Cover





A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set

A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
W. Bruce Cameron


A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
W. Bruce Cameron

A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
The author and publisher have provided this e-book to you without Digital Rights Management software (DRM) applied so that you can enjoy reading it on your personal devices. This e-book is for your personal use only. You may not print or post this e-book, or make this e-book publicly available in any way. You may not copy, reproduce or upload this e-book, other than to read it on one of your personal devices.
Copyright infringement is against the law. If you believe the copy of this e-book you are reading infringes on the author’s copyright, please notify the publisher at: http://us.macmillanusa.com/piracy.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
Table of Contents
A Dog’s Purpose
Dedication
Acknowledgments
Chapter One
Chapter Two
Chapter Three
Chapter Four
Chapter Five
Chapter Six
Chapter Seven
Chapter Eight
Chapter Nine
Chapter Ten
Chapter Eleven
Chapter Twelve
Chapter Thirteen
Chapter Fourteen
Chapter Fifteen
Chapter Sixteen
Chapter Seventeen
Chapter Eighteen
Chapter Nineteen
Chapter Twenty
Chapter Twenty-One
Chapter Twenty-Two
Chapter Twenty-Three
Chapter Twenty-Four
Chapter Twenty-Five
Chapter Twenty-Six
Chapter Twenty-Seven
Chapter Twenty-Eight
Chapter Twenty-Nine
Chapter Thirty
Chapter Thirty-One
Copyright
A Dog’s Journey
Dedication
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
Chapter 7
Chapter 8
Chapter 9
Chapter 10
Chapter 11
Chapter 12
Chapter 13
Chapter 14
Chapter 15
Chapter 16
Chapter 17
Chapter 18
Chapter 19
Chapter 20
Chapter 21
Chapter 22
Chapter 23
Chapter 24
Chapter 25
Chapter 26
Chapter 27
Chapter 28
Chapter 29
Chapter 30
Chapter 31
Acknowledgments
About the Author
Copyright
A Q&A with W. Bruce Cameron
A Dog’s Purpose: Ellie’s Story
Dedication
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Copyright
Forge Books by W. Bruce Cameron
Copyright
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
A DOG’S PURPOSE
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set

A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
TO CATHRYNFor doing everything, for being everything
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ ACKNOWLEDGMENTS }
So many people have helped me in so many ways to get me from where I started to where I am today, I hardly know where to begin the task of identifying them all—and where to stop is even more perplexing a choice. So let me state for the record that I know that as both a writer and a person I am a work in progress who thus far is a sum of all I’ve learned and experienced, and that I owe everything to the people who have taught me, helped me, and supported me.
I do want to make sure I acknowledge some of the writings I used in my research into how dogs think. Dogwatching, by Desmond Morris. What the Dogs Have Taught Me, by Merrill Markoe. The Hidden Life of Dogs, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. Search and Rescue Dogs, by the American Rescue Dog Association. The works of Cesar Millan, James Herriot, Dr. Marty Becker, and Gina Spadafori.
I wouldn’t be anything without the support of my family, especially my parents, who have always believed in my writing despite a couple of decades’ worth of rejection notices.
Also believing in me is my agent, Scott Miller, at Trident Media, who never gave up, not on this book, not on me.
Scott’s efforts led me to Tor/Forge and my editor, Kristin Sevick, whose faith in A Dog’s Purpose, combined with a careful eye and an expert touch, refined and improved this novel. She and everyone else at Tor/Forge have been a delight to work with.
As I write these words, this book hasn’t yet gone to press, and already there are so many people working to support it. Sheryl Johnston, who is a great publicist and a terror behind the wheel. Lisa Nash, who reached out to her vast network to help validate the voice of this book. Buzz Yancey, who tried to create, well, buzz. Hillary Carlip, who took on the task of redesigning wbrucecameron.com and created adogspurpose.com and succeeded so fabulously. Amy Cameron, who applied her years of teaching experience to the task of writing a study guide for any educator who wants to use A Dog’s Purpose in the classroom. Geoffery Jennings, bookseller extraordinaire, who gave an early draft his thumbs-up. Lisa Zupan, who gets it.
Thanks to all the editors who carry my column in their newspapers, despite the turmoil in the industry. Thanks especially to The Denver Post, which picked me up after the sad demise of the Rocky Mountain News. Thanks, Anthony Zurcher, for doing such a great job editing my column for all these years.
Thanks to Brad Rosenfeld and Paul Weitzman at Preferred Artists, for preferring me, and to Lauren Lloyd, for managing everything.
Thanks, Steve Younger and Hayes Michael, for all the legal work—I still think we should plead insanity.
Thanks, Bob Bridges, for continuing his volunteer work on my column’s mistakes and typos. I wish I could afford to pay you one hundred times your current salary.
Thanks, Claire LaZebnik, for coming out on the ledge to talk to me about writing.
Thanks, Tom Rooker, for whatever the heck it is that you’re doing.
Thanks to Big Al and Evie, for investing themselves in my “genius” career. Thanks, Ted, Maria, Jakob, Maya, and Ethan, for admiring my pants.
Thanks to everyone in the National Society of Newspaper Columnists, for trying to keep us all off the endangered species list.
Thanks, Georgia Lee Cameron, who introduced me to the world of dog rescue.
Thanks, Bill Belsha, for the work you did on my head.
Thanks, Jennifer Altabef, for being there when I needed you.
Thanks, Alberto Alejandro, for almost single-handedly making me a bestselling author.
Thank you, Kurt Hamilton, for motivating me to make sure there was nothing seriously wrong with the pipes.
Thanks to Julie Cypher, for loaning me everything she owns.
Thanks, Marcia Wallace, you are my favorite action figure.
Thanks, Norma Vela, for all the horse sense.
Thanks, Molly, for the car ride, and Sierra, for letting it happen.
Thanks, Melissa Lawson, for providing the final cut.
Thanks, Betsy, Richard, Colin, and Sharon, for showing up for everything and for trying to teach me how to dance the rumba.
The very first person I told this story to was Cathryn Michon. Thank you, Cathryn, for insisting that I write A Dog’s Purpose immediately, and for everything else.
Now I understand why so many people are still talking when the music plays at the Academy Awards: the list of individuals I want to thank is simply endless. So let me just stop here, ending with one final note: I want to acknowledge the sacrifice and tireless hard work of the many men and women who work in animal rescue, helping lost, abandoned, and abused pets find new and happy lives with loving families. You are all angels.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
A DOG’S PURPOSE
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ ONE }

One day it occurred to me that the warm, squeaky, smelly things squirming around next to me were my brothers and sister. I was very disappointed.
Though my vision had resolved itself only to the point where I could distinguish fuzzy forms in the light, I knew that the large and beautiful shape with the long wonderful tongue was my mother. I had figured out that when the chill air struck my skin it meant she had gone somewhere, but when the warmth returned it would be time to feed. Often finding a place to suckle meant pushing aside what I now knew was the snout of a sibling seeking to crowd me out of my share, which was really irritating. I couldn’t see that my brothers and sister had any purpose whatsoever. When my mother licked my stomach to stimulate the flow of fluids from under my tail, I blinked up at her, silently beseeching her to please get rid of the other puppies for me. I wanted her all to myself.
Gradually, the other dogs came into focus, and I grudgingly accepted their presence in the nest. My nose soon told me I had one sister and two brothers. Sister was only slightly less interested in wresting with me than my brothers, one of whom I thought of as Fast, because he somehow always moved more quickly than I could. The other one I mentally called Hungry, because he whimpered whenever Mother was gone and would suckle her with an odd desperation, as if it were never enough. Hungry slept more than my siblings and I did, so we often jumped on him and chewed on his face.
Our den was scooped out underneath the black roots of a tree, and was cool and dark during the heat of the day. The first time I tottered out into the sunlight, Sister and Fast accompanied me, and naturally Fast shoved his way to the front.
Of the four of us, only Fast had a splash of white on his face, and as he trotted jauntily forward this patch of fur flashed in the daylight. I’m special, Fast’s dazzling, star-shaped spot seemed to be declaring to the world. The rest of him was as mottled and unremarkably brown and black as I was. Hungry was several shades lighter and Sister shared Mother’s stubby nose and flattened forehead, but we all looked more or less the same, despite Fast’s prancing.
Our tree was perched on a creek bank, and I was delighted when Fast tumbled head over heels down the bank, though Sister and I plummeted with no more grace when we tried to make the same descent. Slippery rocks and a tiny trickle of water offered wonderful odors, and we followed the wet trail of the creek into a moist, cool cave—a culvert with metal sides. I knew instinctively that this was a good place to hide from danger, but Mother was unimpressed with our find and hauled us unceremoniously back to the Den when it turned out our legs weren’t powerful enough to enable us to scale back up the bank.
We had learned the lesson that we couldn’t return to the nest on our own when we went down the bank, so as soon as Mother left the nest we did it again. This time Hungry joined us, though once he was in the culvert he sprawled in the cool mud and fell asleep.
Exploring seemed like the right thing to do—we needed to find other things to eat. Mother, getting impatient with us, was standing up when we weren’t even finished feeding, which I could only blame on the other dogs. If Hungry weren’t so relentless, if Fast weren’t so bossy, if Sister didn’t wiggle so much, I knew Mother would hold still and allow us to fill our bellies. Couldn’t I always coax her to lie down, usually with a sigh, when I reached up for her while she stood above us?
Often Mother would spend extra time licking Hungry while I seethed at the injustice.
By this time, Fast and Sister had both grown larger than I—my body was the same size, but my legs were shorter and stubbier. Hungry was the runt of the litter, of course, and it bothered me that Fast and Sister always abandoned me to play with each other, as if Hungry and I belonged together out of some sort of natural order in the pack.
Since Fast and Sister were more interested in each other than the rest of the family, I punished them by depriving them of my company, going off by myself deep into the culvert. I was sniffing at something deliciously dead and rotten one day when right in front of me a tiny animal exploded into the air—a frog!
Delighted, I leaped forward, attempting to pounce on it with my paws, but the frog jumped again. It was afraid, although all I wanted to do was play and probably wouldn’t eat it.
Fast and Sister sensed my excitement and came stampeding into the culvert, knocking me over as they skidded to a stop in the slimy water. The frog hopped and Fast lunged at it, using my head as a springboard. I snarled at him, but he ignored me.
Sister and Fast fell all over themselves to get at the frog, who managed to land in a pool of water and kick away in silent, rapid strokes. Sister put her muzzle in the pond and snorted, sneezing water over Fast and me. Fast climbed on her back, the frog—my frog!—forgotten.
Sadly, I turned away. It looked as though I lived in a family of dimwits.
I was to think of that frog often in the days that followed, usually just as I drifted off to sleep. I found myself wondering how it would have tasted.
More and more frequently, Mother would growl softly when we approached, and the day she clicked her teeth together in warning when we came at her in a greedy tumble I despaired that my siblings had ruined everything. Then Fast crawled to her, his belly low, and she lowered her snout to him. He licked her mouth and she rewarded him by bringing up food, and we rushed forward to share. Fast pushed us away, but we knew the trick, now, and when I sniffed and licked my mother’s jaws she gave me a meal.
At this point we had all become thoroughly familiar with the creek bed, and had tracked up and down it until the whole area was redolent with our odors. Fast and I spent most of our time dedicated to the serious business of play, and I was beginning to understand how important it was to him for the game to wind up with me on my back, his mouth chewing my face and throat. Sister never challenged him, but I still wasn’t sure I liked what everyone seemed to assume was the natural order of our pack. Hungry, of course, didn’t care about his status, so when I was frustrated I bit his ears.
One afternoon I was drowsily watching Sister and Fast yank on a scrap of cloth they’d found when my ears perked up—an animal of some kind was coming, something large and loud. I scrambled to my feet, but before I could race down the creek bed to investigate the noise Mother was there, her body rigid with warning. I saw with surprise that she had Hungry in her teeth, carrying him in a fashion that we’d left behind weeks ago. She led us into the dark culvert and crouched down, her ears flat against her head. The message was clear, and we heeded it, shrinking back from the tunnel opening in silence.
When the thing came into view, striding along the creek bed, I felt Mother’s fear ripple across her back. It was big, it stood on two legs, and an acrid smoke wafted from its mouth as it shambled toward us.
I stared intently, absolutely fascinated. For reasons I couldn’t fathom I was drawn to this creature, compelled, and I even tensed, preparing to bound out to greet it. One look from my mother, though, and I decided against it. This was something to be feared, to be avoided at all costs.
It was, of course, a man. The first one I’d ever seen.
The man never glanced in our direction. He scaled the bank and disappeared from view, and after a few moments Mother slid out into the sunlight and raised her head to see if the danger had passed. She relaxed, then, and came back inside, giving each of us a reassuring kiss.
I ran out to see for myself, and found myself disheartened when all that remained of the man’s presence was a lingering scent of smoke in the air.
Over and over again the next few weeks, Mother reinforced the message we’d learned in that culvert: Avoid men at all costs. Fear them.
The next time Mother went to hunt, we were allowed to go with her. Once we were away from the security of the Den, her behavior became timid and skittish, and we all emulated her actions. We steered clear of open spaces, slinking along next to bushes. If we saw a person, Mother would freeze, her shoulders tense, ready to run. At these times Fast’s patch of white fur seemed as obtrusive as a bark, but no one ever noticed us.
Mother showed us how to tear into the filmy bags behind houses, quickly scattering inedible papers and revealing chunks of meat, crusts of bread, and bits of cheese, which we chewed to the best of our ability. The tastes were exotic and the smells were wonderful, but Mother’s anxiety affected all of us, and we ate quickly, savoring nothing. Almost immediately Hungry brought up his meal, which I thought was pretty funny until I, too, felt my insides gripped in a powerful spasm.
It seemed to go down easier the second time.
I’d always been aware of other dogs, though I’d never personally met any except those in my own family. Sometimes when we were out hunting they barked at us from behind fences, most likely jealous that we were trotting around free while they were imprisoned. Mother, of course, never let us approach any of the strangers, while Fast usually bristled a little, somehow insulted that anybody would dare call out to us while he lifted his leg on their trees.
Occasionally I even saw a dog in a car! The first time this happened I stared in wonderment at his head hanging out the window, tongue lolling out. He barked joyously when he spotted me, but I was too astounded to do anything but lift my nose and sniff in disbelief.
Cars and trucks were something else Mother evaded, though I didn’t see how they could be dangerous if there were sometimes dogs inside them. A large, loud truck came around frequently and took away all the bags of food people left out for us, and then meals would be scarce for a day or two. I didn’t like that truck, nor the greedy men who hopped off it to scoop up all the food for themselves, despite the fact that they and their truck smelled glorious.
There was less time for play, now that we were hunting. Mother snarled when Hungry tried to lick her lips, hoping for a meal, and we all got the message. We went out often, hiding from sight, desperately searching for food. I felt tired and weak, now, and didn’t even try to challenge Fast when he stood with his head over my back, thrusting his chest at me. Fine, let him be the boss. As far as I was concerned, my short legs were better suited for the low, slinking run our mother had taught us anyway. If Fast felt he was making some sort of point by using his height to knock me over, he was fooling himself. Mother was the dog in charge.
There was barely room for all of us underneath the tree now, and Mother was gone for longer and longer periods of time. Something told me that one of these days she wouldn’t come back. We would have to fend for ourselves, Fast always pushing me out of the way, trying to take my share. Mother wouldn’t be there to look after me.
I began to think of what it would be like to leave the Den.
The day everything changed began with Hungry stumbling into the culvert to lie down instead of going on the hunt, his breathing labored, his tongue sticking out of his mouth. Mother nuzzled Hungry before she left, and when I sniffed at him his eyes remained shut.
Over the culvert was a road, and along the road we’d once found a large dead bird, which we’d all torn into until Fast picked it up and ran off with it. Despite the danger of being seen, we tended to range up and down this road, looking for more birds, which was what we were doing when Mother suddenly raised her head in alarm. We all heard it the same instant: a truck approaching.
But not just any truck—this same vehicle, making the same sounds, had been back and forth along our road several times the past few days, moving slowly, even menacingly, as if hunting specifically for us.
We followed Mother as she darted back to the culvert, but for reasons I’ll never fully understand, I stopped and looked back at the monstrous machine, taking an extra few seconds before I followed Mother into the safety of the tunnel.
Those few seconds proved to make all the difference—they had spotted me. With a low, rumbling vibration, the truck came to a stop directly overhead. The engine clanked and went quiet, and then we heard the sounds of boots on gravel.
Mother gave a soft whimper.
When the human faces appeared at either end of the culvert, Mother went low, tensing her body. They showed their teeth at us, but it didn’t seem to be a hostile gesture. Their faces were brown, marked with black hair, black brows, and dark eyes.
“Here, boy,” one of them whispered. I didn’t know what it meant, but the call seemed as natural as the sound of the wind, as if I had been listening to men speak my whole life.
Both men had poles, I now saw, poles with ropes looped on the end. They appeared threatening, and I felt Mother’s panic boil over. Her claws scrabbling, she bolted, her head down, aiming for the space between the legs of one of the men. The pole came down, there was a quick snap, and then my mother was twisting and jerking as the man hauled her out into the sunlight.
Sister and I backed up, cowering, while Fast growled, his fur bristling on the back of his neck. Then it occurred to all three of us that while the way behind us was still blocked, the tunnel mouth in front of us was now clear. We darted forward.
“Here they come!” the man behind us yelled.
Once out in the creek bed, we realized we didn’t really know what to do next. Sister and I stood behind Fast—he wanted to be the boss, so okay, let him deal with this.
There was no sign of Mother. The two men were on opposite banks, though, each wielding his pole. Fast dodged one but then was snagged by the other. Sister took advantage of the melee to escape, her feet splashing in the water as she scampered away, but I stood rooted, staring up at the road.
A woman with long white hair stood there above us, her face wrinkled in kindness. “Here, puppy, it’s okay. You’ll be all right. Here, puppy,” she said.
I didn’t run; I didn’t move. I allowed the loop of rope to slip over my face and tighten on my neck. The pole guided me up the bank, where the man seized me by the scruff of the neck.
“He’s okay; he’s okay,” the woman crooned. “Let him go.”
“He’ll run off,” the man warned.
“Let him go.”
I followed this bit of dialogue without comprehension, only understanding that somehow the woman was in charge, though she was older and smaller than either of the two men. With a reluctant grunt, the man lifted the rope off my neck. The woman offered her hands to me: rough, leathery palms coated with a flowery smell. I sniffed them, then lowered my head. A clear sense of caring and concern radiated off of her.
When she ran her fingers along my fur I felt a shiver pass through me. My tail whipped the air of its own accord, and when she astonished me by lifting me into the air I scrambled to kiss her face, delighting in her laughter.
The mood turned somber when one of the men approached, holding Hungry’s limp body. The man showed it to the woman, who clucked mournfully. Then he took it to the truck, where Mother and Fast were in a metal cage, and held it up to their noses. The scent of death, recognizable to me as any memory, wafted off of Hungry in the dry, dusty air.
We all carefully smelled my dead brother, and I understood the men wanted us to know what had happened to Hungry.
Sadness came from all of them as they stood there silently in the road, but they didn’t know how sick Hungry had been, sick from birth and not long for the world.
I was put in the cage, and Mother sniffed disapprovingly at the woman’s smell, which had been pressed into my fur. With a lurch, the truck started up again, and I was quickly distracted by the wonderful odors flowing through the cage as we moved down the road. I was riding in a truck! I barked in delight, Fast and Mother jerking their heads in surprise at my outburst. I couldn’t help myself; it was the most exciting thing that had ever happened in my whole life, including almost catching the frog.
Fast seemed overcome with sadness, and it took me a moment to understand: Sister, his favorite companion, was gone, as lost to us as was Hungry.
There was, I reflected, much more complexity to the world than I had supposed. It wasn’t just about Mother and my siblings hiding from people, hunting, and playing in the culvert. Larger events had the ability to change everything—events that were controlled by human beings.
I was wrong about one thing: though we didn’t know it at the time, Fast and I would meet up with Sister again in the future.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ TWO }

Wherever we were headed on our truck ride, I had the sense we’d see other dogs when we got there. The cage in which we were being held was positively flooded with the scent of other canines, their urine and feces and even their blood mixed with fur and saliva. While Mother cowered, her claws extended to keep her from sliding on the bouncing, jerking floor, Fast and I paced, our noses down, smelling one distinct dog after another. Fast kept trying to mark the corners of the cage, but every time he tried to stand on three legs a good jounce from the truck sent him sprawling. Once he even landed on Mother, earning him a quick nip. I gave him a disgusted look. Couldn’t he see she was unhappy?
Eventually, bored with smelling dogs who weren’t even there, I pressed my nose to the wire grate and pulled in great snootfuls of the wind. It reminded me of the first time I’d buried my face in the succulent garbage bins that represented our main source of food; there were thousands of unidentifiable odors out there, all of them coming up my nose with such force I kept sneezing.
Fast took up position on the other side of the cage and lay down, not joining me at the side of the cage, because it hadn’t been his idea. He gave me a surly look every time I sneezed, as if warning me that next time I tried that I’d better ask him for permission. Each time his cold gaze met my eyes I would glance pointedly at Mother, who, though obviously cowed by this whole experience, was still in charge as far as I was concerned.
When the truck stopped, the woman came around and spoke to us, pressing her palms to the side of the cage for us to lick. Mother stayed where she was, but Fast was as beguiled as I was, and stood next to me, his tail wagging.
“You are so cute. You hungry, babies? You hungry?”
We were parked in front of a long, flat dwelling, sparse desert grasses poking up between the truck’s tires. “Hey, Bobby!” one of the men yelled.
The response to his shout was astonishing. From behind the house came a chorus of loud barks, so many I couldn’t count the sources. Fast rose up on his back legs and put his paws on the side of the cage, as if that would somehow help him see better.
The racket continued as another man emerged from around the side of the house. He was brown and weathered, walking with a slight limp. The way the two other men stood grinning at him carried an air of expectation. When he saw us, he stopped in his tracks, his shoulders slumping.
“Oh no, senora. Not more dogs. We have too many now.” He radiated resignation and regret, but there was nothing angry in what I felt coming off him.
The woman turned and approached him. “We have two puppies, and their mother. They are maybe three months old. One of them got away, and one of them died.”
“Oh no.”
“The mother was feral, poor thing. She’s terrified.”
“You know what they told you the last time. We have too many dogs and they will not give us a license.”
“I don’t care.”
“But senora, we have no room.”
“Now Bobby, you know that’s not true. And what can we do, let them live as wild animals? They’re dogs, Bobby, little puppies, you see?” The woman turned back to the cage, and I wagged my tail to show her I had been paying rapt, if uncomprehending, attention.
“Yeah, Bobby, what’s another three more?” one of the grinning men asked.
“One of these days there will be no money to pay you; it will all go to dog food,” the man called Bobby replied. The men just shrugged, grinning.
“Carlos, I want you to take some fresh hamburger and go back out there to that creek. See if you can find the one that got away,” the woman said.
The man nodded, laughing at Bobby’s expression. I understood that the woman was in charge of this family of humans, and gave her another lick on the hand so she would like me best.
“Oh, you’re a good dog, a good dog,” she told me. I jumped up and down, my tail wagging so hard it whipped Fast in the face, who irritably blinked it off.
The one called Carlos smelled of spicy meat and exotic oils that I couldn’t identify. He reached in with a pole, snagging Mother, and Fast and I followed willingly as she was led around the side of the house to a large fence. The barking here was deafening, and I felt a slight flicker of fear—just what were we getting into?
Bobby’s scent had a citrus quality, oranges, as well as dirt, leather, and dogs. He opened the gate a little, blocking the way with his body. “Get back! Get back now; get back! Go on!” he urged. The barking lessened just a little, and when Bobby pulled the gate all the way open and Carlos thrust Mother forward it ceased completely.
I was so astounded by what greeted me, I didn’t even feel the foot in my back as Bobby pushed me inside the enclosure.
Dogs.
There were dogs everywhere. Several were as large as or even larger than Mother, and some were smaller, and all were milling freely around in a large enclosure, a huge yard surrounded by a high wooden fence. I scampered forward toward a knot of friendly-looking dogs not much older than myself, halting just as I got to them to pretend to be fascinated by something on the ground. The three dogs in front of me were all light colored and all females, so I seductively peed on a mound of dirt before joining them to sniff politely at their rear ends.
I was so happy at this turn of events I felt like barking, but Mother and Fast were not having as easy a time of it. Mother, in fact, was hunting along the perimeter of the fence, seeking a way out, her nose pressed to the ground. Fast had approached a group of males and now stood stiffly with them, his tail quivering, while each took a turn lifting a leg against a fence post.
One of the males moved to stand squarely in Fast’s path while another circled back to sniff him aggressively from the rear, and that’s when my poor brother folded. His butt sagged, and as he turned to face the male behind him his tail curved and slid up between his legs. I wasn’t at all surprised when, seconds later, he was on his back, squirming with a certain desperate playfulness. I guessed he was no longer the boss.
While all this was happening, another male, muscular and tall, his ears hanging long on the sides of his head, stood absolutely still in the center of the yard, watching Mother run around in desperate circumnavigation. Something told me that of all the dogs in the yard, this was the one to be careful of, and, sure enough, when he broke from his rigid stance and padded over toward the fence the dogs surrounding Fast stopped messing around and raised their heads alertly.
A dozen yards from the fence, the lone male broke into a full run, bearing down on Mom, who stopped, cringing. The male braced her with his shoulders, blocking her, his tail straight as an arrow. She let herself be sniffed up and down the length of her body, still crouched against the fence.
It was my impulse, and I am sure it was also Fast’s, to rush to her aid, but I somehow knew this would be wrong. This was the Top Dog, this male, a thick-boned mastiff with a brown face and dark, rheumy eyes. Mother’s submission was simply the natural order.
After his careful examination, Top Dog aimed an economical stream of urine against the fence, which Mother dutifully examined, and then he trotted off, paying her no more attention. Mother herself seemed deflated, and slid off unnoticed to hide behind a pile of railroad ties.
In due course, the pack of males came over to check me over as well, but I crouched low and licked them all in the face, letting them know in no uncertain terms that they’d have zero problems with me—it was my brother who was the troublemaker. All I wanted to do was play with the three girls and explore the yard, which was populated with balls and rubber bones and all sorts of wonderful smells and distractions. A clear trickle of water fell continuously into a trough, providing refreshment whenever we wanted it, and the man named Carlos came into the yard once a day to clean up our messes. At regular intervals we would all break out in loud barking, for no reason other than the sheer joy of it.
And the feedings! Twice a day, Bobby, Carlos, Senora, and the other man would wade into the pack, separating us out into groups based on age. They would pour bags of rich food into large bowls, and we would bury our faces, eating as much as we could hold! Bobby stood by, and whenever he thought one of the dogs (usually the smallest of the girls) didn’t get enough he would pick her up and give her another handful, pushing the rest of us away.
Mother ate with the adult dogs and occasionally I’d hear a growl from over on their side, though when I looked all I could see was wagging tails. Whatever they were eating smelled wonderful, but if one of the juveniles tried to wander over there to see what was going on the men would step in and stop the pup.
The woman, Senora, would bend and let us kiss her face, and she would run her hands through our fur and laugh and laugh. My name, she told me, was Toby. She said it to me every time she saw me: Toby, Toby, Toby.
I was certain I was, by far, her favorite dog—how could I not be? My best friend was a fawn-colored female named Coco, who had greeted me on my first day. Coco’s legs and feet were white, her nose pink, her fur coarse and wiry. She was small enough that I could keep up with her despite my short legs.
Coco and I wrestled all day long, usually joined by the other girls and sometimes by Fast, who always wanted to play the game where he wound up the Top Dog. He had to keep his aggressive play in check, though, because when he became too rambunctious one of the males would be dispatched to trot over and teach Fast a lesson. When this happened, I always pretended I had never seen him before in my life.
I loved my world, the Yard. I loved running through the mud by the water trough, my paws making a dirty spatter that flecked my fur. I loved when we’d all start barking, though I seldom understood why we were doing so. I loved chasing Coco and sleeping in a pile of dogs and smelling other dogs’ poops. Many days I would drop dead in my tracks, exhausted from play, deliriously happy.
The older dogs played, too—even Top Dog could be seen tearing up the yard, a ragged piece of blanket in his mouth, while the other dogs pursued and pretended not to be able to quite catch up with him. Mother never did, though—she had dug herself a hollow behind the railroad ties and spent most of her time just lying there. When I went to see how she was doing, she growled at me as if she didn’t know who I was.
One evening, after dinner when the dogs were drowsy and sprawled out in the Yard, I saw Mother stealthily emerge from her hiding place and creep toward the gate. I was gnawing on a rubber bone, addressing a constant ache in my mouth for something to chew, but I stopped and regarded her curiously as she sat in front of the gate. Was someone coming? I cocked my head, thinking if we were having a visitor the other dogs would have started barking by now.
Many evenings Carlos and Bobby and the other men would sit at a small table and talk, opening and passing a glass bottle from which came a sharp chemical smell. Not this night, though—the dogs were all alone in the Yard.
Mother lifted her forelegs off the ground, pressing them against the slats of the wooden gate, and took the metal knob in her mouth. I was baffled—why, I wondered, would she chew on such a thing when there were all these perfectly good rubber bones scattered about? She twisted her head left and right, apparently unable to get a good bite of the thing. I glanced over at Fast, but he was sound asleep.
Then, astoundingly, the gate clicked open. My mother had opened the gate! She dropped her paws to the ground and shouldered the gate aside, sniffing cautiously at the air on the other side of the fence.
Then she turned to look at me, her eyes bright. The message in them was clear: my mother was leaving. I stood to join her, and Coco, who was lying nearby, lazily lifted her head to blink at me for a moment before sighing and stretching back out in the sand.
If I left, I’d never see Coco again. I was torn between loyalty to Mother, who had fed me and taught me and taken care of me, and to the pack, which included my worthless brother, Fast.
Mother didn’t wait for my decision. She slunk off silently into the gloom of the approaching night. If I wanted to catch up to her, I would have to hurry.
I scampered out the open gate, pursuing her into the unpredictable world on the other side of the fence.
Fast never saw us go.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ THREE }

I didn’t get very far. I couldn’t move as quickly as Mother to begin with, and anyway the front of the house had a stand of bushes that I felt compelled to mark. She didn’t wait for me, never even looked back. The last I saw of my mother she was doing what she did best: sliding into the shadows, unnoticed, unseen.
There was a time not long ago when all I wanted out of life was an opportunity to snuggle up to Mother, when her tongue and her warm body meant more to me than anything else. But now, watching her disappear, I understood that by leaving me behind she was simply doing what all mother dogs must do eventually. The compulsion to follow had been the last reflexive gesture in a relationship that had forever changed the day our family arrived at the Yard.
My leg was still in the air when Senora came out on her porch, stopping when she saw me.
“Why, Toby, how did you get out?”
If I wanted to get away I needed to run now, which was, of course, not what I did. Instead I wagged my tail and jumped up on Senora’s legs, trying to lick her face. Her flowery smell was enlivened with a wonderfully greasy chicken odor. She smoothed my ears back, and I followed her, addicted to her touch, as she strode rapidly around to the still-open gate, the dog pack slumbering inertly inside the Yard. She gave me a gentle nudge and followed me in.
The moment the gate shut, the other dogs were on their feet, racing over to us, and Senora petted them and talked soothingly while I seethed a little over the divided attention.
It seemed more than a little unfair; I’d given up Mother to be with Senora, and here she was acting as if I were no more special than anybody else!
When Senora left, the gate clanked into place with a solid metallic sound, but I would never again regard it as an impassible barrier.
I was wrestling with Coco when Mother returned a few days later. At least, I thought it was my mother—I was distracted by a new wrinkle in our continuous wrestling match, one where I would circle behind Coco and climb up on her back, gripping her with my forelimbs. It was a wonderful game, and I couldn’t understand why Coco was so surly about it, twisting and snarling at me. It felt so right, how could she be so unreceptive?
I looked up when Bobby opened the gate, and there was Mother, standing uncertainly. Joyously I tore across the yard, leading a charge of dogs, but I slowed down when I got closer.
This female dog was marked the same as Mother, with a splotch of black over one eye, and had the stubby snout and short coat, but it wasn’t Mother. She squatted and urinated submissively at our approach. I circled the new dog with the others, though Fast marched right up to her to sniff at her rear end.
Bobby had the same defeated sag to his shoulders as when he’d loaded us all into the truck the first time, but he stood close to the dog, protecting her with his body.
“You’ll be okay, girl,” he said.
It was Sister. I had nearly forgotten all about her, and now, inspecting her, I realized how different life must be on the other side of the fence. She was thin, her ribs plainly visible, and a white, oozing scar tracked down her side. Her mouth smelled of rotten food, and when she squatted a sickly odor came from her bladder.
Fast was overjoyed, but Sister was too cowed by the rest of the pack to accept his offer of play. She groveled in front of Top Dog and let all of the canines sniff her without making a single move to establish any boundaries. When they contemptuously dismissed her, Sister furtively inspected the empty feeding trough and drank some water as if she were stealing.
This was what happened to dogs who tried to live in the world without people—they became beaten down, defeated, starved. Sister was what we all would have become if we’d stayed in the culvert.
Fast clung to her side the whole time. It occurred to me that Sister had always been his favorite, more important to him than even Mother. I watched him kiss Sister and bow toward her without jealousy—I had Coco.
What did make me jealous was the attention Coco was getting from some of the other males, who seemed to think they could wander over and play with her as if I weren’t there, which I suppose they could. I knew my position in the pack and was happy for the sense of order and security it provided me, but I wanted Coco for myself and didn’t appreciate it when I was rudely shouldered out of the way.
The males all seemed to want to play the game I’d invented, circling behind Coco and trying to jump on her, but I noted with cold satisfaction that she had no interest in playing this game with them, either.
The morning after Sister arrived, Bobby came into the yard and took Fast, Sister, Coco, and one other young male, a frisky spotted hound the men called Down, and put them all with me in a cage in the back of the truck. It was crowded and noisy, but I loved the high-velocity airstream and the expression on Fast’s face when I sneezed on him. Astoundingly, a long-haired female dog from the pack rode in the cab with Carlos and Bobby. Why did she get to be a front-seat dog? I wondered. And why, when her scent flowed from the open windows, did a shiver pass through me, making me feel an urgent wildness?
We parked next to an old, gnarly tree that provided the only visible shade in a hot parking lot. Bobby went inside the building with the female from the cab while Carlos came around to the cage door. All of us except Sister surged forward.
“Come on, Coco. Coco,” Carlos said. I could smell peanuts and berries on his fingers, plus something sweet I couldn’t identify.
We all barked jealously as Coco was led into the building, and then we barked because we were barking. A large black bird landed in the tree above us and stared down at us as if we were idiots, so we barked at it for a while.
Bobby came back out to the truck. “Toby!” he called.
Proudly I stepped forward, accepting a loop of leather around my neck before jumping down onto the pavement, which was so hot it hurt my feet. I didn’t even glance back at the losers in the cage as I entered the building, which was astoundingly cool and redolent with the smells of dogs and other animals.
Bobby led me down a hallway and then picked me up and dropped me on a shiny table. A woman entered and I thumped my tail as she put her soft, gentle fingers in my ears and probed under my throat. Her hands smelled of a strong chemical, though her clothes smelled of other animals, including Coco.
“What’s this one?” she asked.
“Toby,” Bobby said. I wagged harder when I heard my name.
“How many did you say, today?” While she and Bobby spoke, she lifted back my gums to admire my teeth.
“Three males, three bitches.”
“Bobby,” the woman said. I wagged my tail because I recognized his name.
“I know; I know.”
“She’s going to get into trouble,” the woman said. She was feeling me up and down, and I wondered if it would be okay if I groaned with pleasure.
“There are no neighbors to complain.”
“Still, there are laws. She can’t just keep taking on more dogs. There are already too many. It’s not sanitary.”
“She says otherwise, the dogs all die. There are not enough people to take them on.”
“It is against the law.”
“Please don’t tell, Doctor.”
“You put me in a bad position, Bobby. I have to be concerned with their welfare.”
“We bring them to you if they are sick.”
“Someone is going to file a complaint, Bobby.”
“Please, don’t.”
“Oh, not me. I’m not going to say anything without telling you first, give you a chance to find a solution. Okay, Toby?”
I gave her a lick on the hand.
“Good boy. We’re going to get you into surgery now, fix you right up.”
Bobby chuckled.
Soon I was in another room, brightly lit but deliciously cool, full of the strong chemical smell that came off the nice lady. Bobby held me tightly and I lay still, somehow sensing this was what he wanted. It felt good to be held like that, and I thumped my tail. I felt a brief, sharp pain, behind my neck, but I didn’t complain, wagging vigorously to show that I didn’t mind.
The next thing I knew, I was back in the Yard! I opened my eyes and tried to stand up, but my back legs weren’t working. I was thirsty but too tired to go get water. I put my head down and went back to sleep.
When I awoke, I was instantly aware that there was something around my neck, a white cone of some kind, so stupid looking I worried I might be dismissed from the pack. I had an aching, itchy feeling between my back legs, though I couldn’t get at it with my teeth because of the silly collar. I stumbled over to the faucet and drank a little, my stomach queasy and my underside very, very sore. I could tell by the smells in the Yard that I had missed supper, but I couldn’t have cared less, at that point. I found a cool patch of earth and flopped down with a groan. Fast was lying there, and he looked over at me—he, too, was wearing the ridiculous collar.
What had Bobby done to us?
The three females who had gone with us to the building with the nice lady were nowhere to be seen. The next day I limped around the Yard, sniffing for signs of Coco, but there was no evidence that she had come back with us.
Aside from the humiliation of the stupid collar, I also had to suffer the indignity of an inspection of the sore area by every male in the pack. Top Dog flipped me over on my back with a not-so-gentle shove, and I lay there in misery as first he and then the other males sniffed me with undisguised contempt.
They didn’t try the same thing with the females, who bounded into the yard a few days later. I was overjoyed to see Coco, who also wore the strange collar, and Fast did his best to comfort Sister, who plainly felt the entire process had been traumatizing.
Carlos eventually removed the collars, and from that point on I found myself somehow less interested in the game where I climbed on Coco’s back. Instead, I had a new game, where I would strut up to Coco with a rubber bone and chew it right in front of her, tossing it up in the air and dropping it. She would pretend she didn’t want it, looking away, but her eyes always came back to the bone when I nudged it toward her with my nose. Finally she would lose control and lunge, but I knew her so well I could snatch the bone away before she closed her jaws on it. I would dance back, wagging joyfully, and sometimes she would chase me and we’d run in big circles, which was my favorite part of the game. Other times she would yawn in fake boredom, so I’d come close again, tantalizing her with the rubber bone until she simply couldn’t take it anymore and made another grab for it. I loved this game so much that when I slept I dreamed about it.
Sometimes there were real bones, though, and these were handled differently. Carlos would come into the yard with a greasy bag, handing out charred treats and calling our names as he did so. Carlos didn’t understand that he should always give one to Top Dog first, which was okay by me. I didn’t always get a bone, but when I did, Carlos would say, “Toby, Toby,” and hand it to me right past some other dog’s nose. There were different rules when humans were involved.
Once when Fast got a bone and I didn’t, I saw something extraordinary. Fast was hunkered down across the yard, chewing frantically, intoxicating odors wafting up from his prize. I’d slid over to watch enviously, so I was standing right there when Top Dog walked up.
Fast tensed, spreading his legs a little as if getting ready to stand, and as Top Dog came forward Fast stopped chewing and loosened a deep growl. No one ever growled at Top Dog. I sensed, though, that Fast was right—this was his bone, given to him by Carlos, and not even Top Dog could take it.
But the bone was so delicious, Top Dog couldn’t seem to help himself. He shoved his nose forward, and that’s when Fast struck, a sharp click of his teeth right in Top Dog’s face! Fast’s lips were drawn back and his eyes were slits. Top Dog stared at him as if dumbfounded at this open rebellion, and then, with his head raised regally, he turned and lifted his leg on the fence, paying Fast no further attention.
I knew that if Top Dog wanted to, he could have taken Fast’s prize. Top Dog had that power, and he’d exerted it before. I’d seen what happened when, right around the time we took the truck ride to visit the nice lady in the cool building, the male dogs had assembled around one of the females, sniffing at her and lifting their legs with a certain frantic purpose. I was in the group, I’m sorry to say; there was just something so compelling about her, I can’t even describe it.
Every time a male tried to smell her from behind, the female sat in the dirt. Her ears were back in humility, but she also growled a few times, and when she did the males backed off as if she had just been elected Top Dog.
We were all gathered so close together, it was impossible not to bump into one another, and that’s when a fight erupted between Top Dog and the largest male in the pack, a huge black and brown dog whom Bobby called Rottie.
Top Dog fought with expert efficiency, seizing Rottie by the back of the neck and dragging the dog’s shoulders down to the ground. The rest of us gave the fight a wide berth, and it was over in seconds, really, Rottie flipping over on his back subserviently. The noise had drawn Carlos, though, who called, “Hey! Hey! That’s enough.” Carlos stood in the yard, ignored by the males, while Coco trooped over to him to be petted. After watching us a few minutes, Carlos called for the female who had been getting all the attention and took her outside the gate.
I didn’t see her again until we were all in the truck the next morning, headed out to see the nice lady in the cool room, and she was a front-seat dog with the men.
After Fast was finished with his bone, he seemed to have second thoughts about nipping at Top Dog. My brother hung his head, tail wagging low, and shambled over to where Top Dog was standing. Fast made several play bows, which Top Dog ignored, and then Fast licked Top Dog in the mouth. This seemed to be sufficient apology, so, with that, Top Dog played with Fast a little, rolling my brother over and letting Fast chew at his neck before he abruptly walked away.
This was how Top Dog maintained order, by keeping us all in our places but not taking advantage of his position to steal food that was given to us by the men. We had a happy pack, right up until the day that Spike arrived.
After that, nothing was the same.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ FOUR }

It was starting to seem to me that just when I had life all figured out it changed. When we were running with Mother, I learned to fear humans, I learned to scavenge for food, I learned how to placate Fast so he would be in what, for him, was a good mood. And then the men came and took us to the Yard and everything was different.
In the Yard I adjusted quickly to life in the pack, I learned to love Senora and Carlos and Bobby, and just when my play with Coco was starting to assume a different, more complex character we were taken to visit the nice lady in the cool room and the urgency I’d been feeling went completely away. I still spent most of my day chewing on, and being chewed by, Coco, but without the odd compulsions that had occasionally seized me.
In between the two worlds—the one outside and the Yard—stood the gate Mother had opened. I thought about the night of her escape so many times I could practically feel the metal knob in my mouth. Mother had shown me a way to freedom, if I wanted it. But I was a different dog than Mother. I loved the Yard. I wanted to belong to Senora. My name was Toby.
Mother, however, was so anti-social that no one seemed to notice she was gone. Senora had never even given Mother a name. Fast and Sister sniffed every so often at the depression behind the railroad ties where Mother had lain but never showed any outward concern about her disappearance beyond that. Life went on, just as before.
And then, with everyone’s status in the pack settled, with me feeding at the adult trough, with Carlos sneaking us bones and Senora handing out treats and kisses, in came a new dog.
His name was Spike.
We’d heard the doors on Bobby’s truck slam, so we were all barking, though it was so hot that day that some of us who were lying in the shade didn’t even get off our bellies. The gate opened and Bobby entered, leading a large, muscular male on the end of his pole.
Having the entire pack rush you at the gate was intimidating, but the new dog didn’t budge. He was as dark and broad as Rottie and as tall as Top Dog. Most of his tail was missing, but what little stub he possessed wasn’t wagging, and he stood with his weight balanced on all four legs. A low rumble emitted from his chest.
“Easy, Spike. Okay there,” Bobby said.
The way Bobby said “Spike,” I knew that was his name. I decided to let everyone else have a turn at inspecting him before I did anything.
Top Dog had, as usual, hung back, but now he emerged from the cool shadows near the waterspout and trotted forward to meet the new arrival. Bobby slipped the loop off Spike’s neck. “Easy, now,” Bobby said.
Bobby’s tension rippled through the pack, and I could feel the fur on my back rising up, though I wasn’t sure why. Top Dog and Spike were stiffly examining each other, neither one backing down, the pack in a tight circle. Spike’s face was covered with scars—teardrop-shaped pits and lumps colored a pale gray against his dark fur.
Something about the way Spike seemed to take us all in, every single one of us arrayed against him, made me afraid, though the result was as it should be. Spike allowed Top Dog to put his head over his back, though he didn’t bow or lower his stomach to the ground. Instead, Spike went over to the fence, carefully sniffed at it, and then lifted his leg. The males immediately lined up after Top Dog to do the same thing on the same spot.
Senora’s face appeared over the top of the gate, then, and a lot of the anxiety I’d been feeling went away. Several of us broke from the circle and ran over to her, putting our legs on the fence so she could reach our heads.
“See? He’ll be okay,” Senora said.
“A dog like him’s been bred to fight, senora. He is not like the rest of ’em, no ma’am.”
“You be a good dog, Spike!” Senora called over to him. I looked jealously in the new dog’s direction, but his reaction to having his name spoken was to glance over as if it were nothing at all.
Toby, I wanted her to say. Good dog, Toby. Instead she said, “There are no bad dogs, Bobby, just bad people. They just need love.”
“Sometimes they’re broke inside, senora. And nuthin’ will help ’em.”
Senora’s hand absently reached down and scratched behind Coco’s ears. I frantically shoved my nose underneath Senora’s fingers, but she didn’t even seem to know I was there.
Later Coco sat down in front of me with a rubber bone, gnawing on it industriously. I ignored her, still hurt that I, Senora’s favorite, had been treated so dismissively. Coco flipped on her back and played with the bone with her paws, lifting it out of her mouth and dropping it, holding it so lightly that I knew I could take it, so I lunged! But Coco was rolling away from me, and then I was chasing her in the yard, furious that she had gotten the game all backward.
I was so preoccupied with getting the stupid bone back from Coco because I was supposed to have it, not her, that I didn’t see how it started; I just registered that suddenly the fight I think we’d all known was coming was already happening.
Normally a fight with Top Dog was over quickly, the lower-status dog accepting his punishment for challenging the order. But this horrible battle, loudly joined and viciously savage, seemed to last and last.
The two dogs clashed with their forelegs off the ground, each vying to obtain the higher position, their teeth flashing in the sun. Their yowling was the most ferocious and terrifying thing I had ever heard.
Top Dog went for his usual grip on the back of the neck, where control could be exerted without doing permanent damage, but Spike shook and snapped and bit until he had Top Dog’s snout in his mouth. Though it had cost Spike a bloody tear under his ear, he now had the advantage over Top Dog, forcing our leader’s head lower and lower toward the ground.
The pack did nothing, could do nothing but pant and circle anxiously, but the gate swung open and Bobby came running in, pulling a long hose behind him. A jet of water hit both dogs.
“Hey! Cut it out! Hey!” he shouted.
Top Dog went limp, acceding to Bobby’s authority, but Spike held on, ignoring the man. “Spike!” Bobby yelled. He thrust his nozzle forward and blasted Spike right in the face with it, blood flying into the air. Finally Spike broke away, shaking his head to get it out of the spray, and the look he turned on Bobby was murderous. Bobby backed away, holding the hose out in front of him.
“What happened? Was it the new one? El combatiente?” Carlos called, coming into the yard.
“Sí. Este perro será el problema,” Bobby replied.
Senora joined the men in the Yard and, after much conferring, they called Top Dog over and tended to his wounds with a sharp-smelling chemical that I instantly associated with the nice lady from the cool room. Top Dog squirmed and licked and panted, his ears back, when Carlos dabbed something on the small cuts along his face.
I never thought Spike would allow the same treatment, but he stood without protest when they worked on the cut under his ear. He seemed accustomed to it, somehow, accepting the chemical smell as something that happened after a fight.
The next several days were agony. None of use knew where we stood anymore, especially the males.
Spike was unquestionably the leader now, a message he enforced by challenging every single one of us, head-to-head in the Yard. Top Dog had done the same, but not like this—for Spike, the most minor infraction was cause for discipline and most punishment included a swift, painful nip. When play became too boisterous and too intrusive on Top Dog’s area, he had always issued a cold warning in the form of a stare, perhaps a growl. Spike spent his day on patrol and would snap at us for no reason whatsoever—there was a black energy in him, something strange and mean.
When the males jockeyed for new positions in the pack, challenging each other, Spike was there and, too often, would himself get involved, seemingly unable to hold back from plunging into the fray. It was unnecessary and distracting, causing so much tension that minor skirmishes began breaking out among us, fights for things that had been long ago decided, such as position at the food trough, or who would next get to lie in the part of the Yard turned cool by the leaky water faucet.
When Coco and I played our game where I had the rubber bone and she’d try to steal it, Spike would come over, growling, and force me to drop the prize at his feet. Sometimes he would carry the bone back to his corner, ending the play until I could find another toy, and other times he would sniff at it contemptuously and leave it lying in the dirt.
And when Carlos brought in his sack of bones, Spike didn’t even bother to run over to see if he’d be given one. He’d wait until there were no men in the yard and then simply take what he wanted. Spike left some of the dogs alone, such as Rottie and Top Dog and, oddly, Fast, but whenever I was lucky enough to sink my teeth into one of Carlos’s delicious treats I was resigned to the fact that Spike would soon be chewing on it instead.
It was the new order. We might be having trouble figuring out the rules, but we knew who made them, and we all accepted them, which was why I was so surprised when Fast took Spike on.
It was, of course, because of Sister. In a rare coincidence, the three siblings—Fast, Sister, and I—were standing by ourselves in the corner, investigating a bug that had crawled in from under the fence. Being in such free and simple association with my old family was so relaxing, especially after the stress-filled past few days, that I pretended that I had never seen anything more fascinating than a tiny black insect raising microscopic pincers as if daring the three of us to fight.
Thus distracted, none of us noticed Spike until he was upon us, and his quick, silent attack on Sister’s haunches drew an instant frightened whelp from her.
I instantly slunk to the ground—we’d been doing nothing wrong!—but Fast couldn’t take any more and he lashed back at Spike, teeth flashing. Sister darted away but I, propelled forward by a rage I’d never felt before, joined Fast in battle, the two of us snarling and biting.
I tried to leap up and grab a hunk of Spike’s back, but he turned and slashed at me, and as I stumbled backward his jaws clamped down on my foreleg, and I let out a scream.
Fast soon found himself pinned to the ground, but I wasn’t paying attention—the pain in my leg was agonizing, and I limped off, still crying. Coco was there, licking at me anxiously, but I ignored her, making a beeline for the gate.
Just as I knew he would, Bobby opened the gate and came into the Yard, his hose in his hand. The fight was over; Fast had made peace, and Sister was hiding behind the railroad ties. So it was my leg that drew his attention.
Bobby knelt in the dirt. “Good dog, Toby. Okay, boy,” he told me. I gave my tail a feeble wag, and when he touched my paw, sending a searing pain all the way up to my shoulder, I licked him in the face to let him know I knew he hadn’t done it on purpose.
Senora went with us to see the nice lady in the cool room. Bobby held me down while she poked me with the same chemical-smelling needle she’d used on me before, and then the pain in my leg didn’t bother me anymore. I lay drowsily on the table while the lady tugged on my leg, listening to her voice as she spoke to Bobby and Senora. I could feel her concern, her caution, but couldn’t make myself care as long as Senora stroked my fur and Bobby leaned into me to hold me still. Even as Senora drew in her breath when the nice lady in the cool room said “permanent damage,” I didn’t so much as raise my head. I just wanted to lie on the table forever or at least until dinner.
When I got back to the Yard I was wearing the stupid cone collar again and I sported a hard lump of something encasing my wounded foot. I wanted to tear into the lump with my teeth, but not only did the collar look ridiculous, it also prevented me from getting at my foot! I could only walk on three legs, which Spike seemed to find amusing, because he came over to me and knocked me down with his chest. Fine, Spike, go ahead; you are the ugliest dog I’ve ever seen.
My leg hurt all the time and I needed to sleep, and usually Coco came over and rested her head on me as I did so. Twice a day Bobby came in and gave me a treat, and I pretended not to notice that there was something bitter inside the roll of meat, though sometimes instead of swallowing it I waited a bit and then spat it out: a small white thing the size of a pea.
I was still wearing the stupid collar the day all the men came. We heard several doors slamming in the driveway, so we took up our usual chorus of barking, though many of us went quiet when we heard Senora shriek.
“No! No! You can’t take my dogs!”
The grief in her voice was unmistakable, and Coco and I nuzzled each other in alarm. What was going on?
The gate swung open, and several men cautiously entered the Yard, carrying the familiar poles with them. Several held metal canisters out in front of them and were braced as if expecting an attack.
Well, whatever this game was, most of us were willing to play. Coco was one of the first to approach, and she was snagged and pulled without resistance out through the gate. Most of the rest of the pack followed, lining up willingly, though several hung back—Sister, Fast, Spike, Top Dog, and myself, because I just didn’t feel like limping over to them. If they wanted to play, let them play with Spike.
Sister broke into a run around the perimeter of the yard, as if expecting a hole to open. Fast went with her at first and then stopped in despair, watching her panicked, pointless flight. Two men closed in on her and captured her with a rope. Fast let them take him right away, so that he’d go with Sister, and Top Dog stepped forward with dignity when they called to him.
Spike, though, fought the loop, growling savagely and snapping at them. The men yelled, and one of them directed a thin stream of liquid from his canister at Spike’s face, the scent instantly burning my nose from all the way across the Yard. Spike stopped fighting and fell to the ground, his paws over his snout. They dragged him out and then came to me.
“Nice doggy. You hurt your leg, boy?” one of the men asked. I gave my tail a feeble wag and ducked my head a little to make it easier for him to slip the loop over my head, which took a bit of doing because of my stupid plastic collar.
Once outside the fence, I was upset to see Senora crying, struggling against Carlos and Bobby. Her sadness came off her and washed into me, and I pulled against the noose, wanting to go comfort her.
One of the men tried to hand Senora a paper, but she threw it on the ground.
“Why do you do this? We’re not hurting anyone!” Bobby shouted. His anger was clear and frightening.
“Too many animals. Poor conditions,” the man with the paper said. He, too, radiated anger, and everyone was very tense and stiff. I noticed that his clothes were dark and that he had metal flashing on his chest.
“I love my dogs,” Senora wailed. “Please don’t take them from me.” Senora was not angry; she was sad and afraid.
“Inhumane,” the man replied.
I was mystified. Seeing the entire pack outside the Yard, led one by one to cages on the trucks, was very disorienting. Most of us had our ears back and our tails submissively low. I was next to Rottie, whose deep, heavy woofing filled the air.
My comprehension did not improve when we arrived at our destination, which smelled a little like the place with the nice lady in the cool room but was hot and filled with loud, anxious dogs. I followed willingly and was somewhat disappointed to find myself shoved into a cage with Fast and Top Dog—I would have preferred Coco or even Sister, though my fellow males were as cowed as I was and regarded me without hostility.
The barking was deafening, yet above it all I heard the unmistakable snarl of Spike in full attack, followed by a sharp squeal of pain from some unfortunate canine. Men yelled, and then a few minutes later Spike was led past us at the end of a pole, disappearing down a hallway.
A man stopped in front of our cage. “What happened here?” he asked.
The other man, the one who had just led Spike away, stopped and regarded me without interest. “Dunno.”
From the first man I sensed a caring tinged with sadness, but from the second man there was nothing but disinterest. The first man opened the door and gently probed my leg, pushing Fast’s face away. “This is ruined,” he said.
I tried to communicate to him that I was a much better dog without the stupid collar on.
“Unadoptable,” the first man said.
“We got too many dogs,” the second man said.
The first man reached inside the cone and smoothed my ears back. Though I felt disloyal to Senora, I licked his hand. He mostly just smelled of other dogs.
“Okay,” the first man said.
The second man reached in and helped me jump to the ground. He slipped the loop of rope around me and led me back to a tiny, hot room. Spike was there, in a cage, while two other dogs I’d never met paced loose outside Spike’s cage, giving it a wide berth.
“Here. Wait.” The first man was at the door. He reached down and unsnapped the collar, and the air that rushed at my face was like a kiss. “They hate those things.”
“whatever,” the second man said.
They shut the door behind them. One of the new dogs was an old, old female, who sniffed my nose without much interest. Spike was barking, making the other dog, a younger male, nervous.
With a groan, I slid down to lie on the floor. A loud hiss filled my ears, and the young male began to whine.
Suddenly Spike toppled to the floor with a crash, his tongue sliding out of his mouth. I regarded him curiously, wondering what he was up to. The old female slumped nearby, her head coming to rest against Spike’s cage in a manner I was astounded he would allow. The young male whined, and I regarded him blankly, then shut my eyes. I felt overwhelmed with a fatigue as heavy and oppressive as when I was a small puppy and my brothers and sister would lie on top of me, crushing me. That’s what I was thinking about as I began to sink into a dark, silent sleep—being a puppy. Then I thought of running wild with Mother, and of Senora’s caresses, and of Coco and the Yard.
Unbidden, the sadness I’d felt from Senora washed through me, and I wanted to squirm up to her and lick her palms and make her happy again. Of all the things I’d ever done, making Senora laugh seemed the most important.
It was, I reflected, the only thing that gave my life any purpose.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ FIVE }

At once, everything was both strange and familiar.
I could clearly remember the loud, hot room, Spike filling the air with his fury and then abruptly falling into a slumber so deep it was as if he’d opened a gate with his mouth and run away. I remembered becoming sleepy, and then there was the sense that much time had passed, the way a nap in the afternoon sun will span the day and suddenly it will be time for the evening feed. This nap, though, brought me not just to a new time but to a new place.
Familiar was the warm, squirming presence of puppies on either side of me. Familiar, too, was the shoving clamber for a turn at the teat and the rich, life-giving milk that was the reward for all the pushing and climbing. Somehow, I was a puppy again, helpless and weak, back in the Den.
But when I took my first bleary look at the face of my mother, she wasn’t the same dog at all. Her fur was a light color, and she was larger than, well, than Mother. My brothers and sisters—seven of them!—shared the same light-colored fur, and when I examined my forelegs I realized that I matched the rest of the litter as well.
And not only were my legs no longer dark brown—they stretched out from me in perfect proportion to the rest of my body also.
I heard a lot of barking and smelled many dogs nearby, but this wasn’t the Yard. When I ventured from the Den, the surface beneath my pads was rough and hard and a wire fence abruptly ended my exploration after half a dozen yards. It was a cage with a wire top and a cement floor.
The implications of all this made me weary, and I stumbled back to the Den, climbed up on top of a pile of siblings, and collapsed.
I was a little puppy again, barely able to walk. I had a new family, a new mother, and a new home. Our fur was uniformly blond, our eyes dark. My new mother’s milk was far richer than what had come from my first mother.
We lived with a man, who came by with food for my mother, which she gulped down quickly before returning to the Den to keep us warm.
But what about the Yard, and Senora, and Fast and Coco? I could remember my life very clearly, and yet everything was different now, as if I had started over. Was that possible?
I recalled Spike’s outraged barking and how, as I fell asleep in that hot room, I was seized with an inexplicable question, a question of purpose. This didn’t seem like the sort of thing a dog should think about, but I found myself returning to the issue often, usually as I was just dozing off for an irresistible nap. Why? Why was I a puppy again? Why did I harbor a nagging feeling that as a dog there was something I was supposed to do?
Our enclosure didn’t offer much to look at, and there was nothing fun to chew on except each other, but as my brothers and sisters and I became more aware, we discovered there were more puppies in a kennel to the right: tiny, energetic little guys with dark markings and hair that stuck up all over the place. On the other side was a slow-moving female, all alone, with a hanging belly and distended teats. She was white with black spots, and her coat was very short. She didn’t walk around much and seemed pretty uninterested in us. About a foot of space separated the two kennels, so all we could do was smell the little puppies next to us, though they looked like they’d be fun to play with.
Straight ahead was a long strip of lawn that beckoned with sweet odors of moist earth and rich, green grass, but we were prevented from going out there by the locked door to the cage. A wooden fence encircled both the grassy area and the dog cages.
The man wasn’t anything like Bobby or Carlos. When he ventured into the kennel area to feed the dogs, he didn’t speak much to any of us, radiating a bland indifference so at odds with the kindness of the men tending the dogs in the Yard. When the puppies in the kennel next to us rushed over to greet him, he pushed them away from the dinner bowl with a grunt, letting the mother have access to her food. We were less coordinated in our attack and usually didn’t manage to tumble our way to the cage door before he’d already moved on and our mother let us know we were not to share her meal.
Sometimes the man would be talking when he moved from cage to cage, but not to us. He spoke softly, focused on a piece of paper in his hands.
“Yorkshire terriers, week or so,” he said one time, looking in at the dogs in the cage to our right. He stopped in front of our pen and peered inside. “Golden retrievers, probably three weeks yet, and got a Dalmatian ready to pop any day.”
I decided my time in the Yard had prepared me to dominate the puppies in my family, and was irritated they didn’t feel the same way. I’d maneuver to grab one the way Top Dog had grabbed Rottie, and then two or three of my siblings would jump on top of me, not understanding the point of the whole thing at all. By the time I’d fought them off, the original target of my attentions would be off wrestling with someone else, as if it were all some kind of game. When I tried a menacing growl, though, I sounded ridiculously nonthreatening, my brothers and sisters joyously growling back.
One day the spotted dog next to us drew our attentions—she was panting and pacing nervously—and we instinctively hung close to our mother, who was watching our neighbor intently. The spotted dog ripped up a blanket, shredding it with her teeth, and circled around several times before lying down with a gasp. Moments later, I was shocked to see a new puppy lying by her side, covered in spots and cloaked in a slippery-looking film, some kind of sac that the mother immediately licked off. Her tongue pushed the little puppy over, and after a minute it groggily crawled toward its mother’s teats, which reminded me that I was hungry.
Our mother sighed and let us feed awhile before she abruptly stood up and walked away, one of my brothers dangling along for a second before dropping off. I jumped on him to teach him a lesson, which wound up taking a lot of time.
When next I glanced over at the spotted dog, there were six more puppies! They looked spindly and weak, but the mother didn’t care. She licked them, guiding them to her side, and then lay quietly while they fed.
The man came and entered the cage where the newborns lay sleeping, looking them over before turning and walking away. Next he opened the door for the furry-looking puppies in the kennel to the right of ours and released them into the grassy area!
“No, not you,” he said to the mother, blocking her way as she tried to follow. He shut her in and then put bowls of food down for the puppies, which they climbed in and licked off of each other—these idiots wouldn’t last a day in the Yard. The mother sat behind her cage door and whimpered until her brood had quit feeding, and then the man let her out to join her pups.
The hairy little dogs came over to our cage door to sniff us, finally going nose-to-nose with us after living next door for these past few weeks. I licked at the goop on their faces while one of my brothers stood on my head.
The man left the puppies running free while he departed out a gate in the wooden fence that was exactly like the one Carlos and Bobby always accessed to enter the Yard. I watched jealously as the puppies ranged up and down the tiny patch of grass, sniffing hello to the other caged dogs and playing with each other. I was tired of being inside the pen and wanted to get out and explore. Whatever was my purpose in my new life, this didn’t feel like it.
After a few hours, the man returned, carrying another dog who looked exactly like the mother of the hairy puppies who were running free, except that he was a male. The man shoved the mother back into her pen and dropped the male in with her before shutting the gate, locking them in together. The male seemed pretty glad to see the mother, but she snarled at him when he jumped on her from behind.
The man left the fence gate open behind him, and I was surprised at the feeling of longing that swept through me as I peered at the tiny sliver of outside world visible on the other side of the fence. If I were ever running free in the grass, I knew I would head right out that open gate, but naturally the puppies who currently had that option didn’t do anything about it; they were too busy wrestling.
The mother raised her paws up on the cage door and cried softly as the man methodically rounded up her puppies and carried them out the gate. Soon they were all gone. The mother dog paced back and forth in her cage, panting, while the male in the cage with her lay there and watched. I could feel her distress, and it unsettled me. Night fell, and the mother dog let the male lie with her—they seemed to know each other, somehow.
The male was only in there for a few days before he, too, was taken away.
And then it was our turn to be let out! We tumbled out joyously, lapping up the food that was set out for us by the man. I ate my fill and watched my brothers and sisters go crazy, as if they’d never seen anything so exciting before as a bunch of dog food bowls.
Everything was wonderfully moist and rich, not at all like the dry and dusty dirt in the yard. The breeze was cool and carried with it the tantalizing scent of open water.
I was sniffing the succulent grass when the man returned to release our mother. My siblings bounded over to her, but I didn’t because I’d found a dead worm. Then the man left, and that’s when I started thinking about the gate.
There was something wrong with this man. He didn’t call me Toby. He didn’t even talk to us. I thought of my first mother, the very last time I saw her, escaping the Yard because she couldn’t live with humans, not even with someone as loving as Senora. But the man didn’t love us at all.
My gaze focused on the doorknob in the gate.
There was a wooden table next to the door. By climbing up on a stool I was able to get on the table, and from there I was just able to stretch out and put my mouth on the metal knob, which instead of being round was a strip of metal, a handle.
My tiny teeth weren’t very useful in getting a purchase on the thing, but I did my best to manipulate it the way Mother had the night she fled from the Yard. Soon I lost my balance and toppled to the ground, the gate still locked. I sat and barked at it in frustration, my voice a tiny yip. My brothers and sisters raced over to jump on me in their usual fashion, but I turned from them in irritation. I was in no mood to play!
I tried it again. This time I put my front paws on the knob to keep from tumbling to the ground, and as I did so it fell away beneath me, so that my whole body hit the lever on my way down. I landed on the sidewalk with a grunt.
To my astonishment, the gate edged ajar. I shoved my nose into the crack and pushed, and it swung wider. I was free!
I eagerly scampered out into the open, my little legs tripping over themselves. A dirt path lay right in front of me, two tracks dug into sandy soil. I instinctively knew that was the way to go.
After I’d run a few feet I stopped, sensing something. I turned and looked back at my new mother, who was sitting just inside the open gate, watching me. I remembered Mother back in the Yard, glancing once at me before heading back out into the world. My new mother wouldn’t be joining me, I realized. She was staying with the family. I was on my own.
Yet not for a moment did I hesitate. I knew from past experience that there were better yards than this, with loving people who would stroke my fur with their hands. And I knew that the time for suckling at my new mother’s teat was at an end. It was just how it was supposed to work—a dog eventually separated from his mother.
But mostly I knew an opportunity was in front of me that was irresistible, a whole new world to be explored with long, if somewhat clumsy, legs.
The dirt track eventually led to a road, which I decided to follow, if for no other reason than the fact that it led straight into the wind, which was bringing me wonderful new scents. Unlike the Yard, which had always been parched, I smelled damp, rotting leaves, and trees, and pools of water. I skipped forward, the sun in my face, happy to be free, off on an adventure.
I heard the truck coming long before I saw it but was so busy trying to catch an amazing winged bug I didn’t even look up until the door slammed. A man with wrinkled, tanned skin and muddy clothes knelt down, his hands out in front of him.
“Hey there, little fella!” he called.
I regarded him uncertainly.
“You lost, fella? You lost?”
Wagging, I decided he must be okay. I trotted over to him and he picked me up, holding me high over his head, which I didn’t appreciate very much.
“You’re a pretty little fella. You look like a purebred retriever; where did you come from, fella?”
The way he was speaking to me reminded me of the first time Senora called me Toby. I instantly understood what was happening—just as the men had pulled my first family from the culvert, this man had taken me from the grass. And now my life would be what he decided it would be.
Yes, I decided. My name could be Fella. I was thrilled when he sat me down inside the front of the truck, right beside him. The front seat!
The man smelled like smoke and had an eye-watering tang to him that reminded me of when Carlos and Bobby would sit out in the Yard at a small table and talk and hand a bottle to each other. He laughed when I tried to climb up to lick his face, and continued to chuckle as I squirmed around in the narrow places of the truck, taking in rich, strange odors.
We bumped along for a while, and then the man stopped the truck. “We’re in the shade here,” he told me.
I looked around blankly. A building with several doors was directly in front of us, and from one of them came strong chemical smells exactly like those coating the man.
“I’m just going to stop for one drink,” the man promised, rolling up the windows. I didn’t realize he was leaving until he’d slipped out and shut the door behind him, and I watched in disillusionment as he entered the building. What about me?
I found a cloth strap and chewed on it for a little while, until I got bored and put my head down to sleep.
When I awoke, it was hot. The sun now came full force into the truck, the cab airless and humid. Panting, I started whimpering, putting my paws up so I could see where the man had gone. There was no sign of him! I dropped my feet, which were literally burning from the windowsill.
I had never felt such heat. An hour or so went by as I paced back and forth across the scorching front seat, panting harder than I ever had in my life. I began to quiver, and my vision was swimming. I thought of the faucet in the yard; I thought of my mother’s milk; I thought of the spray from the hose Bobby used to break up dogfights.
Blearily I noticed a face staring in the window at me. It wasn’t the man; it was a woman with long black hair. She looked angry, and I backed away from her, afraid.
When her face vanished, I lay back down, nearly delirious. I didn’t have the energy to pace anymore. I had an odd heaviness in my limbs, and my paws were beginning to twitch of their own accord.
And then there was a hard crash, rocking the truck! A rock tumbled past me, bouncing off the seat and falling to the floor. Clear pebbles showered down on me, and a cool kiss of air swept in over my face. I lifted my nose to it.
I was limp and helpless when I felt hands slide around my body and raise me into the air, too exhausted to do anything but hang slackly in her hands.
“You poor puppy. You poor, poor puppy,” she whispered.
My name is Fella, I thought to myself.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ SIX }

Nothing in my life has ever felt as good as the cool, clear flow of liquid that pulled me out of my dreamless sleep. The woman stood over me with a water bottle and was carefully showering me with the sweet spray. I shuddered with pleasure as the trickle painted my back, and raised my mouth to lap and bite at the stream the way I’d often attacked the drizzle that fell from the faucet above the trough in the Yard.
A man stood nearby, and both he and the woman were watching me with concerned expressions.
“Do you think he’ll be okay?” the woman asked.
“Looks like the water is doing the job,” he replied.
From both of them came the sort of open adoration I often felt pouring out of Senora when she stood at the fence to watch us play. I rolled on my back so the water would wash over my hot tummy, and the woman laughed.
“Such a cute puppy!” the woman exclaimed. “Do you know what kind it is?”
“Looks like a golden retriever,” the man observed.
“Oh, puppy,” the woman murmured.
Yes, I could be Puppy, I could be Fella, I could be whatever they wanted, and when the woman swept me up in her arms, heedless of the wet splat I made against her blouse, I kissed her until she closed her eyes and giggled.
“You’re coming home with me, little guy. I’ve got someone I want you to meet.”
Well, it looked like I was a front-seat dog now! She held me in her lap while she drove, and I gazed up at her in gratitude. Curious about my new surroundings, I finally crawled off and explored the inside of the car, astounded at the rich, cold air coming from two vents in front of me. Against my wet fur the air was so chilly I actually began to tremble, and wound up climbing onto the flat floor on the other side of the car, where a soft warmth, just like Mother, quickly lured me back into another nap.
I woke up when the car stopped, sleepily regarding the woman as she reached down and picked me up.
“Oh, you are so cute,” she whispered. As she held me against her chest and stepped out of the car I could feel her heart beating strongly and I sensed something like alarm coming off of her. I yawned off the last vestiges of my nap and, after a quick squat in some grass, was ready to face whatever challenge had her so worked up.
“Ethan!” she called. “Come here; I want you to meet someone.”
I looked up at her curiously. We were in front of a big white house, and I wondered if there were kennels in the back, or maybe a big yard. I couldn’t hear any barking, though, so maybe I was the first dog here.
Then the front door of the house banged open and a human being like I’d never seen before ran out on the porch, jumped down the cement steps, and stopped dead in the grass.
We stared at each other. It was, I realized, a human child, a male. His mouth broke into a huge grin and he spread his arms. “A puppy!” he sang, and we ran to each other, instantly in love. I could not stop licking him and he could not stop giggling, and we rolled together in the grass.
I guess I had never bothered to consider that there might be such a thing as a boy, but now that I had found one, I thought it was just about the most wonderful concept in the world. He smelled of mud and sugar and an animal I’d never scented before, and a faint meaty odor clung to his fingers, so I licked them.
By the end of the day I would know him not just by smell but also by sight, sound, and gesture. His hair was dark, like Bobby’s, but very short, and his eyes were much lighter. He had a way of turning his head to look at me as if he were trying to hear me more than see me, and his voice bubbled with joy whenever he talked to me.
For the most part, though, I was drinking in his scent, licking his face, chewing his fingers.
“Can we keep him, Mom? Can we keep him?” the boy gasped between giggles.
The woman squatted down to pet my head. “Well, you know your dad, Ethan. He’s going to want to hear that you’ll take care of him—”
“I will! I will!”
“And that you’ll walk him and feed him—”
“Every day! I’ll walk him and feed him and brush him and give him water—”
“And you’ll have to clean up when he poops in the yard.”
The boy didn’t answer that one.
“I bought some puppy food at the store; let’s give him some dinner. You won’t believe what happened, I had to run to the gas station and get a jug of water; the poor thing was nearly dead with heat exhaustion,” the woman said.
“Want some dinner? Huh? Dinner?” the boy asked.
Sounded pretty good to me.
To my amazement, the boy picked me up and carried me right into the house! I had never in my life imagined such a thing was even possible.
I was going to like it here just fine.
Some of the floors were soft and embedded with the same animal odor I’d picked up on the boy, while other floors were slick and hard, causing my feet to skitter out from underneath me as I pursued the boy through the house. When the boy picked me up, the flow of love between us was so strong it gave me a hollow feeling in my tummy, almost like hunger.
I was lying on the floor with the boy, wrestling over a cloth, when I felt a vibration rumble through the house and heard the sound I’d learned meant the closing of a car door.
“Your father’s home,” the woman, whose name was Mom, told the boy, who was called Ethan.
Ethan stood up and faced the door, and Mom came to stand beside him. I grabbed the cloth and gave it a victorious shake but found it much less interesting without a boy attached to the other end of it.
A door opened. “Hi, Dad!” the boy yelled.
A man stepped into the room, looking back and forth between the two of them. “Okay, what is it?” he asked.
“Dad, Mom found this puppy . . . ,” Ethan said.
“He was locked in a car, nearly dead from heatstroke,” Mom said.
“Can we keep him, Dad? He’s the best puppy in the world!”
I decided to take advantage of the lapse in security and dove onto the boy’s shoes, biting his laces.
“Oh. I don’t know; this is not a good time,” the father said. “Do you know how much work a puppy is? You’re only eight years old, Ethan. It’s too much responsibility.”
I yanked on one of the boy’s laces and it gave, sliding away from his shoes. I tried to run off with it, but it remained attached to his feet so that it yanked me back, tumbling me head over heels. Snarling, I dove back onto the laces, grabbing them and giving them a furious shake.
“I’ll take care of him, and I’ll walk him and feed him and wash him,” the boy was saying. “He’s the best puppy in the world, Dad. He’s already house broken!”
Having wrestled the shoes into submission, I decided this would be a good time to take a little break, and squatted, depositing a stool along with my urine.
Wow, did that get a reaction!
Soon the boy and I were sitting on the soft floor. Mom would say, “George?” and then Ethan would say, “George? Here, George! Hi, George!” and then Dad would say, “Skippy?” and Ethan would say, “Skippy? Are you Skippy? Here, Skippy!”
It was exhausting.
Later, playing out in the backyard, the boy called me Bailey. “Here, Bailey! Here, Bailey!” he would call, slapping his knees. When I trotted over to him he would dash away, and we ran around and around in the backyard. As far as I was concerned, it was an extension of the game inside, and I was prepared to respond to “Hornet” and “Ike” and “Butch,” but it seemed like this time “Bailey” would stick.
After another meal, the boy took me into the house. “Bailey, I want you to meet Smokey the cat.”
Holding me tightly against his chest, Ethan turned so I could see, sitting in the middle of the floor, a brown and gray animal whose eyes grew big when he spotted me. This was the smell I’d been tracking! The thing was larger than me, with tiny ears that looked like they’d be fun to bite. I struggled to get down to play with this new friend, but Ethan held me tight.
“Smokey, this is Bailey,” Ethan said.
At last he placed me on the floor and I ran over to kiss the cat, but he drew his lips back from a set of really wicked-looking teeth and spat at me, arching his back and thrusting his puffy tail straight up into the air. I stopped, puzzled. Didn’t he want to play? The musty smell coming from under his tail was delicious. I tried to inch in and give Smokey’s butt a friendly sniff, and he hissed and spat and raised a paw, nails extended.
“Aw, Smokey, be a nice cat. Be a nice cat.”
Smokey gave Ethan a baleful glare. I picked up on the boy’s encouraging tone and yipped in a very welcoming fashion, but the cat remained unapproachable, even batting at my nose when I tried to lick his face.
Okay, well, I was ready to play with him whenever he wanted, but I had more important things to care about than some snotty cat. Over the next several days, I learned my place in the family.
The boy lived in a small room full of wonderful toys, while Mom and Dad shared a room with no toys whatsoever. One room had a basin of water I could only drink from if I climbed into it, and also had no toys unless you counted the white paper that I could pull from the wall in a continuous sheet. The rooms for sleeping were at the top of some steps that were impossible for me to climb despite my full-sized dog legs. The food was all kept hidden in one part of the house.
Every time I decided I needed to squat and relieve myself, everyone in the house went crazy, scooping me up and racing out the door with me, setting me in the grass and watching me until I’d recovered from the trauma of it all enough to continue with my business, which earned me so much praise I wondered if this was my main function in the family. Their praise was inconsistent, though, because there were some papers they’d set out for me to rip up and if I squatted on them I was called a good dog, too, but with relief, not joy. And, as I mentioned, sometimes when we were all in the house together they became upset with me for doing exactly the same thing.
“No!” Mom or Ethan would shout when I wet the floor. “Good boy!” they’d sing when I peed in the grass. “Okay, that’s good,” they’d say when I urinated on the papers. I could not understand what in the world was wrong with them.
Dad mostly ignored me, though I sensed he liked it when I got up in the morning to keep him company while he ate. He regarded me with mild affection—nothing like the berserk adoration flooding out of Ethan, though I could feel that was how much Dad and Mom loved the boy. Occasionally Dad would sit at the table in the evenings with the boy and they would talk quietly, concentrating, while sharp, pungent fumes filled the air. Dad would let me lie on his feet, since the boy’s feet were too far off the ground for me to reach.
“Look, Bailey, we built an airplane,” the boy said after one of these sessions, thrusting a toy at me. It made my eyes water with the chemical odors, so I didn’t try to take it away. Making noises, the boy ran around the house holding the toy, and I chased after him and tried to tackle him. Later he put the thing on a shelf with other toys that faintly smelled of the same chemicals, and that was it until he and Dad decided to build another one.
“This one is a rocket, Bailey,” Ethan told me, offering me a toy shaped like a stick. I turned up my nose at it. “We’re going to land one on the moon one day, and then people will live there, too. Would you like to be a space dog?”
I heard the word “dog” and sensed there was a question, so I wagged. Yes, I thought. I would be happy to help clean the dishes.
Cleaning the dishes was where the boy would put a plate of food down and I would lick it. It was one of my jobs, but only when Mom wasn’t watching.
Mostly, though, my job was to play with the boy. I had a box with a soft pillow in it where the boy put me at night, and I came to understand that I was to stay in the box until Mom and Dad came in and said good night and then the boy would let me up into his bed to sleep. If I got bored in the night, I could always chew on the boy.
My territory was behind the house, but after a few days I was introduced to a whole new world, the “neighborhood.” Ethan would burst out the front door in a dead run, me at his heels, and we’d find other girls and boys and they’d hug me and wrestle with me and tug toys from my mouth and throw them.
“This is my dog, Bailey,” Ethan said proudly, holding me up. I squirmed at the sound of my name. “Look, Chelsea,” he said, offering me to a girl his size. “He is a golden retriever. My mother rescued him; he was dying in a car from heat exhaust-station. When he gets old enough I’m going to take him hunting on my grandpa’s farm.”
Chelsea cuddled me to her chest and gazed into my eyes. Her hair was long and lighter than even mine, and she smelled like flowers and chocolate and another dog. “You are sweet, you are so sweet, Bailey, I love you,” she sang to me.
I liked Chelsea; whenever she saw me she would drop to her knees and let me pull on her long blond hair. The dog scent on her clothing came from Marshmallow, a long-haired brown and white dog who was older than I but still a juvenile. When Chelsea let Marshmallow out of her yard we would wrestle for hours and sometimes Ethan would join us, playing, playing, playing.
When I lived in the Yard, Senora loved me, but I now realized it was a general love, aimed at all the dogs in the pack. She called me Toby, but she didn’t say my name the way the boy whispered, “Bailey, Bailey, Bailey,” in my ear at night. The boy loved me; we were the center of each other’s worlds.
Living in the Yard had taught me how to escape through a gate. It had led me straight to the boy, and loving and living with the boy was my whole purpose in life. From the second we woke up until the moment we went to sleep, we were together.
But then, of course, everything changed.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ SEVEN }

One of my favorite things to do was to learn new tricks, as the boy called them, which consisted of him speaking to me in encouraging tones and then feeding me treats. “Sit,” for example, was a trick where the boy would say, “Sit, Bailey! Sit!” and then he would climb on my rear end, forcing it to the ground, and then he would feed me a dog biscuit.
“Dog Door! Dog Door!” was a trick where we would go out to the “garage,” where Dad kept his car, and the boy would shove me through a plastic flap in the side door to the backyard. Then he’d call for me and I’d push my nose through the flap and he’d feed me a dog biscuit!
My legs, I was gratified to see, kept growing with the rest of me, so that as the nights grew cooler I was able to keep up with the boy, even at a sprint.
One morning, the dog door trick took on an entirely different meaning. The boy was up early, barely after sunrise, and Mom was running in and out of different rooms.
“Take care of Bailey!” Mom called at one point. I looked up from where I was giving a chew toy a serious working over, taking note of Smokey the cat, who sat on the counter and gazed down upon me with insufferable haughtiness. I picked up the chew toy and shook it to demonstrate to Smokey what a great time he was missing out on by being so snooty.
“Bailey!” the boy called. He was carrying my bed, and, intrigued, I followed him out to the garage. What was this game?
“Dog Door,” the boy said to me. I sniffed his pockets but couldn’t smell any biscuits. Since the whole point of playing Dog Door was, in my opinion, the dog biscuits, I decided to turn away and lift my leg on a bicycle.
“Bailey!” I felt impatience from the boy and regarded him in puzzlement. “You sleep here, okay, Bailey? You be a good dog. If you need to go to the bathroom, you go out the dog door, okay? Dog Door, Bailey. I have to go to school now. Okay? I love you, Bailey.”
The boy gave me a hug, and I licked him in the ear. When he turned, I naturally followed, but at the door to the house he barred me from entry. “No, Bailey, you stay in the garage until I get home. Dog Door, okay, Bailey? You be a good dog.”
He shut the door in my face.
“Stay”? “Dog Door”? “Good dog”? How were these terms, which I’d heard so often, even remotely related, and which one was “Stay” again?
None of this made any sense to me. I sniffed around the garage, which was full of wonderful smells, but I wasn’t in the mood to explore; I wanted my boy. I barked, but the door to the house remained shut, so I scratched it. Still nothing.
I heard some children yelling from the front of the house and ran to the big garage doors, hoping they would lift up as they sometimes did when the boy stood in front of them, but nothing happened. A loud truck of some kind swept up the voices of the children and carried them away. A few minutes later, I heard Mom’s car drive off, and then the world, which had been so full of life and fun and noise, became intolerably quiet.
I barked for a while, but that did nothing at all, though I did smell Smokey just on the other side of the door, smugly taking note of my predicament. I scratched the door. I chewed on some shoes. I ripped up my dog bed. I found a trash bag full of clothing, tore it open the way Mother had when we were scavenging for garbage, and strewed the clothes around the garage. I peed in one corner and pooped in the other corner. I tipped over a metal container and ate some pieces of chicken and some spaghetti and a waffle, and licked out a can of fish that smelled like Smokey’s breath. I ate some paper. I knocked over my water dish and chewed on it.
There was nothing to do.
After what seemed like the longest day of my life, I heard Mom’s car pull into the driveway. Her car door slammed, and I heard running feet pound through the house.
“Bailey!” the boy shouted, opening the door.
I tackled him, overjoyed that we had ended this madness forever. But he stood staring at the garage.
“Oh, Bailey,” he said, sounding sad.
Full of manic energy, I burst past him and skittered around in the house, leaping over furniture. I spotted Smokey and took off in pursuit, chasing him up the stairs and barking when he dove under Mom and Dad’s bed.
“Bailey!” Mom called to me sternly.
“Bad dog, Bailey,” the boy said crossly.
I was astounded at this false accusation. Bad? I’d been accidentally locked in the garage but was more than willing to forgive them. Why were they scowling at me like that, shaking their fingers at me?
Moments later I was back in the garage, helping the boy, who picked up everything I’d played with and put most of it into the trash container I’d knocked over. Mom came out and sorted through the clothing, taking some into the house with her, but no one praised me for discovering where the items had been hiding.
“Dog Door,” the boy said crossly, but he didn’t give me any treats. I was beginning to think that “Dog Door” was the same as “bad dog,” which was very disappointing, to say the least.
Obviously, this had been a very upsetting day for everybody, and I was certainly willing to put the whole incident behind us, but when Dad came home Mom and the boy talked to him and he yelled, and I knew he was mad at me. I slunk off into the living room and ignored Smokey’s snide expression.
Dad and the boy left right after dinner. Mom sat at the table and stared at papers, even when I approached and put a wonderful wet ball in her lap. “Oh, yuck, Bailey,” she said.
When the boy and Dad came home, the boy called me out into the garage and showed me a big wooden box. He climbed inside, so I joined him, though the space was hot and tight with the two of us in there. “Doghouse, Bailey. This is your doghouse.”
I didn’t see how the box related to me, but I was certainly happy to play “Doghouse” when treats were introduced into the mix. “Doghouse” meant “go inside the doghouse and eat the dog biscuit.” We did the doghouse trick and the dog door trick while Dad moved around the garage, placing things up on shelves and tying a rope on the big metal container. I was overjoyed that “Dog Door” had treats associated with it again!
When the boy grew tired of tricks, we went inside and wrestled on the floor. “Time for bed,” Mom said.
“Oh, Mom, please? Can I stay up?”
“We both have school tomorrow, Ethan. Time for you to say good night to Bailey.”
While conversations like this took place in the house all the time, I rarely bothered to pay attention, but this time I lifted my head at my name, sensing a shift in the boy’s emotions. A sadness and regret wafted off him and he stood, his shoulders slumped.
“Okay, Bailey. Time for bed.”
I knew what bed was, but apparently we were going to take a detour along the way, because the boy led me out to the garage for another rousing game of Doghouse. I was perfectly fine with this but shocked when, moments later, the boy sealed me back in the garage, all by myself.
I barked, trying to make sense of it all. Was it because I’d chewed up my dog bed? I never slept in the thing anyway; it was just for show. Did they really expect me to remain outside in the garage all night? No, that couldn’t be it.
Could it?
I was so distressed, I couldn’t help but whimper. The thought of the boy lying in bed without me, all alone, made me so sad I wanted to chew shoes. My cries grew louder, my heartbreak unrestrained.
After ten or fifteen minutes of relentless grief, the garage door cracked. “Bailey,” the boy whispered.
I ran to him in relief. He eased out, carrying a blanket and a pillow. “Okay. Doghouse, Doghouse,” he told me. He crept over to the doghouse and arranged the blanket on the thin pad inside. I climbed in next to him—we both had two feet sticking out the door. I put my head on his chest, sighing, while he stroked my ears.
“Good dog, Bailey,” he murmured.
A little while later, Mom and Dad opened the door from the house and stood there, watching us. I flapped my tail but didn’t get up, not wanting to wake the boy. Finally, Dad came out and picked up Ethan and Mom gestured to me and the two of us were put to bed inside the house.
The next day, as if we hadn’t learned anything from our mistakes, I was out in the garage again! This time there was far less for me to do, though I did, with some effort, manage to tear the pad out of the doghouse and shred it up pretty well. I knocked over the trash container but couldn’t get the lid off. Nothing on the shelves was chewable—nothing I could reach, anyway.
At one point I went over and assaulted the flap over the dog door, my nose picking up the rich scent of an oncoming rainstorm. Compared to the Yard, where a dry, sandy dust had coated our parched tongues every day, the place the boy lived was wetter and colder, and I loved the way scents would blur together and re-form when it rained. Wonderful trees, laden with leaves, sheltered the ground everywhere we went, and they would harbor raindrops and release them later when tossed by breezes. It was all so deliciously moist—even the hottest days were usually broken by cooler air at night.
The tantalizing odors drew my head farther and farther through the dog door until suddenly, quite by accident, I was out in the yard, without the boy having to push me!
Delighted, I tore around the backyard, barking. It was as if the dog door had been put there to let me out into the backyard from the garage! I squatted and relieved myself—I was finding I much preferred doing my business outdoors instead of in the house, and not just because of the lack of drama. I liked to wipe my paws on the lawn after I went, trailing the scent from the sweat on my pads onto the blades of grass. It was also much more gratifying to lift my leg and mark the edge of the yard than, say, the corner of the couch.
Later, when the cold rain turned from mist to serious drops, I discovered the dog door worked both ways! I wished the boy were home so he could see what I had taught myself.
After the rain ended, I dug a hole, chewed the hose, and barked at Smokey, who sat in the window and pretended not to hear me. When a large yellow bus pulled up in front of the house and disgorged the boy and Chelsea and a bunch of other kids from the neighborhood, I was in the backyard, my paws up on the fence, and the boy ran up to me, laughing.
I didn’t really go into the doghouse after that, except when Mom and Dad yelled at each other. Ethan would come out into the garage and get into the doghouse with me and put his arms around me, and I would sit perfectly still for however long he wanted me to. This was, I decided, my purpose as a dog, to comfort the boy whenever he needed me.
Sometimes families would leave the neighborhood and new families would arrive, so when Drake and Todd moved in a few houses down I considered it nothing but good news—and not just because Mom made delicious cookies to take to the new neighbors, feeding me a couple as a reward for keeping her company in the kitchen. New boys meant more children to play with.
Drake was older and bigger than Ethan, but Todd was the same age and he and Ethan became fast friends. Todd and Drake had a sister named Linda who was even younger; she fed me sugary treats when no one was watching.
Todd was different from Ethan. He liked to play games in the creek with matches, burning plastic toys, like Linda’s dolls. Ethan would participate, but he didn’t laugh as much as Todd; mostly Ethan just watched the things burn.
When Todd announced he had firecrackers one day, Ethan got pretty excited. I had never seen anything like a firecracker and was pretty startled at the flash and the noise and the way the plastic doll instantly had a smoky smell—or at least the part I could find after the explosion. At Todd’s urging, Ethan went into his house and came back with one of the toys he had built with his father and the boys put a firecracker in it and threw it in the air, and it blew up.
“Cool!” Todd yelled. But Ethan just grew quiet, frowning at the little shards of plastic floating away in the creek. I sensed a jumble of confused emotions from him. When Todd tossed firecrackers up into the air and one came down near me, the percussion snapped against my side. I ran over to the boy for reassurance, and he hugged me and took me home.
Having such easy access to the backyard had some advantages. Ethan wasn’t always particularly attentive to the fence gate, which meant I sometimes was free to stroll the neighborhood. I’d trot out and go over to visit the brown and white dog named Marshmallow, who lived in a big wire cage on the side of her house. I marked her trees pretty well, and sometimes, caught by a scent that was both foreign and familiar, I would skip off, nose to the air, and wander far from home on an adventure. During those wanderings I sometimes forgot about the boy altogether and I was reminded of the time several of us were taken from the Yard to the cool room with the nice lady, how the front-seat dog had a provocative odor similar to the one luring me onward.
Usually I lost the scent and then would remember who I was and turn and trot home. The days that the bus brought Ethan home, I would go with him over to Chelsea and Marshmallow’s house and Chelsea’s mother would feed Ethan snacks, which he always shared with me. Other days Ethan came home in Mom’s car. And some days no one in the house got up for school and I would have to bark to wake them all up!
It was a good thing they no longer wanted me to sleep in the garage. I would hate for them to miss the morning!
One day I wandered farther than usual, so that when I headed back toward home it was getting late in the afternoon. I was anxious, my inner clock telling me that I had already missed Ethan’s arrival on the bus.
I cut through the creek, which took me right past Todd’s backyard. He was playing on the muddy bank, and when he saw me he called to me.
“Hey, Bailey. Here, Bailey.” He held out his hand to me.
I regarded him with open suspicion. There was just something different about Todd, something inside of him I didn’t trust.
“Come on, boy,” he said, slapping his hand against his leg. He turned and walked toward his house.
What could I do? I was compelled to do what a person told me. I lowered my head and followed.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ EIGHT }

Todd let me in his house through the back door, shutting it noiselessly behind him. Some of the windows were covered, giving the place a dark, gloomy feel. Todd led me past the kitchen, where his mother was sitting and watching a flickering television. I knew from Todd’s behavior that I was supposed to be quiet, but I thumped my tail a little when I smelled the mother, who carried a strong chemical odor similar to the man who had found me by the road and named me Fella.
The mother didn’t see us, but Linda sure did. She sat upright when we walked past her in the living room. She, too, was watching television, but she slid off the couch and made to follow us down the hallway.
“No,” Todd hissed at her.
I certainly knew that word. I cringed a little at the venom in Todd’s voice.
Linda held her hand out and I licked it, and Todd pushed it away. “Leave me alone.” He opened a door and I went inside, sniffing at the clothes on the floor. It was a small room with a bed in it. He locked the door behind us.
I found a crust of bread and ate it quickly, just performing a quick cleanup. Todd pushed his hands into his pockets. “Okay,” he said. “Okay, now . . . now . . .”
He sat at his desk and opened a drawer. I could smell firecrackers in there; the pungent odor was unmistakable. “I don’t know where Bailey is,” he was saying quietly. “I haven’t seen Bailey.”
I wagged at my name, then yawned and collapsed on a soft pile of clothing. I was tired from my long adventure.
A tiny knock on the door electrified Todd, who leaped to his feet. I jumped up, too, and stood behind him while he whispered angrily out his door at Linda, whom I could smell more than see in the dark hallway. She seemed both scared and concerned, for some reason, making me anxious. I started to pant a little, yawning nervously. I felt too tense to lie back down.
The conversation ended with Todd slamming his door and locking it again. I watched as he went to his drawer, fished around, and brought out a small tube. He was emanating an agitated excitement. He removed the top and took a tentative sniff while heavy chemical vapors instantly filled the room. I knew the astringent odor from when the boy and Dad would sit at the table and play with their airplane toys.
When Todd shoved it at me I already knew I didn’t want my nose anywhere near the tube, and I jerked my head away. I sensed the flash of rage in Todd, and it frightened me. He picked up a cloth and dripped a lot of clear liquid from the tube onto it, folding and squeezing the cloth so that the sticky coating was all over it.
Just then I heard Ethan, a plaintive cry from outside the window. “Bayleeeee!” he was calling. I ran to the window and jumped up, but it was too high for me to see out, so I barked in frustration.
My rear end stung as Todd struck it with an open palm. “No! Bad dog! No barking!”
Again, the heat of his fury flowed off of him as strong as the vapors coming from the cloth in his hand.
“Todd?” a woman called from somewhere in the house.
He gave me a mean look. “You stay here. You stay,” he hissed. He backed out of the room, shutting the door behind him.
My eyes watering at the fumes that still filled the air, I paced around apprehensively. The boy was calling me, and I couldn’t figure out how Todd had the right to keep me locked up in here as if it were the garage.
Then a small sound alerted me: Linda was opening the door, holding out a soggy cracker. “Here, Bailey,” she whispered. “Good dog.”
What I really wanted was out of there, but I was no idiot; I ate the cracker. Linda held the door open wider. “Come on,” she urged, and that was all I needed. I bounded down the hallway after her, turning down some stairs and trotting to the front door. She pushed it open and the cool air washed those horrible fumes right out of my head.
Mom’s car was down the street, and the boy was leaning out of it, calling, “Bailey!” I took off as fast as I could, in hot pursuit. The car’s taillights flashed brightly and Ethan was out on the street, running to me. “Oh, Bailey, where have you been?” he said, burying his face in my fur. “You are a bad, bad dog.”
I knew being a bad dog was wrong, but the love pouring out of the boy was so strong, I couldn’t help but feel that in this case, being a bad dog was somehow good.
It wasn’t long after my adventure at Todd’s house that I was taken on a car ride to see a man in a clean, cool room. I realized I’d been to a similar place before. Dad drove Ethan and me to the place, and from Dad’s attitude I got the sense that I was somehow being punished, which hardly seemed fair. If anyone belonged in the cool room, in my opinion, it was Todd. He was mean to Linda and he kept me apart from my boy—it wasn’t my fault I had been a bad dog. Nonetheless, I wagged and lay quietly when a needle was slipped into my fur behind my head.
When I awoke I was stiff, sore, and itchy, with a familiar ache low in my belly, and I was wearing a stupid plastic collar, so that my face lay at the bottom of a cone again. Smokey clearly felt this was hilarious, so I did my best to ignore him. In fact, nothing felt better than lying on the cold cement floor of the garage for a few days, my rear legs splayed.
After the collar came off and I was back to my old self, I found that I was less interested in pursuing exotic odors outside the fence, though if the gate was left open I was always happy to explore the neighborhood and see what all the other dogs were up to. I stayed away from Todd’s end of the street, though, and if I saw him or his brother, Drake, playing in the creek, I usually shied away from them, slinking into the shadows the way my first mother had taught me.
I was learning new words every day. Besides being a good dog, and sometimes a bad dog, I was being told more and more that I was a “big” dog, which to me mostly meant that I was finding it harder and harder to arrange myself comfortably on the boy’s bed. I learned that “snow,” which sounded so much like “no,” but was shouted joyously, meant that the world was coated in a cold, white coat. Sometimes we went sledding down a long, steep road, and I usually tried to stay on the sled with Ethan until we crashed. And “spring” meant warm weather and longer days and that Mom spent all weekend digging in the backyard and planting flowers, the dirt smelling so wonderful that when everyone went to school I dug the flowers up, chewing the bittersweet blossoms out of a sense of loyal obligation to Mom, though I eventually spat them all out.
That day I was a bad dog again, for some reason, and even had to spend the evening out in the garage instead of lying at Ethan’s feet while he worked on his papers.
Then one day the kids on the big yellow bus were so loud I could hear them shrieking five minutes before the thing stopped in front of the house. The boy was full of joy when he burst out and ran up to me, his mood so high that I ran around and around in circles, barking extravagantly. We went to Chelsea’s house and I played with Marshmallow, and Mom was happy when she came home, too. And from that time on, the boy didn’t go to school anymore and we could lie in bed quietly instead of getting up for breakfast with Dad. Life had finally gotten back to normal!
I was happy. One day we took a long, long car ride and when we were done we were at the “Farm,” a whole new place with animals and smells I’d never before encountered.
Two older people came out of a big white house when we pulled into the driveway. Ethan called them Grandma and Grandpa and Mom did, too, though later I also heard her call them Mom and Dad, which I dismissed as mere confusion on her part.
There were so many things to do on the Farm that the boy and I spent the first few days on a dead run. An enormous horse stared at me from over a fence when I approached, though she was unwilling to play or do anything but look blankly at me, even when I climbed under the fence and barked at her. Instead of a creek there was a pond, big and deep enough for Ethan and me to swim in. A family of ducks lived on its banks and drove me crazy by taking to the water and paddling away when I approached, but then the mother duck would swim back toward me whenever I grew tired of barking at them, so I’d bark some more.
In the scheme of things, I put ducks right down there with Smokey the cat when it came to their value to the boy and myself.
Dad left after a few days, but Mom stayed with us on the Farm that whole summer. She was happy. Ethan slept on the porch, a room on the front of the house, and I slept right with him and no one even pretended the arrangement should be different. Grandpa liked to sit in a chair and scratch my ears, and Grandma was always slipping me little treats. The love from them made me squirm with joy.
There was no yard, just a big open field with a fence designed to let me in and out at any point I desired, like the world’s longest dog door, only without a flap. The horse, whose name was Flare, stayed inside the fence and spent the day eating grass, though I never saw her throw up once. The piles she left in the yard smelled as if they’d taste pretty good but were actually dry and bland, so I only ate a couple of them.
Having the run of the place meant I could explore the woods on the other side of the fence, or run down and play in the pond, or do just about anything I pleased. I mostly stuck close to the house, though, because Grandma seemed to be cooking delicious meals almost every minute of every day and needed me to be on hand to taste her concoctions to make sure they were acceptable. I was glad to do my part.
The boy liked to put me in the front of the rowboat and push it out in the pond, drop a worm into the water, and pull out a small, wriggling fish for me to bark at. He would then let it go.
“It’s too little, Bailey,” he always said, “but one of these days we’ll catch a big one; you watch.”
Eventually I discovered (much to my disappointment) that the Farm had a cat, a black one, who lived in an old, collapsing building called the barn. She always watched me, crouched in the darkness, whenever I took it into my head to go in there and try to sniff her out. This cat seemed afraid of me and therefore was a major improvement over Smokey, just like everything at this place.
And one day I thought I saw the black cat in the woods and took off in hot pursuit, though she was waddling slowly and, as I got closer, revealed that she was something else entirely, a whole new animal, with white stripes down her black body. Delighted, I barked at her, and she turned and gave me a solemn look, her fluffy black tail held high up in the air. She wasn’t running, which I figured meant she wanted to play, but when I jumped in to paw at her, the animal did a most curious thing, turning away from me, her tail still in the air.
The next thing I knew, a plume of horrid smell enveloped my nose, stinging my eyes and lips. Blinded, yelping, I retreated, wondering what in the world had just happened.
“Skunk!” Grandpa announced when I scratched at the door to be let in. “Oh, you’re not coming in, Bailey.”
“Bailey, did you get into a skunk?” Mom asked me through the screen door. “Ugh, you sure did.”
I didn’t know this word “skunk,” but I knew that something very odd had occurred out there in the woods, and it was followed by something odder still—wrinkling up his nose at me, the boy took me out into the yard and wetted me down with a hose. He held my head while Grandma carted up a basket of tomatoes from the garden and squeezed the tart juices all over my fur, turning it red.
I couldn’t see how any of this helped matters any, particularly since I was then subjected to the indignity of what Ethan informed me was a bath. Perfumed soap was rubbed into my wet fur until I smelled like a cross between Mom and a tomato.
I had never been so thoroughly humiliated in my life. When I was dry, I was consigned to the porch, and though Ethan slept out there with me, he kicked me out of his bed.
“You stink, Bailey,” he said.
The assault on my person thus complete, I lay on the floor and tried to sleep despite the riot of odors wafting around the room. When morning finally came I ran down to the pond and rolled in a dead fish that had washed up onshore, but not even that helped, much—I still smelled like perfume.
Eager to figure out what had happened, I went back into the woods to see if I could find that catlike animal and get an explanation. Now that I knew her scent, she wasn’t hard to locate, but I’d hardly begun to sniff at her when the same exact thing happened, a blinding spray that hit me from, of all places, the animal’s rear end!
I couldn’t figure out how to resolve this misunderstanding and wondered if I wouldn’t be better off just ignoring the animal altogether, making her suffer for all the ignominy she had put me through.
In fact, that’s exactly what I decided to do once I trotted home and was put through the entire cycle of washings and tomato juice dunkings again—was this my life, now? Every day I’d be slathered in vegetables, have stinky soaps rubbed into me, and be barred from entry into the main part of the house, even when Grandma was cooking?
“You are so stupid, Bailey!” the boy scolded me while he scrubbed me out in the yard.
“Don’t use the word ‘stupid’; it is such an ugly word,” Grandma said. “Tell him . . . tell him he’s a doodle; that’s what my mother always called me when I was a little girl and I did something wrong.”
The boy faced me sternly. “Bailey, you are a doodle dog. You are a doodle, doodle dog.” And then he laughed and Grandma laughed, but I was so miserable I could barely move my tail.
Fortunately, around about the time that the smells faded from my fur the family stopped behaving so strangely and allowed me to rejoin them. The boy sometimes called me a doodle dog, but never angrily, more as an alternative to my name.
“Want to go fishing, doodle dog?” he’d ask, and we’d shove out in the rowboat and pull tiny fish out of the water for a few hours.
One day toward the very end of summer it was colder than usual and we were out in the boat, Ethan wearing a hood that was attached to his shirt at the neck. And suddenly he jumped up. “I’ve got a big one, Bailey, a big one!”
I responded to his excitement, leaping to my feet and barking. He wrestled with his rod for more than a minute, grinning and laughing, and then I saw it, a fish the size of a cat, coming to the surface right next to our boat! Ethan and I both leaned forward to see it, the boat rocked, and then with a yell the boy fell overboard!
I leaped to the side of the boat and stared down into the dark green water. I could see the boy vanishing from sight, and the bubbles rising to the surface carried his scent to me, but he showed no signs of resurfacing.
I didn’t hesitate; I dove right in after him, my eyes open as I pushed against the water and struggled to follow the trail of bubbles down into the cold darkness.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ NINE }

I couldn’t see much of anything down there in the water, which pressed against my ears and slowed my desperate descent. I could sense the boy, though, sinking slowly ahead of me. I swam even harder, finally catching blurry sight of him—it was almost like my first vision of Mother, a smeared image in murky shadows. I lunged, jaws open, and when I was right up to him I was able to seize the hood of his sweatshirt in my mouth. I lifted my head and, dragging him with me, rose as quickly as I could toward the sunlit surface of the pond.
We burst up into the air. “Bailey!” the boy shouted, laughing. “Are you trying to save me, boy?” He reached out and snagged the boat with his arm. Frantically I tried to claw my way up his body and into the boat, so I could pull him the rest of the way to safety.
He was still laughing. “Bailey, no, you doodle dog! Stop it!” He pushed me away, and I swam a tight circle.
“I have to get the rod, Bailey; I dropped the rod. I’m okay! Go on; I’m okay. Go on!” The boy gestured toward the shore, as if he were throwing a ball in that direction. He seemed to want me to leave the pond, so after a minute I did, aiming for the small area of sand next to the dock.
“Good boy, Bailey,” he said encouragingly.
I looked around and saw his feet go up in the air, and then an instant later he vanished under the water. With a whimper I turned right around and swam as hard as I could, my shoulders lifting clear out of the pond with the effort. When I got to the trail of bubbles, I followed the scent. It was much harder to get myself down this time because I hadn’t dived out of the boat, and as I was headed toward the bottom of the pond I sensed the boy coming up and I switched directions.
“Bailey!” he called delightedly. He tossed his rod into the boat. “You are such a good dog, Bailey.”
I swam beside him as he pulled the boat over to the sand, so relieved I licked his face when he bent over to haul the boat onto the shore.
“You really tried to save me, boy.” I sat, panting, and he stroked my face. The sun and his touch warmed me in equal measure.
The next day, the boy brought Grandpa down to the dock. It was much hotter than it had been the day before, and, racing ahead of the two of them, I made sure the duck family was out in the middle of the pond where it belonged. The boy was wearing another shirt with a hood, and the three of us trotted to the end of the dock and looked down into the green water. The ducks swam over to see what we were looking at, and I pretended I knew.
“You watch, he’ll dive underwater; I promise,” the boy said.
“I’ll believe it when I see it,” Grandpa replied.
We walked back to the shore side of the dock. Grandpa grabbed my collar. “Go!” he shouted.
The boy took off running, and after only a second Grandpa released me so I could follow. Ethan sailed off the end of the dock and made a huge splash, which the ducks complained about to each other, bobbing in the waves. I ran to the end of the dock and barked, then looked back at Grandpa.
“Go get him, Bailey!” Grandpa urged.
I looked down at the frothy water where the boy had gone in, then back at Grandpa. He was old and moved pretty slow, but I couldn’t believe he was so daft that he wasn’t going to do anything about this new situation. I barked some more.
“Go on!” Grandpa told me.
I suddenly understood and looked at him in disbelief. Did I have to do everything in this family? With one more bark I dove off the end of the dock, swimming down toward the bottom, where I could sense Ethan lying motionless. I gripped his collar in my jaws and headed for air.
“See! He saved me!” the boy called when we both surfaced.
“Good boy, Bailey!” Grandpa and the boy shouted together. Their praise pleased me so much I took off after the ducks, who quacked stupidly as they swam away. I got so close to being able to nip off a few tail feathers that a couple of them flapped their wings and briefly took flight, which meant I won, in my opinion.
The rest of the afternoon was spent playing “Rescue Me,” and my anxiety gradually dissipated as I learned that the boy could pretty much fend for himself in that pond, though it so delighted him whenever I hauled him to the surface I dove after him every single time. The ducks eventually climbed out of the water and sat by the edge of the pond and watched us without comprehension. Why they didn’t fly up into the trees with the other birds I’d never understand.
I could see no reason to ever leave the Farm, but when Dad arrived a few days later and Mom started walking from room to room, opening drawers and pulling things out, I had a feeling we were going to move yet again and began pacing anxiously, afraid I’d be left behind. It wasn’t until the boy called, “Car ride!” that I was allowed to climb in and hang my head out the window. The horse, Flare, stared at me with what I assumed was unrestrained jealousy, and both Grandma and Grandpa hugged me before we drove away.
We wound up going back home, and I was delighted to reacquaint myself with the kids and dogs in the neighborhood, but not Smokey. We played games and I chased balls and wrestled with my friend Marshmallow, so busy having fun I was completely unprepared for the morning a few days later when we all got up early and I found myself being unceremoniously led out to the garage. I immediately ran out the dog door and confirmed that Ethan and Mom were both leaving, Ethan taking off with the rest of the children in the same yellow bus.
Well, this was intolerable. I barked for a while, and from down the street Marshmallow answered, so we barked at each other, but that didn’t help as much as you’d think. I moodily went back into the garage, sniffing with disdain at the doghouse. I would not spend my day in there, I decided, even though it was the softest place around.
I saw Smokey’s feet underneath the door and put my nose to the crack and inhaled his scent, letting out a frustrated sigh. I didn’t sense a lot of sympathy coming from him.
Because I was a big dog now, the doorknob was easily within reach, and it occurred to me that there was something I could do about my predicament. I put my paws on the door, took the knob in my mouth, and twisted it.
Nothing happened, but I kept trying, and eventually, with a small click, the door fell open!
Smokey had been sitting on the other side, probably laughing, but when I saw him he sure wasn’t laughing anymore. His pupils grew dark and he turned and fled, so naturally I followed him, skittering around the corner and barking when he leaped up on the counter.
It was much better in the house. The night before, pizza dinner had arrived at the front door in a long, flat box, which was still sitting on the counter and therefore easily accessible. I pulled it onto the floor and ate the delicious cardboard, shredding the less flavorful parts, while Smokey watched in feigned disgust. Then I ate a can of his cat food, licking the metal clean.
Normally, I wasn’t allowed to sleep on the couch, but I couldn’t see any reason to follow that rule, since clearly everything had changed now that I was inside the house by myself. I settled in for a nice nap, my head on a soft pillow, the sun warm on my back.
Sometime later, I realized the sun had moved, which was most inconvenient, and I changed positions on the couch, groaning.
Not long after that, I heard the distinctive sound of one of the kitchen cupboards opening and raced in to see what was happening. Smokey was on the counter and had reached up and opened a door, which I thought was extremely enterprising of him. I watched intently as he leaped inside the cupboard, his tiny nose sniffing at the delicious items inside. He looked down at me, calculating something.
I decided to bite at the base of my tail a bit, and when I turned back I was intrigued to see that Smokey was batting at a bag of food. He hit it once, twice, and on the third smack toppled the thing out of the cupboard and onto the floor!
I bit through the plastic and into some salty crunchy things, which I ate hurriedly in case Smokey tried to come down for his share. He watched impassively from his perch and then smacked down another bag, full of sweet, doughy rolls.
I decided then and there that I had been wrong about Smokey all along. I almost felt bad about eating his cat food earlier, though it was hardly my fault that he didn’t finish his meal when it was served. What did he expect would happen?
I couldn’t open the cupboards myself; the science somehow escaped me. I did, however, manage to snag a loaf of bread and pull it off the counter, carefully removing it from the package, which I chewed separately. The trash can in the kitchen didn’t have a lid, so it was easy to access, though a few of the items—some bitter black grit that coated my tongue when I gave it an experimental lick, along with eggshells, and plastic containers—were inedible. I chewed the plastic anyway.
I was outside waiting when the bus pulled up, and although Chelsea and Todd both got off, there was no sign of the boy, which meant he would be arriving home with Mom. I went back into the house and pulled some shoes out of Mom’s closet, though I didn’t chew on them much because I was feeling pretty lethargic from all of the snacks Smokey had given me. I stood in the living room, trying to decide whether to lie on the couch, which no longer had any sun on it at all, or lie in the patch of sun on the carpet. It was a tough decision, and when I finally chose the sun I lay down uneasily, not sure I’d picked the right thing.
When Mom’s car door slammed I tore through the house into the garage and was out the dog door in an instant, wagging at the fence so no one would be the wiser. Ethan ran straight over to me and came into the yard to play with me while Mom went up the walk, her shoes clicking.
“I missed you, Bailey! Did you have fun today?” the boy asked me, scratching under my chin. We gazed at each other in adoration.
“Ethan! Come look what Bailey did!”
At the sound of my name, pronounced so sternly, my ears fell. Somehow, Smokey and I had been found out.
Ethan and I went into the house and I approached Mom with my tail in full wag so she’d forgive me. She was holding one of the shredded bags in her hand.
“The door to the garage was open. Look what he did,” Mom said. “Bailey, you are a bad dog. A bad dog.”
I hung my head. Though I’d technically done nothing wrong, I realized that Mom was mad at me. Ethan was, too, particularly when he started to pick up the bits of plastic off the floor.
“How in the world did he even get up on the counter? He must have jumped,” Mom said.
“You are a bad dog, a bad, bad dog, Bailey,” Ethan told me again.
Smokey strolled in, leaping languidly onto the counter. I gave him a glum look—he was a bad cat, a bad, bad cat.
Amazingly, no one said anything to Smokey about his role as instigator. Instead, they gave him a fresh can of food! I sat expectantly, figuring I should at least get a dog biscuit, but everyone was still giving me cross looks.
Mom pushed a mop around on the floor, and the boy carried a bag of trash out into the garage.
“Bailey, that was bad,” the boy whispered to me again. Apparently, everyone was having a much harder time getting over the incident than I was.
I was still in the kitchen when I heard Mom shriek, “Bailey!” from the back of the house.
I guessed she had found her shoes.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ TEN }

Over the course of the next year or two, I noticed that when the children all played together Todd was often excluded. When he came around, an uneasiness went through the children, a mood change that Marshmallow and I could sense as easily as if one of them had screamed. Girls usually turned their backs on Todd, and the boys accepted him into their games with a noticeable reluctance. Ethan never went over to Todd’s house anymore.
Todd’s older brother, Drake, rarely came outside except to get in his car and drive away, though Linda soon learned to ride a bicycle and pedaled it down the street to be with little girls her age almost every day.
I took my cue from Ethan and never went near Todd again, though one snowy night when I was out in the backyard doing my business before bed I could smell him standing on the other side of the fence, back in some trees. I let out a warning bark and was pretty pleased when I heard him turn around and run away.
I didn’t much care for the concept of school, which was what happened most mornings at home. I liked it better when summer came and Mom and Ethan no longer had school and we would go to the Farm to live with Grandpa and Grandma.
Whenever I arrived at the Farm I took off at a run, checking to see what was different and what was the same, marking my territory, and reacquainting myself with Flare the horse, the mysterious black cat in the barn, and the ducks, who had irresponsibly decided to produce another batch of ducklings. I often could smell the skunk in the woods but, mindful of the unpleasantness of our last meetings, elected not to chase her down. If she wanted to play, she knew where to find me.
One summer night the whole family sat with me in the living room far past normal bedtime and everyone was excited, though Mom and Grandma were also afraid. And then they yelled and cheered and Grandpa cried and I barked, swept up in all the emotions. Humans are so much more complex than dogs, with such a broad range of feelings—though there were many times I missed the Yard, for the most part I was now living a far richer life, even though I often didn’t know what was going on. Ethan took me out into the night and gazed at the sky. “There’s a man on the moon right now, Bailey. See the moon? Someday, I’ll go there, too.”
He radiated such happiness I raced over and got a stick for him to throw for me. He laughed.
“Don’t worry, Bailey. I’ll take you with me when I go.”
Sometimes Grandpa would go for a car ride into town and the boy and I would accompany him. Before long I had memorized a scent map of the entire trip—there was a moist smell that carried with it the distinct odor of stupid ducks and delicious rotting fish, followed a few minutes later by a powerfully pungent scent that filled the car.
“Phew,” Ethan often said.
“That’s the goat ranch,” Grandpa would always reply.
With my head out the window I often spied the goats who were responsible for all the wonderful smells, and I would bark at them, though they were so dumb they never once fled in terror but just stood there, staring like Flare the horse.
Soon after the goat ranch a great rattle would seize the car as we drove over a wooden bridge and I would start wagging then, because I loved car rides to town and the banging rumble noise meant we were almost there.
Grandpa liked to go to a place where he sat in a chair and a man played with his hair, and Ethan would get bored and we’d wind up walking up and down the streets, looking at windows and hoping to meet other dogs, which I assumed was the reason we were in town in the first place. The best location for dogs was in the park, which was a big grassy area where people sat on blankets. There was a pond, but the boy didn’t want me to swim in it.
Everywhere in town I could smell the goat ranch—if I ever needed to catch my bearings, I would just turn my nose until the scent was the strongest, and that way lay home.
One day we were in the park and an older boy was throwing a plastic toy for his dog to catch. The dog was a black female, short, and all business—when I trotted up to her she completely ignored me, her eyes on the plastic toy, which was a thin, brightly colored disk. It would soar through the air and she would run and leap and snag it before it even touched the ground, which I suppose was a pretty impressive trick if you liked that sort of thing.
“What do you think, Bailey? Do you want to do that, boy?” Ethan asked me. His eyes were shining as he watched the little dog catch the plastic disk, and when we got home he went right to his room and got busy making what he called the “flip.”
“It’s like a cross between a boomerang, a Frisbee, and a baseball,” he told Grandpa. “It will fly twice as far, because the ball gives it weight, see?”
I sniffed at the object, which had been a perfectly good football before Ethan cut it up and asked Grandma to put new stitches in it. “Come on, Bailey!” the boy shouted.
We raced outside. “How much money can you make on an invention like this?” the boy asked his grandpa.
“Let’s just see how she flies,” Grandpa observed.
“Okay, ready, Bailey? Ready?”
I took this to mean that something was about to happen and stood alertly. The boy cranked his arm back and flung the flip into the air, where it twisted and fell from the sky as if it had hit something.
I trotted off the porch and went over to sniff it.
“Bring the flip, Bailey!” the boy called.
Gingerly I picked the thing up. I remembered the short dog chasing the elegant flying disk in the park and felt a pang of envy. I took it back over to where the boy was standing and spat it out.
“Not aerodynamic,” Grandpa was saying. “Too much resistance.”
“I just need to throw it right,” the boy said.
Grandpa went back inside, and for the next hour the boy practiced throwing the flip out into the yard and I brought it back. I could sense a building despair in him, so one time when he threw the flip and it flopped to the ground I brought him back a stick instead. “No, Bailey,” he said sadly. “The flip. Get the flip.”
I barked, wagging, trying to get him to see just how fun the stick could be if he would give it a chance.
“Bailey! The flip!”
And then someone said, “Hi.”
It was a girl Ethan’s age. I trotted over to her, wagging, and she petted me on the head. In one hand she carried a covered basket containing some sweet-smelling breads, which really got my attention. I sat down, looking as attractive as possible so she’d hand over what was in her basket. “What’s your name, girl?” she asked me.
“He’s a boy,” Ethan said. “Name is Bailey.”
I looked over at the boy because he said my name and saw that he was acting strange. It was almost as if he were afraid, but not exactly, though he had taken a half step back when he saw her. I looked back at the girl, who I really liked because of the rich-smelling biscuits in her basket.
“I live down the road. My mom made some brownies for your family. Uh,” the girl said, gesturing to her bicycle.
“Oh,” the boy said.
I kept my attention on the basket.
“So, um,” the girl said.
“I’ll get my grandma,” the boy said. He turned and walked inside the house, but I elected to stay with the girl and her dog biscuits.
“Hi, Bailey, are you a good dog? You’re a good dog,” the girl told me.
Good, but not so good as to get a dog biscuit, I discovered, even though after a minute I gave the basket a nudge with my nose to remind her of the business at hand. Her hair was light colored and she brushed at it while she waited for Ethan to come back. She, too, seemed the tiniest bit afraid, though I could see nothing that would give anybody anxiety except a poor starving dog who needed a treat.
“Hannah!” Grandma said, coming out of the house. “It’s so good to see you.”
“Hi, Mrs. Morgan.”
“Come in, come in. What have you got there?”
“My mom made some brownies.”
“Well, isn’t that wonderful. Ethan, you probably don’t remember, but you and Hannah used to play together when you were just babies. She’s a little more than a year younger than you.”
“I don’t remember,” Ethan said, kicking at the carpet.
He was still acting oddly, but I felt duty bound to guard the basket of dog biscuits, which Grandma set on a side table. Grandpa was sitting in his chair holding a book, and now he reached into the basket, looking over the tops of his glasses.
“Do not spoil your dinner!” Grandma hissed at him. He snatched his hand back, and he and I exchanged grieving looks.
For the next several minutes nothing much happened, biscuit wise. Grandma did most of the talking while Ethan stood with his hands in his pockets and Hannah sat on the couch and didn’t look at him. Finally, Ethan asked Hannah if she wanted to see the flip, and at the sound of the dreaded word I whipped my head around and stared at him in disbelief. I had assumed we had ended that chapter of our lives.
The three of us went out into the yard. Ethan showed Hannah the flip, but when he threw it, it still fell to the ground like a dead bird.
“I need to make some design changes to it,” Ethan said.
I walked over to the flip but didn’t pick it up, hoping the boy would decide to end this embarrassment once and for all.
Hannah stayed for a while, going over to the pond to look at the stupid ducks, petting Flare on the nose, and taking a couple of turns with the flip. She got on her bicycle and as she steered down the driveway I trotted beside her, then when the boy whistled for me returned at a dead run.
Something told me we’d be seeing that girl again.
Later that summer, too early in the season to go back home and go to school, in my opinion, Mom packed up the car. Ethan and I stood next to it as Grandma and Grandpa eased into their seats.
“I’ll navigate,” Grandpa said.
“You’ll fall asleep before we cross the county line,” Grandma replied.
“Now, Ethan. You are a big boy. You be good. You call if you have any problems.”
Ethan squirmed under his mother’s hug. “I know,” he said.
“We’ll be back in two days. You need anything, you can ask Mr. Huntley next door. I made you a casserole.”
“I know!” Ethan said.
“Bailey, you take good care of Ethan, okay?”
I wagged my tail in cheerful noncomprehension. Were we going for a car ride or what?
“I stayed by myself all the time when I was his age,” Grandpa said. “This will be good for him.”
I could feel worry and hesitation in Mom, but eventually she got behind the wheel. “I love you, Ethan,” Mom said.
Ethan muttered something, kicking at the dirt.
The car rolled off down the driveway, and Ethan and I solemnly watched it go. “Come on, Bailey!” he shouted when it was out of sight. We ran into the house.
Everything was suddenly more fun. The boy ate some lunch and when he was done he put the plate on the floor for me to lick! We went into the barn and he climbed up on the rafters while I barked, and when he jumped into a pile of hay I tackled him. An inky shadow from the corner told me the cat was watching all of this, but when I trotted over to investigate she slid off and vanished.
I became uneasy when Ethan unlocked the gun cabinet, something he had never done without Grandpa being there. Guns made me nervous; they reminded me of when Todd threw a firecracker and it banged so close to me I felt a percussion against my skin. But Ethan was so excited, I couldn’t help but prance around at his feet. He put some cans on a fence and shot the gun and the cans went flying. I couldn’t quite understand the connection between the cans and the loud bang of the gun but knew it was somehow all related and, judging from the boy’s reaction, gloriously fun. Flare snorted and trotted to the far end of her yard, distancing herself from all the commotion.
After that the boy made dinner by warming up some succulent chicken. We sat in the living room and he put on the television and ate off of a plate in his lap, tossing me pieces of skin. Now this kind of fun I understood!
At that moment, I didn’t care if Mom ever came back.
After I licked the plate, which the boy left on the floor, I decided to test the new rules and climbed up in Grandpa’s soft chair, looking over my shoulder to see if I’d draw the expected “Down!” command. The boy just stared at the television, so I curled up for a nap.
I drowsily registered the telephone ringing and heard the boy say “bed,” but when he hung up he didn’t go to bed; he sat back down to watch more television.
I was in a solid sleep when a sudden sense of something wrong roused me with a jolt. The boy was sitting stiffly upright, his head cocked.
“Did you hear a noise?” he whispered at me.
I debated whether the urgency I sensed in his voice meant that my nap was over. I decided that what was needed was a calming influence, and lowered my head back on the soft cushion.
From within the house there was a light thump. “Bailey!” the boy hissed.
Okay, this was serious. I got off the chair, stretched, and looked at him expectantly. He reached down and touched my head, and his fear leaped from his skin. “Hello?” he called. “Is someone there?”
He froze, and I emulated his posture, on high alert. I wasn’t at all sure what was happening, but I knew there was a threat. When another thump caused him to jump, fright rippling over his skin, I prepared myself to face whatever or whoever was the problem. I could feel the fur rising on my back, and I gave a low growl of warning.
At the sound of my growl, the boy moved soundlessly across the room. I shuffled after him, still alert, and watched as he opened the gun cabinet for the second time that day.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ ELEVEN }

Holding Grandpa’s rifle in his trembling hands, the boy crept up the stairs, down the hall, and into Mom’s bedroom. I was right on his heels. Ethan checked her bathroom and under the bed, and when he whipped the closet door open he yelled, “Ha!” scaring me half to death. We repeated this examination in the boy’s room, Grandma and Grandpa’s room, and the small room with the couch where Grandma slept when Grandpa made his loud rumbling noises at night. Before leaving on the car ride, Grandma had been in this room doing more work on the flip, trying to fix it at Ethan’s direction, and it was called the sewing room.
The boy checked the whole house, Grandpa’s gun out in front of him, and he rattled every knob and tested every window. Passing through the living room, I walked hopefully over to Grandpa’s chair, but the boy still wanted to explore the house, so with a weary sigh I accompanied him on a check of the shower curtains.
Finally he returned to Mom’s room. He worked the doorknob, and then he dragged her dresser over in front of the door. He set the rifle down next to the bed and called me up to lie with him. When he clung to me, I was reminded of how he sometimes came out to the doghouse in the garage when Mom and Dad were shouting. He felt full of the same lonely terror. I licked him as comfortingly as I knew how—we were together; how could anything be wrong?
The next morning we slept in and then had a fabulous breakfast. I ate toast crusts and licked scrambled eggs and finished his milk for him. What a great day! Ethan put more food in a bag, along with a bottle that he filled with water, and slid the whole thing in his backpack. Were we going for a walk? Sometimes Ethan and I would go for a walk and he’d take sandwiches for us to share. Lately, his walks always seemed to take us down by where the girl lived; I could smell her scent on the mailbox. The boy would stand and look at the house, and then we’d turn around and go back home.
The fear from the night before was totally gone. Whistling, the boy went out to take care of Flare, who wandered over to eat the bucket of dry, tasteless seeds or whatever they were that she munched on when she wasn’t trying to make herself sick with grass.
I was surprised, though, when the boy fetched a blanket and a shiny leather saddle from the barn and affixed them to the horse’s back. We’d done this a few times before, with Ethan climbing up to sit high on Flare’s back, but always with Grandpa there, and always with the gate to Flare’s yard firmly closed. Now, though, the boy opened the gate, hoisting himself up with a grin.
“Let’s go, Bailey!” he called down to me.
I followed, feeling surly. I didn’t like that Flare suddenly was getting all the attention and that I was so far away from the boy, forced to walk beside the huge creature, who I had come to conclude was just as dumb as the ducks. I especially didn’t appreciate it when, with a flick of her tail, Flare dropped a smelly pile of poo on the road, narrowly missing me. I lifted my leg on it because it now, after all, belonged to me, but I felt fairly certain the horse had meant the thing as an insult.
Soon we were off-road, in the woods, walking along a trail. I chased down a rabbit and would have caught it if it hadn’t cheated by suddenly changing direction. I smelled more than one skunk and haughtily refused to take even a single step in that direction. We stopped at a small pool and Flare and I drank, and later the boy ate his sandwich, tossing me the crusts.
“Isn’t this great, Bailey? Are you having a good time?”
I watched his hands, wondering if his questioning tone indicated he was going to feed me some more sandwich.
Aside from the fact that we had Flare with us, I was really enjoying myself. Of course, just getting away from the stupid flip was reason in and of itself to celebrate, but after several hours we were so far from home I could no longer smell any sign of it.
I could tell that Flare was getting weary, but from the boy’s attitude I concluded we still had a way to go to reach our destination. At one point, Ethan said, “Do we go this way? Or that way? Do you remember, Bailey? Do you know where we are?”
I looked up at him expectantly, and, after a moment, we continued on, picking up a trail that had many, many animal scents on it.
I’d marked so much territory my leg was sore from being lifted into the air. Flare stopped and let loose with a huge gush of urine, which I felt was entirely inappropriate behavior, since her scent would obliterate mine and I was the dog. I wandered up ahead to clear the smell from my nose.
I topped a small rise and that’s when I saw the snake. It was coiled in a patch of sun, sticking its tongue out rhythmically, and I stopped dead, fascinated. I’d never seen one before.
I barked, which caused no reaction whatsoever. I trotted back to the boy, who had Flare underway again.
“What is it, Bailey? What did you see?”
I decided that whatever the boy was saying, it wasn’t go bite the snake. I slid in next to Flare, who was plodding along expressionlessly, and wondered how she would react when she saw the snake curled up in front of her.
At first she didn’t see it, but then as she approached, the snake suddenly pulled back, lifting its head, and that’s when Flare screamed. Her front legs came off the ground and she spun, kicking, and the boy went flying off her back. I ran to him at once, of course, but he was okay. He jumped to his feet. “Flare!” he shouted.
I watched sourly as the horse retreated at a full gallop, her hooves pounding the dirt. When the boy took off running I understood what was needed and ran ahead in hot pursuit, but the horse kept going and soon the gap between me and my boy was too great and I turned back to be with him.
“Oh no!” the boy was saying, but the “no” wasn’t for me. “Oh God. What are we going to do, Bailey?”
To my utter dismay, the boy started crying. He did this less and less as he had gotten older, which made it all the more upsetting now. I could feel his utter despair, and I shoved my face into his hands, trying to comfort him. The best thing, I decided, would be for us to go home and eat more chicken.
The boy eventually stopped crying, looking blankly around the woods. “We’re lost, Bailey.” He took a drink of water. “Well, okay. Come on.”
Apparently the walk wasn’t over, because we set out in an entirely new direction, not at all the way from which we’d come.
We went a long way into the woods, at one point crossing our own scent, and still the boy plodded on. I grew so weary that when a squirrel darted out right in front of me I didn’t even bother to chase it; I just followed the boy, who I could tell was also getting tired. When the light began to fade from the sky, we sat down on a log and he ate the last of the sandwiches, carefully feeding me a hunk. “I’m really sorry, Bailey.”
Just before dark, the boy became interested in sticks. He began dragging sticks over to a tree that had blown over, stacking them up against the wall of mud and gnarly roots. He piled pine needles on the ground underneath this canopy and stacked more sticks on top. I watched curiously, ready despite my fatigue to chase one if he threw it, but he just stayed focused on his task.
When it became too dark to see, he climbed in on the pine needles. “Here, Bailey! Come here!”
I crawled in beside him. It reminded me of the doghouse. I ruefully remembered Grandpa’s chair, wondering why we couldn’t just go home and sleep there. But the boy soon started to shiver, and I put my head on top of him and eased my belly onto his back the way I used to lie on my brothers and sisters when we were cold.
“Good dog, Bailey,” he told me.
Soon his breathing became deep and he stopped shivering. Though I wasn’t exactly perfectly comfortable, I carefully lay in a position to keep him warm as possible through the night.
We were up when the birds started to call and before it was even fully light were already walking again. I sniffed hopefully at the sack, fooled by the smells, but when the boy let me put my head inside I found nothing to eat.
“We’ll save it in case we need to make a fire,” he told me. I translated this to mean “we need more sandwiches” and thumped my tail in agreement.
The nature of our adventure changed that day. The hunger in my belly grew to be a sharp pain, and the boy cried again, sniffling for about an hour. I could feel anxiety wafting through him, followed by a sullen, lethargic apathy that I found just as alarming. When he sat down and stared at me with glassy eyes, I licked him full in the face.
I was worried about my boy. We needed to go home, now.
We came to a small stream and the boy flopped down on his stomach and we drank thirstily. The water gave the boy both energy and purpose; when we set off again, we were following the stream, which twisted and turned through the trees and, at one point, through a meadow full of singing bugs. The boy turned his face to the sun and increased his pace, hope surging through him, but his shoulders slumped when after an hour or so the stream reentered the dark woods.
We spent that night clinging to each other as before. I smelled a carcass nearby, something old but probably edible, but I didn’t leave the boy. He needed my warmth more than ever. His strength was leaving him; I could feel it ebbing away.
I had never been so afraid.
The next day the boy stumbled a few times while he walked. I smelled blood; his face had been whipped by a branch. I sniffed at it.
“Go away, Bailey!” he yelled at me.
I felt anger and fear and pain coming from him, but I didn’t back away, I stayed right there, and knew I had done the right thing when he buried his face in my neck and cried some more.
“We’re lost, Bailey. I’m so sorry,” the boy whispered. I wagged at my name.
The little stream wandered into a boggy area, losing all definition and making for mucky travels. The boy sank up to his calves, so that his feet made a sucking sound as he pulled them out. Bugs descended on us, landing in our eyes and ears.
Midway across the swamp the boy just stopped. His shoulders sagged, his chin dropping. The air left his lungs in a long, deep sigh. Distressed, I picked my way across the slimy area as quickly as I could, putting a paw on his leg.
He was giving up. An overwhelming sense of defeat was building within him, and he was surrendering to it. He was losing his very will to live. He was like my brother Hungry, lying down that last time in the culvert, never to get back up again.
I barked, startling both the boy and me. His dull eyes blinked at me. I barked again.
“Okay,” he muttered. Lethargically he drew his foot out of the mud and tentatively set it down, sinking again.
It took us more than half the day to cross that swamp. When we picked up the stream on the other side of the bog, it moved water with more purpose, becoming deeper and faster. Soon another trickle joined it, and then another, so that the boy had to make a running start to leap across it when a downed tree blocked his path on one side or another. Each leap seemed to make him tired, and we wound up taking a nap for a few hours. I lay with him, terrified the boy wouldn’t wake up, but he did, rousing himself slowly.
“You’re a good dog, Bailey,” he told me, his voice hoarse.
It was late in the afternoon when the stream joined a river. The boy stood and looked blankly at the dark water for a long time, then aimed us downstream, pushing through grasses and thickly choked trees.
Night was just starting to fall when I picked up the scent of men. At this point Ethan seemed to be walking without purpose, his feet scuffing numbly in the dirt. Each time he fell, he took longer and longer to get back up, and he registered nothing when I darted ahead, my nose to the ground.
“Come on, Bailey,” he mumbled. “Where you going?”
I think he didn’t even notice when we crossed the footpath. He was squinting in the fading light, trying to keep from tripping, and I sensed nothing from him for several seconds when the grasses underfoot became a well-trod trail of dirt. I could smell several different men—all of them old scents but as clear to me as the track of children up and down the streets back home. Then suddenly the boy straightened, taking in a breath. “Hey!” he said softly, his gaze sharpening on the path.
Now that I had a firm sense of where we were going, I trotted on ahead a few yards, my fatigue lifting with the boy’s rising excitement. Both the trail and the river were bending in parallel to the right, and I kept my nose down, noticing how the man smell was becoming both more strong and more recent. Someone had been here not long ago.
Ethan stopped, so I went back to him. He was standing, staring, his mouth open.
“Wow,” he said.
I realized there was a bridge across the river, and, as I watched, a figure broke out of the gloom and walked along the railing, peering at the water. Ethan’s heart rate ticked up; I could hear it. His excitement, though, faded into a fear, and he shrank back, reminding me of my first mother’s reaction when we would come across men while we were hunting.
“Bailey, be quiet,” he whispered.
I didn’t know what was going on, but I sensed his mood—it was the same thing that had happened at home, the night he got the gun out and poked it into all of the closets. I looked at him alertly.
“Hey!” the man on the bridge called. I felt the boy stiffen, getting ready to run away.
“Hey!” the man shouted again. “Are you Ethan?”
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ TWELVE }

The man on the bridge gave us a car ride. “We’ve been searching the whole state of Michigan for you, son,” he said. Ethan looked down, and from him I sensed sadness and shame and a little fear. We drove to a big building, and as soon as we stopped Dad opened the car door and he and Mom hugged Ethan and Grandma and Grandpa were there and everyone was happy, though there were no dog treats of any kind. The boy sat in a chair with wheels and a man pushed him into the building, and just before he went inside the boy turned and waved at me, and I thought he would probably be okay, though I felt pretty anxious to be separated from him. Grandpa held tight to my collar, so I didn’t have any choice in the matter.
Grandpa took me for a car ride and I was a front-seat dog. We went to a place where they handed Grandpa a delicious-smelling sack through his window and he fed me dinner right there in the car, unwrapping hot sandwiches and handing them to me one at a time. He ate one, too.
“Don’t tell Grandma about this,” he said.
When we got home I was startled to see Flare standing in her usual place in her yard, regarding me with a slack expression. I barked at her through the car window until Grandpa told me to stop barking.
The boy was only gone one night, but it was the first time since we’d been together that I had slept without him, and I paced the hallway until Dad shouted, “Lie down, Bailey!” I curled up in Ethan’s bed and fell asleep with my head on the pillow, where his scent was the strongest.
When Mom brought Ethan home the next day I was overjoyed, but the boy’s mood was somber. Dad told him he was a bad boy. Grandpa talked to him in front of the gun cabinet. Everyone was tense—and yet nobody so much as mentioned the name Flare, and it was Flare who was the cause of the whole thing! I realized that because no one else had been there they didn’t know what had really happened and were mad at the boy instead of the horse.
I was angry enough to want to go outside and bite that horse, but I didn’t, of course, because the thing was huge.
The girl came over to see the boy, and the two of them sat on the porch and didn’t talk much, just sort of mumbled and looked away from each other.
“Were you scared?” the girl asked.
“No,” the boy said.
“I would have been scared.”
“Well, I wasn’t.”
“Did you get cold at night?” she pressed.
“Yeah, pretty much.”
“Oh.”
“Yeah.”
I alertly followed this exchange, sifting carefully for words such as “Bailey,” “car ride,” and “treats.” Hearing none of them, I put my head down and sighed. The girl reached down and petted me, so I rolled on my back for a tummy rub.
I decided I liked the girl, and wished she visited more often and brought more of those biscuits and gave me some.
Then, before I was ready, Mom packed and we took the big long car ride that meant school was coming. When we pulled in the driveway at home, several of the children came running over, and Marshmallow and I got reacquainted on the lawn, slipping right into our ongoing wrestling match.
There were other dogs in the neighborhood, but I liked Marshmallow the best, probably because I saw her nearly every day when the boy went to stay with Chelsea’s mother after school. Often when I would head out through the open gate on an adventure Marshmallow would be out, too, and would accompany me while we explored the issue of other people’s trash cans.
So I was alarmed to hear Chelsea leaning out of her mother’s car one day, calling, “Marshmallow! Marshy! Here, Marshmallow!” Chelsea came over to talk to Ethan, and before long all the kids in the neighborhood were calling Mashmallow’s name. It was clear to me that Marshmallow had been a bad dog and had gone off somewhere on her own adventure.
Her scent was most recent in the area of the creek, but there were so many children and dogs, I didn’t have a good sense of what direction she’d taken. Chelsea was sad and cried, and I felt bad for her and put my head in her lap, and she hugged me.
Todd was one of the children who were helping to look for Marshmallow, and curiously, her scent was on his pants. I sniffed him carefully, and he frowned and pushed my head away. His shoes were muddy and Marshmallow’s scent was strong there, too, plus other things I couldn’t identify.
“Come on, Bailey,” Ethan said when he saw Todd’s reaction to my examination.
Marshmallow never did come home. I remembered my first mother, running out the gate and into the world without a look back. Some dogs just want to be free to wander, because they don’t have a boy who loves them.
Eventually Marshmallow’s scent faded from the wind, but I never seemed to stop sniffing for her. When I remembered playing with Marshmallow I found myself thinking of Coco, back in the Yard. I would have loved to see Coco again, and Marshmallow, but I was beginning to understand that life was far more complicated than it had appeared to be in the Yard and that it was people who were in charge of it, not dogs. What mattered was not what I wanted; what mattered was that I was there in the woods when Ethan was cold and hungry, keeping him warm at nights, being his companion.
That winter, around the time when Dad put a tree in the living room for Merry Christmas, Chelsea got a new puppy. They named her Duchess. She was relentlessly playful, to the point where I’d get annoyed at her sharp teeth digging into my ears and would give her a quick growl to make her stop. She’d blink at me innocently and back off for just a few seconds before deciding I couldn’t have meant it, and then she’d come right back at me. It was very irritating.
In the spring, the word “go-kart” swept through the neighborhood, and all up and down the street the children were sawing and hammering on wood, totally ignoring their dogs. Dad would come out to the garage every evening and talk to the boy while he fussed over whatever he was doing. I even went so far as to go into the boy’s closet and bring out the loathsome flip, thinking I could tantalize him with that, but he remained totally focused on playing with pieces of wood that he never once threw for me to chase and bring back.
“See my go-kart, Bailey? It’s going to go fast!”
Finally the boy opened the garage door, sat on the go-kart, and rode it like a sled down the short driveway. I trotted beside him, thinking we’d both been through a lot of bother for such a pointless ending, but when the go-kart reached the bottom of the driveway he picked it up and carried it back into the garage to play with it some more!
At least with the flip you had something you could chew on.
On a sunny day when there was no school, all of the kids in the neighborhood took their go-karts to a long, steep street several blocks away. Duchess was too young to accompany the procession, but I went along with my boy, though I had no enthusiasm for his initial idea that he should sit in the go-kart and I should pull him down the street by a leash.
Todd and his older brother, Drake, were among the kids and laughed and said things about Chelsea’s go-kart, and I could sense that her feelings were hurt. When they lined up the go-karts at the top of the hill, Todd’s was next to Ethan’s.
I was not at all prepared for what happened next: someone yelled, “Go!” and then the go-karts were off, rolling down the hill, gathering speed. Drake ran up behind Todd and gave his go-kart a big push, and it leaped ahead.
“Cheating!” Chelsea yelled. Her go-kart was moving very slowly, but Ethan’s was gaining speed and soon I had to run to keep up. The other go-karts fell away, and after a little bit it was just Ethan’s go-kart, steadily closing in on Todd’s.
I ran with abandonment, an exuberant freedom, galloping down the hill after my boy. At the bottom a boy named Billy stood with a flag on a stick, and I sensed that he was somehow part of what was happening. Ethan was hunched over, his head low, and it was all so much fun I decided I wanted to be on the go-kart with him. I put on an extra burst of speed and leaped through the air, landing on the back of his go-kart and nearly toppling off again.
The force of my impact threw us forward, so that we were now passing Todd! Billy waved his stick and I could hear yelling and cheering behind us as the go-kart, now on the flat part of the road, rolled to a stop.
“Good dog, Bailey,” the boy told me, chuckling.
All the other go-karts rolled up behind us, followed by the rest of the children, who were all yelling and laughing. Billy came over and held Ethan’s hand up into the air, dropping his stick with the flag on it. I picked up the stick and pranced around with it, daring someone to try to take it and have some real fun.
“Not fair, not fair!” Todd shouted.
The crowd of children grew quiet. A hot fury poured off of Todd, who stood facing Ethan.
“The damn dog jumped on the kart; that’s why you won. You’re disqualified,” Drake said, standing behind his brother.
“Well, you pushed your brother!” Chelsea shouted.
“So?”
“I would have caught you anyway,” Ethan said.
“Everyone who says Todd’s right, say ‘aye!’ ” Billy called.
Todd and his brother shouted, “Aye!”
“Everyone who says Ethan won, say ‘nay.’ ”
“Nay!” all of the other children shouted. I was so startled at this loud outburst, I dropped my stick.
Todd took a step forward and hit Ethan, who ducked and tackled Todd. They both fell to the ground.
“Fight!” Billy yelled.
I started to surge forward to protect my boy, but Chelsea put a firm hand on my collar. “No, Bailey. Stay.”
The boys rolled around, the two of them tied together in a tight knot of anger. I twisted around, trying to slip my collar, but Chelsea held fast. Frustrated, I barked.
Ethan was soon sitting up on top of Todd. Both boys were panting. “You give?” Ethan demanded.
Todd looked away, his eyes squeezed shut. Humiliation and hate wafted off of him in equal amounts. Finally, he nodded. The boys stood up warily, beating at the dirt on their pants.
I felt the sudden rage from Drake at the exact moment he lunged forward, slamming Ethan with both hands. Ethan rocked back but didn’t fall.
“Come on, Ethan. Come on,” Drake snarled.
There was a long pause while Ethan stood looking up at the older boy, and then Billy stepped forward. “No,” Billy said.
“No,” Chelsea said.
“No,” some of the other children said. “No.”
Drake looked at us all for a minute, and then he spat on the ground and picked up the go-kart. Without a word, the two brothers walked away.
“Well, we sure showed everybody today, didn’t we, Bailey?” Ethan said to me. Everyone hauled their go-karts to the top of the hill and rolled them back down, all day long. Ethan allowed Chelsea to ride his go-kart, since hers had lost a wheel, and she had me ride behind her every time.
That night Ethan was excited at dinner, talking rapidly to Mom and Dad, who smiled as they listened. It took the boy a long time to fall asleep, and after he did so his restlessness made me slide off the bed and lie on the floor. This meant I wasn’t really asleep when I heard a huge crash from downstairs.
“What was that?” the boy asked me, sitting bolt upright in bed. He jumped down onto the floor as the lights came on in the hallway.
“Ethan, stay in your room,” Dad told him. He was tense, angry, and afraid. “Bailey, come.”
I obediently eased down the stairs with Dad, who moved cautiously and turned on the lights in the living room. “Who’s there?” he asked loudly.
Wind blew the curtains on the front window—a window that was normally never opened. “Don’t come down with bare feet!” Dad shouted.
“What is it?” Mom asked.
“Someone threw a rock through our window. Stay back, Bailey.”
I sensed Dad’s concern and sniffed around the room at all the glass. On the floor was a rock, little shards of the window clinging to it. When I put my nose to it, I instantly recognized the smell.
Todd.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ THIRTEEN }

A year or so later, in the spring, Smokey the cat got sick. He lay around moaning and didn’t protest when I put my nose down in his face to investigate this new behavior. Mom became very worried and took Smokey for a car ride. When Mom came home, she was sad, probably because cats are no fun in a car.
A week or so later, Smokey died. After dinner the family went into the backyard, where Ethan had excavated a big hole, and they wrapped Smokey’s body in a blanket and put it in the hole and covered it with dirt. Ethan hammered a piece of wood into the soil next to the mound of wet dirt, and he and Mom cried a little. I nuzzled them both to remind them that there was really no need to grieve, since I was okay and really a much better pet than Smokey ever was.
The next day, after Mom and the boy left for school, I went out into the yard and dug Smokey back up, figuring they couldn’t have meant to bury a perfectly good dead cat.
That summer we didn’t go to the Farm at all. Ethan and some friends in the neighborhood would get up every day and go to people’s houses and cut grass with loud lawn mowers. The boy would take me along with him but always tied me to a tree. I loved the smell of the newly cut grass, but I did not care for lawn mowing in general and felt this activity was somehow involved in us not visiting the Farm. Grandpa and Grandma did drive in for a week, but it wasn’t nearly as much fun, especially when Dad and Grandpa exchanged some harsh words when they were alone in the backyard peeling husks off of corn. I felt the anger in both of them and wondered if it was a reaction to the fact that the corn husks were inedible, something I’d verified by both smelling and chewing. After that day, Dad and Grandpa were very uneasy in each other’s company.
When school started again, several things were different. The boy no longer went to Chelsea’s house when he got home—in fact, he usually was the last one to arrive, smelling of dirt, grass, and sweat as he raced up the driveway after a car dropped him off in the street. And some nights we’d go on a car ride to what I came to understand was a football game, where I would sit on a leash at the end of a long yard next to Mom and people would yell and scream for no reason. Boys wrestled and threw a ball to each other, sometimes running down close to where I was standing and other times playing all the way at the far end of the big yard.
I could smell Ethan in the group of boys sometimes. It was a little frustrating to just sit there and not go out and enhance the game—at home, I’d learned to get my mouth around a football. One time I was playing with the boy and I bit too hard and the football collapsed until it was a saggy flat wad of leather, sort of like the flip. After that, Ethan didn’t want me chewing on footballs, but I was still allowed to play with them as long as I was careful. Mom didn’t know this and held me tight by the leash. I knew if she would just let me go get the football, the boys would have a lot more fun chasing me than each other, because I was faster than any of them.
Chelsea’s puppy, Duchess, grew up, and we became good friends, once I demonstrated to her how she was to behave around me. One day when the gate was open I trotted over to see her and she was wearing a plastic cone around her neck and seemed very out of sorts. She thumped her tail a little when she saw me outside her cage, but she didn’t bother to get up. The sight made me uneasy—I hoped no one was planning to put one of those things on me again.
When it snowed Ethan and I played with sleds, and when the snow melted we played with bouncy balls. A couple of times the boy pulled the flip out of the closet and stared at it while I glanced away in dread. He’d hold it up and look it over, feeling its heft, and then put it away with a sigh.
That summer was another one without a Farm visit, and once again the boy cut grass with his friends—I would have thought he’d gotten it out of his system, but he apparently still enjoyed it. That year, Dad left for several days and while he was gone Grandpa and Grandma visited. Their car smelled like Flare and hay and the pond, and I stood and sniffed it for several minutes and raised my legs on the tires.
“My goodness, you are such a big boy!” Grandma told Ethan.
There was more football when the days turned cool, plus a wonderful surprise: Ethan could take his own car rides! This changed everything, because now I went almost everywhere with him, my nose out the window as I stood in the front seat, helping him drive. It turned out that the reason he stayed out so late was that he played football every night after school, leaving me tied up by the fence with a dish of water. It was boring, but at least I got to be with the boy.
Sometimes when Ethan took a car ride he forgot me, so I’d sit in the yard and yip for him to come back. Usually when this happened, Mom would come to see me.
“Want to go for a walk, Bailey?” she’d ask over and over until I was so excited I was dancing around in circles. She’d put the leash on my collar and we’d patrol the streets, stopping every few feet so I could mark the territory. Often we’d pass groups of children playing and I’d wonder why Ethan didn’t do that as much anymore. Mom sometimes unsnapped the leash and let me run with the children a little bit.
I liked Mom a lot. My only complaint was that when she exited the bathroom she would close the lid on my water bowl. Ethan always left the lid up for me.
When school ended that summer, Ethan and Mom took us on a car ride to the Farm. I was overjoyed to be back. Flare pretended not to recognize me and I wasn’t sure if they were the same ducks or different ones, but everything else seemed exactly the same.
Nearly every day Ethan would work with Grandpa and some men, hammering and sawing boards. I assumed at first that the boy was building another go-kart, but after a month or so it became clear that they were putting together a new barn, right next to the old one, which had a big hole in the roof.
I was the first one to spot the woman coming up the driveway, and ran down to enforce any needed security. When I got close enough to smell her I realized it was the girl, all grown up now. She remembered me, and I squirmed in pleasure as she scratched behind my ears.
“Hi there, Bailey; did you miss me? Good dog, Bailey.”
As the men noticed the girl they stopped working. Ethan was coming out of the old barn and stopped in surprise.
“Oh. Hi. Hannah?”
“Hi, Ethan.”
Grandpa and the other men were grinning at each other. Ethan looked over his shoulder at them and flushed, then came over to where Hannah and I were standing.
“So, hi,” he said.
“Hi.”
They looked away from each other. Hannah stopped scratching me and I gave her a little nudge to remind her to keep at it.
“Come on in the house,” Ethan said.
The rest of that summer, whenever I went for a car ride it smelled like the girl had been sitting in my seat. Sometimes she would come over and have dinner with us, and then she and Ethan would sit on the porch and talk and I would lie at their feet to give them something interesting to talk about.
One time I was awakened from a well-deserved nap by a little alarm coming off the both of them. They were sitting on the couch and their faces were really close together and their hearts were beating and I could sense fear and excitement. It sounded a little like they were eating, but I couldn’t smell any food. Not sure what was happening, I climbed up on the couch and forced my nose into the place where their heads were together, and they both burst out laughing at me.
The day Mom and Ethan drove back home for school, the smell of paint from the new barn was in the air and the girl came over and she and Ethan went down to the dock and sat with their feet in the water and talked. The girl cried, and they hugged a lot and didn’t throw sticks or do any of the things people normally do at a pond, so I wasn’t quite sure what was going on. There was more hugging at the car, and then we drove away, Ethan honking.
Things were different at home. For one thing, Dad had his own room now, with a new bed in it. He shared the bathroom with Ethan, and frankly, I didn’t like to go in there after Dad had been in it. For another, when Ethan wasn’t playing football with his friends he spent a lot of time in his room talking on the phone. He said the name Hannah often during these calls.
The leaves were falling from the trees on the day Ethan took me for a car ride to a place with big silver school buses full of people, and there, coming off of one of them, was the girl! I don’t know who was more happy to see her, me or the boy—I wanted to play with her, but all he wanted to do was hug. I was so excited at this development I didn’t mind that I was automatically a backseat dog for the return trip.
“Coach says there will be scouts from U of M and Michigan State tonight, to see me, Hannah,” the boy said. I understood the word “Hannah,” of course, but I also picked up a surge of fear and excitement from the boy. From Hannah there was happiness and pride. I looked out the window to see if I could figure out what was going on but didn’t see anything unusual.
That night, I was proud to stand with Hannah while Ethan played football with his friends. I felt fairly certain she had never been to such a place as wonderful as the big yard, and I led her over to where Mom usually took me and showed Hannah where to sit.
We’d only been there a little while when Todd came walking up. I hadn’t seen much of Todd lately, though his sister, Linda, still rode up and down the street on a bicycle all the time. “Hi, Bailey,” he said to me, really friendly, but there was still something very wrong about him and I just sniffed at his hand when he offered it to me.
“Do you know Bailey?” the girl asked. I wagged at the mention of my name.
“We’re old pals, aren’t we, boy. Good dog.”
I did not need to be called good dog by someone like Todd.
“You don’t go to school here; do you go to East?” Todd asked.
“No, I’m just visiting Ethan’s family.”
“What are you, a cousin or something?”
The people in the crowd all shouted and I jerked my head around, but there was nothing happening but more wrestling. It fooled me every time they did that.
“No, just . . . a friend.”
“So you want to party?” Todd asked her.
“Sorry?”
“Want to party? Some of us are getting together. This game’s going nowhere.”
“No, I . . . I’d better wait for Ethan.” I cocked my head at the girl. I could sense her getting anxious for some reason, and I could feel Todd’s anger building inside him like it always did.
“Ethan!” Todd turned and spat in the grass. “So are you two a couple, or what?”
“Well . . .”
“ ’Cause you should know, he’s pretty much going out with Michele Underwood.”
“What?”
“Yeah. Like, everybody knows it.”
“Oh.”
“Yeah. So if you’re thinking, you know, him and you, that’s not, you know, that’s not going to happen.” Todd moved closer to the girl, and when she stiffened I saw that his hand was touching her shoulder. Her rising tension brought me back to my feet. Todd looked down at me and we locked eyes, and I felt the fur lifting on the back of my neck. Almost involuntarily, a low growl emerged from deep in my throat.
“Bailey!” The girl leaped to her feet. “What’s the matter?”
“Yeah, Bailey, it’s me, your pal.” He turned to the girl. “I’m Todd, by the way.”
“I’m Hannah.”
“Why don’t you tie up the dog and come with me? It’ll be fun.”
“Um, no, uh-uh. I couldn’t do that.”
“Why not? Come on.”
“No, I have to take care of Bailey.”
Todd shrugged. He stared at her. “Yeah. Well, whatever.”
The force of his anger was so strong I growled again, and this time the girl didn’t say anything to me about it. “Fine,” Todd said. “You ask Ethan about Michele. Okay?”
“Yes, okay.”
“You ask him.” Todd jammed his hands in his pockets and walked away.
Ethan was pretty happy and excited when he ran over to see us an hour or so later. “Michigan State, here we come. Spartans!” he shouted. I wagged and barked, and then his happiness went away.
“What’s the matter, Hannah?”
“Who is Michele?”
I put my paw on Ethan’s leg to let him know I was ready to play with the football, if he wanted.
“Michele? Who do you mean?” Ethan laughed, but the laughter stopped after a second, as if he had run out of air. “What’s wrong?”
They walked me in circles around the big yard, talking, so intently involved in conversation they didn’t notice when I ate a half of a hot dog, some popcorn, and bits of a tuna sandwich. Before long nearly everyone else had left, but they kept walking around and around.
“I don’t know this girl,” Ethan kept saying. “Who did you talk to?”
“I don’t remember his name. He knew Bailey, though.”
I froze at my name, wondering if I was going to get in trouble for the candy wrapper I was stealthily eating.
“Everybody knows Bailey; he comes to all the games.”
I quickly swallowed, but apparently I wasn’t in trouble. After another circuit around the big yard, made uninteresting by the fact that I’d pretty much found everything edible, the boy and the girl stopped and hugged. They did that a lot. “You’re all sweaty,” the girl laughed, pushing him away.
“Want to go for a car ride, Bailey?” the boy asked.
Of course I did! We went home, and there was some more quiet talking, and they fed me and I was content to fall asleep on the living room floor while the girl and the boy wrestled silently together on the couch.
We had a new dog door now, from the back door right out into the yard, and no one ever tried to suggest I should have to sleep in the garage anymore. I was glad I broke the family of that habit. I went outside to relieve myself and was astonished to find a piece of meat lying in the grass by the fence.
The funny thing was, it didn’t smell right. There was a sharp tang to it, an odd, bitter odor. Even more strange, Todd’s scent was all over it.
I picked up the piece of meat and carried it to the back patio, where I dropped it, the bitter taste causing foam in my mouth. Then I sat and looked at it. It was a pretty bad flavor, but then, it was a nice hunk of meat. If I chewed it fast enough, I could probably swallow it without tasting it.
I poked the meat with my nose. Why, I wondered, did it smell so strongly of Todd?
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ FOURTEEN }

When Mom came outside the next morning and saw me, I hung my head and tapped the patio with just the tip of my tail. For some reason, though I had done nothing wrong, I felt really guilty.
“Good morning, Bailey,” she said. Then she saw the meat. “What’s that?”
When she bent over to look more closely at the meat, I dropped onto my back for a tummy rub. I’d been staring at that piece of meat all night, it seemed, and I was exhausted and needed reassurance I had done the right thing, even if I didn’t understand why. There was just something wrong, here, and it had prevented me from taking advantage of the free meal.
“Where did this come from, Bailey?” Mom stroked my belly lightly, then reached over and picked up the meat. “Ugh,” she said.
I sat up alertly. If she was going to feed it to me, it meant it was okay. Instead, she turned away to take it into the house. I rose up on my back legs a little—now that she was removing it, I’d changed my mind; I wanted to eat it!
“Yuck, Bailey, you don’t want that, whatever it is,” Mom said. She dropped the meat into the garbage.
Hannah sat in my seat for the car ride to the giant silver school buses, and I sat alone in the car for a long time while Ethan and Hannah stood and hugged. When the boy came back to the car, he felt sad and lonely, so I put my head in his lap instead of sticking my nose out the window.
The girl came back to visit again the day after the family sat around the indoor tree and tore up papers for Merry Christmas. I was in a bad mood because Ethan gave Mom a new black and white kitten, named Felix. He had no manners whatsoever and attacked my tail when I sat down and often lunged out at me from behind the couch, batting at me with his tiny paws. When I tried to play with him, he wrapped his legs around my nose and bit me with his sharp teeth. Hannah paid way too much attention to the kitty when she first arrived, though I had known the girl longer and was obviously the favorite pet. Dogs have important jobs, like barking when the doorbell rings, but cats have no function in a house whatsoever.
One thing the kitten couldn’t do was go outside. The ground was coated with a thick layer of snow, and the one time Felix ventured to put a foot into the stuff he turned around and ran back into the house as if he’d been burned. So when Hannah and Ethan built a big pile of snow in the front yard and put a hat on it, I was right there with them. The boy liked to tackle me and drag me around in the white stuff, and I let him catch me for the sheer joy of having his arms around me, the way he’d played with me every day when he was younger.
When we went sledding, Hannah sat in the back and I ran alongside the sled, barking and trying to pull the mittens off of the boy’s hands.
One afternoon the sun was out and the air was so cold and clean I could taste it all the way down my throat. All of the children from the neighborhood were there at the sledding hill, and Hannah and Ethan spent as much time pushing the younger ones as riding themselves. I soon grew tired of running up and down the slope, which was why I was at the bottom when Todd drove up.
He looked at me when he got out of the car, but he didn’t say anything to me, or reach out his hand. I kept my distance.
“Linda! Come on, time to come home!” he shouted, his breath whipping out of his mouth in a steamy cloud.
Linda was on the slope with three of her little friends, coming down in a saucer-shaped sled at about one mile an hour. Ethan and Hannah flashed past them on their sled, laughing. “I don’t want to!” Linda yelled back.
“Now! Mom says!”
Ethan and Hannah came to a halt at the bottom of the hill, tumbling out of their sled. They lay on top of each other, giggling. Todd stood and watched them.
Something in Todd came to the surface, then. Not anger, exactly, but something worse, something dark, an emotion I’d never felt from anyone before. I felt it in the way he stared at Ethan and Hannah, his face very still.
Ethan and the girl stood up, wiping snow off each other, and came over to see Todd, their arms still intertwined. They radiated such love and joy it blinded them to the hate-filled currents emanating from Todd.
“Hey, Todd.”
“Hi.”
“This is Hannah. Hannah, this is Todd; he lives down the street.”
Hannah reached her hand out, smiling. “Nice to meet you,” she said.
Todd stiffened a little. “Actually, we already met.”
Hannah cocked her head, wiping hair out of her eyes. “We did?”
“When was that?” Ethan asked.
“At the football game,” Todd said. Then he laughed, a short bark.
Ethan was shaking his head blankly, but Hannah blinked. “Oh. Oh, right,” she said, suddenly subdued.
“What?” Ethan asked.
“I have to pick up my sister. Linda!” Todd yelled, cupping his hands. “Come home now!”
Linda detached herself from her pile of friends and trudged through the snow dejectedly.
“He’s . . . he’s the one I talked to,” Hannah told Ethan. Some worry flickered through Hannah, and I glanced at her curiously, then jerked my head at Ethan when I felt a rising anger from him.
“Wait, what? You? Todd, you were the person who told Hannah I’d been with Michele? I don’t even know Michele.”
“I got to go,” Todd mumbled. “Get in the car, Linda,” he told his sister.
“No, wait,” Ethan said. He reached his hand out and Todd jerked away from it.
“Ethan,” Hannah murmured, putting a mitten on his arm.
“Why would you do that, Todd? Why would you lie? What’s wrong with you, man?”
Though the conflicts and emotions boiling through Todd were hot enough to melt the snow we were standing on, he just stood there, staring back at Ethan, not saying a word.
“This is why you don’t have any friends, Todd. Why can’t you just be normal? You’re always doing stupid things like this,” Ethan said. “It’s sick.” The anger was leaving him, but I could feel how upset he still was.
“Ethan,” Hannah said more sharply.
Todd wordlessly got in his car, slamming the door. His face, when he looked back at Hannah and Ethan, was absolutely blank.
“That was mean,” Hannah said.
“Oh, you don’t know him.”
“I don’t care,” Hannah replied. “You shouldn’t have said he doesn’t have any friends.”
“Well, he doesn’t. He’s always doing stuff, like when he said this one guy stole his transistor radio. The whole thing was a lie.”
“He’s not . . . there’s something different about him, right? Like is he in special education?”
“Oh no, he’s really smart. That’s not it. He’s just Todd, that’s all. He’s always been twisted, you know? We used to be friends, when we were kids. But he had all these weird ideas for what was fun, like throwing eggs at the preschoolers when they were waiting for the van to summer school. I told him I didn’t want to do it—his own sister was one of the kids; I mean, come on—and so he just stomped on the carton of eggs he’d brought over. Made a mess in my driveway that I had to hose off before my dad got home. Bailey liked that part, though.”
I wagged at my name, glad to think we might be talking about me, now.
“I’ll bet he did,” Hannah laughed, reaching down and petting me.
A few days after Hannah left, the snow came down and the wind blew so hard that we stayed inside all day, sitting in front of the heater. (At least, that is what I did.) That night I slept under the covers on Ethan’s bed, and stayed there even when I got so hot I panted, just because it was so wonderful to be pressed up against him like when I was a puppy.
The next morning the snow finally stopped and Ethan and I went outside and dug for hours in the driveway. Running in that deep, heavy snow was tough going, and I would leap ahead for only a few feet before needing to stop and rest.
The moon came out right after dinner, so bright that I could see really well, and the air was thick with the fragrance of fire-place smoke. Ethan was tired and went to bed early, but I went out the dog door and stood in the yard, my nose to the faint breeze, galvanized by the exotic light and crisp night air.
When I discovered that the snow had drifted in a huge pile against the fence, I was delighted to climb right up to the top of the mound and drop over the other side. It was a perfect night for an adventure. I went over to Chelsea’s house to see if Duchess was available, but there was no sign other than a fairly recent patch of urine-soaked snow. I thoughtfully lifted my leg on the area so she’d know I was thinking of her.
Normally when I went for a little nighttime exploration, I ventured along the creek. It reminded me of hunting with Sister and Fast when I was a wild puppy, and the smells were always exciting. Now, though, I was forced to stick to the plowed roads, turning up driveways that were clear to sniff at the cracks between garage doors and the pavement. Some people had already dragged their indoor trees outside, though at Ethan’s house it still stood in the front window, with objects and lights hanging from it for Felix to attack. When I came across the indoor trees lying in the plowed driveways, I marked them with my scent, and it was this, the seemingly endless procession of trees to tag, that kept me out so late. If it hadn’t been for the scent of yet another misplaced tree luring me onward, I would have returned back home and maybe would have arrived in time to prevent what happened.
Finally I was caught square in the headlights of a passing car, and it slowed for a minute, and the smell of it reminded me of Mom’s car whenever she and Ethan came looking for me when I’d been out too long on an adventure, and I felt a quick stab of guilt. I lowered my head and trotted back home.
Turning up the shoveled sidewalk, I was struck by several things at once, all of them wrong.
The front door was open, and the aroma of home was wafting out in great gusts, propelled into the frosty night air by the force of the furnace. Riding on the currents of that air was a chemical smell both sharp and familiar—I smelled it whenever we went for a car ride and stopped at the place where Ethan liked to stand by the back of the car with a thick black hose. And backing out of the house was someone I initially thought was the boy. Not until he turned to shake some more chemical-laden liquid into the front bushes did I pick up his scent.
It was Todd. He took three steps back and pulled out some paper from his pocket and lit it, the fire flickering against his stony blank face. When he tossed the burning papers into the bushes, a blue flame popped up, making an audible noise.
Todd didn’t see me; he was watching the fire. And I never barked, I never growled, I just ran up that sidewalk in silent fury. I leaped for him as if I had been taking down men my whole life, and surging through me was a sense of power, as if I were leading a pack.
Any reluctance I might have felt to attack a human being was overridden by the sense that whatever Todd was doing, it was causing harm to the boy and to the family I was there to protect. There was no stronger purpose than that.
Todd yelled and fell and kicked at my face. I took the foot that the kicking offered, biting into it and holding on while Todd screamed. His pants ripped, his shoe came off, and I tasted blood. He struck at me with his fists, but I kept my grip on his ankle, shaking my head, feeling the flesh tear some more. I was in a fury, completely oblivious to the fact that my mouth was filled with the unique flavor of human skin and blood.
A sudden piercing noise distracted me, and Todd managed to work his foot loose as I turned to look at the house. The indoor tree was totally aflame, and thick, acrid smoke was pouring out the front door and up into the night. The electronic shriek was painfully high and loud, and I instinctively backed away from it.
Todd stood and limped away as fast as he could, and I registered his retreat out of the corner of my eye, no longer caring. I sounded my own alarm, barking, trying to draw attention to the flames, which were spreading quickly through the house and were curling upstairs toward the boy’s room.
I ran around the back of the house but was frustrated to discover that the pile of snow that had assisted me on my escape was on the wrong side of the fence. While I stood there barking, the patio door slid open and Dad and Mom stumbled into view. Mom was coughing.
“Ethan!” she screamed.
Black smoke was coming out the patio door. Mom and Dad ran to the gate, and I met them there. They shoved past me, running through the snow to the front of the house. They stood looking up at the dark window to Ethan’s room.
“Ethan!” they shouted. “Ethan!”
I broke from them and raced around to the now open back gate. I darted through it. Felix was outside on the patio, huddled under a picnic bench, and she yowled at me, but I didn’t stop. I squeezed through the patio door, my eyes and nose filled with smoke. Unable to see, I staggered toward the stairs.
The sound of the flames was as loud as the wind when we went for a car ride with the windows down. The smoke was suffocating, but it was the heat that beat me back. The intensity of the fire burned my nose and ears, and in frustration I lowered my head and ran out the back door, the cold air instantly salving my pain.
Mom and Dad were still yelling. Lights had come on across the street and in the house next door, and I could see one of the neighbors looking out his window, talking on the phone.
There was still no sign of the boy.
“Ethan!” Mom and Dad yelled. “Ethan!”
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ FIFTEEN }

I had never before felt such fear as what was pouring off of Mom and Dad as they shouted at the boy’s window. Mom was sobbing and Dad’s voice was tight, and when I began barking again, frantically, they made no move to tell me to be quiet.
My ears picked up the thin wail of a siren, but mostly I could only hear my barking, Mom and Dad calling Ethan’s name, and, over all of it, the roar of the fire, so loud I could feel it as a vibration through my whole body. The bushes in front of us were still burning, clouds of steam rising as the snow melted with a sizzle.
“Ethan! Please!” Dad shouted, his voice cracking.
Just then, something burst through Ethan’s window, showering glass into the snow. It was the flip!
Frantically I picked it up, to show Ethan that yes, I had it. His head appeared in the hole the flip had made, black smoke framing his face.
“Mom!” he yelled, coughing.
“You’ve got to get out of there, Ethan!” Dad roared.
“I can’t open the window, it’s stuck!”
“Just jump!” Dad responded.
“You’ve got to jump, honey!” Mom shouted at him.
The boy’s head disappeared back inside. “The smoke is going to kill him; what’s he doing?” Dad said.
“Ethan!” Mom screamed.
The boy’s desk chair came through the window, smashing it, and, a second later, the boy plunged out. He appeared to get hung up on the remaining bits of wood and glass, though, so that instead of sailing out over the flaming bushes he dropped directly into them.
“Ethan!” Mom shrieked.
I barked frantically, the flip forgotten. Dad reached into the fire and grabbed Ethan and pulled him out into the snow, rolling him over and over. “Oh God, oh God,” Mom was sobbing.
Ethan lay on his back in the snow, his eyes closed. “Are you okay, son? Are you okay?” Dad asked.
“My leg,” the boy said, coughing.
I could smell his burned flesh. His face was blackened and oozing. I pressed forward, the flip in my mouth, feeling the stabbing pain in him and wanting to help.
“Go away, Bailey,” Dad said.
The boy opened his eyes, and he grinned weakly at me. “No, it’s okay. Good dog, Bailey, you caught the flip. Good dog.”
I wagged. He reached out with one hand and petted my head, and I spat out the flip, which to tell the truth didn’t taste very good. His other hand was curled up against his chest, blood dribbling out of it.
Cars and trucks began arriving, lights flashing. Men ran up to the house and began spraying it with large hoses. Some people brought over a bed and put the boy on it and lifted it up and put it into the back of a truck. I tried to crawl in after him, but the man at the truck’s back doors pushed me away. “No, sorry,” he said.
“Stay, Bailey; it’s okay,” the boy said.
I knew all about Stay; it was my least favorite command. The boy was still hurting, and I wanted to be with him.
“May I go?” Mom asked.
“Of course; let me help you,” the man replied.
Mom crawled into the back of the truck. “It’s okay, Bailey.” Chelsea’s mother approached, and Mom looked up at her. “Laura? Could you watch Bailey?”
“Sure.”
Chelsea’s mother took hold of my collar. Her hands smelled like Duchess. Dad’s hand, though, smelled of the fire, and I knew he was in pain. He climbed in to be with Mom and the boy.
Nearly everyone in the neighborhood was out in the street, but no dogs. The truck drove off and I gave it a single mournful bark. How did I know the boy would be safe now? He needed me with him!
Chelsea’s mother stood off to the side, holding me. I could tell she was a little unsure what to do now; most of the neighbors were collected in the street, but she’d been close to the house and now everyone acted like they expected her to remain there instead of joining her friends.
“No question but that it is arson,” one of the men said, talking to a woman who had a gun on her belt. I’d learned that people who dressed like this were called police. “The bushes, the tree, all of it went up at once. Multiple ignition points, lots of accelerant. Family is lucky to be alive.”
“Lieutenant, look at this!” another man called. He had a gun, too—the men in rubber coats didn’t carry guns and were still spraying hoses.
Chelsea’s mother hesitantly eased up to see what they were all looking at. It was Todd’s shoe. I turned my head away guiltily, hoping no one would notice me.
“I got this tennis shoe, looks like there’s blood on it,” the man noted, illuminating the snow with a flashlight.
“The boy got pretty cut up going out his window,” someone else observed.
“Yeah, over there. But not here. All I got here are dog tracks and this shoe.”
I cringed that the word “dog” had come up. The woman with the gun took out a flashlight and aimed it in the snow. “What do you know,” she said.
“That’s blood,” someone else said.
“Okay, you two, see where the trail leads, okay? Let’s tape this off. Sergeant?”
“Yes, ma’am,” a man said, approaching the group.
“We’ve got a blood trail. I want eight feet on either side of it cordoned off. Keep the traffic off the street, and have those people move back.”
The woman stood and Chelsea’s mother bent down, suddenly paying attention to me. “You okay, Bailey?” she asked, petting me.
I wagged.
She abruptly stopped petting me and looked at her hand.
“Ma’am, do you live here?” the policewoman with the gun asked Chelsea’s mother.
“No, but the dog does.”
“Could I ask you to . . . well, wait, are you a neighbor?”
“I live two houses down.”
“Did you see anyone tonight, anyone at all?”
“No, I was asleep.”
“Okay. Could I ask you to join the others over there? Or if you’re cold, please just give us your contact information and you can go home.”
“Yes, but . . . ,” Chelsea’s mother said.
“Yes?”
“Could someone look at Bailey? He seems to be bleeding.”
I wagged.
“Sure,” the woman replied. “Is he friendly?”
“Oh yes.”
The woman bent down. “Are you hurt, boy? How did you get hurt?” she asked softly. She took out a flashlight and probed carefully at my neck. I tentatively licked her face, and she laughed.
“Okay, yes, he’s friendly. I don’t think that’s his blood, though. Ma’am, we’ll need to hold on to the dog for a while; is that okay?”
“I can stay, if you need me to.”
“No, that’s all right,” the woman said.
I was taken over to one of the cars, where a very gentle man took some scissors and snipped off some of my fur, putting it into a plastic bag.
“What do you want to bet it’s the same blood type that’s on the shoe? I’d say our four-legged friend here was on canine patrol tonight and got himself a good bite of arsonist. We get a suspect, the blood is going to help put him away,” the woman told the man who was giving me the haircut.
“Lieutenant,” a man said, approaching. “I can tell you where our perp lives.”
“Oh, do tell,” the woman replied.
“I got the dumb ass bleeding his way in a straight line to a home about four houses down. You can see the blood on the snow from the sidewalk; it goes right up to a side door.”
“I’d say we have enough for a search warrant,” the woman replied. “And I’m going to lay odds that somebody who lives there has a couple of teeth marks in his leg.”
For the next several days I lived at Chelsea’s house. Duchess seemed to think I was there to supply her with a twenty-four-hour-a-day playmate, but I couldn’t dispel the nervous tension that kept me pacing back and forth, waiting for Ethan to come home.
Mom showed up the second day. She told me I was a good dog, and I could smell the boy on her clothes, so I cheered up a little and played Duchess’s favorite game of tug-on-the-sock for an hour or so while Chelsea’s mother served strong-smelling coffee.
“What in the world was that boy doing? Why would he set your house on fire? You could all have been killed.”
“I don’t know. Todd and Ethan used to be friends.”
I turned at Ethan’s name, and Duchess used the moment to yank the sock out of my mouth.
“Is it for sure Todd? I thought the police said the blood work would take longer.”
“He confessed when they took him in for questioning,” Mom said.
“Did he explain why he did it?”
Duchess was shoving the sock at me, daring me to take it. I pointedly looked away.
“He said he didn’t know why he did it.”
“Well, for heaven’s sake. You know, I always did think that boy was strange. Remember when he pushed Chelsea into the bushes for no reason? My husband had a fit. He went down and talked to Todd’s father and I thought the two of them were going to get into a fight.”
“No, I never heard that. He pushed her?”
“And Sudy Hurst says she caught him trying to see in her bedroom window.”
“I thought she wasn’t sure who it was.”
“Well, now she says it was Todd.”
With a sudden lunge, I grabbed the sock. Duchess dug her feet in and growled. I pulled her around the room, but she didn’t let go.
“Bailey’s a hero, now. Todd’s leg took eight stitches.”
At the mention of my name, both Duchess and I froze. Dog biscuits, maybe? The sock went slack between us.
“They want his picture for the paper,” Mom said.
“Good thing I gave Bailey a bath,” Chelsea’s mom replied.
What? Another bath? I’d just had a bath! I spat out the sock, Duchess shaking it joyously, prancing around the room in victory.
“How is Ethan?”
Mom put her coffee cup down. The boy’s name and the flash of worry and grief coming off of her caused me to go over to her and put my head in her lap. She reached down and petted my head.
“They had to put a pin in his leg, and he’ll have . . . scarring.” Mom gestured toward her face and then pressed her hands to her eyes.
“I’m so, so sorry,” Chelsea’s mother said.
Mom was crying. I put a paw on her leg to comfort her.
“Good dog, Bailey,” Mom said.
Duchess stuck her idiot face right in front of me, the sock loosely dangling from her jaws. I gave her a low growl and she backed away, looking bewildered.
“Be nice, please, guys,” Chelsea’s mother said.
A little while later Chelsea’s mother gave pie to Mom but not to the dogs. Duchess lay on her back and held the sock with her paws above her mouth, just like I used to do with Coco in the Yard, what seemed like forever ago.
Some people came and I sat with Mom in the living room and blinked at the bright flashes, like lightning with no sound. Then we went over to the house, which was now covered in plastic sheeting that flapped in the wind, and some more flashes went off.
A week later, Mom gave me a car ride and we moved into the “apartment.” This was a small house built into a big building full of houses, and there were lots of dogs everywhere. Most of them were pretty little, but in the afternoons Mom would take me over to see them in a big cement yard. She would sit on a bench and talk to people while I ran around, making friends and marking territory.
I didn’t like the apartment, and neither did Dad. He yelled at Mom a lot more there than at the house. The place was small, and, even worse, we were there without the boy. Both Dad and Mom would often smell like Ethan, but he wasn’t living with us anymore, and my heart ached. At night I would pace the house, compelled to wander around restlessly, until Dad would yell at me to lie down. Dinner, the high point of my day, was not as interesting when Mom served it to me—I just didn’t feel hungry, and sometimes didn’t finish it.
Where was my boy?
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ SIXTEEN }

We were still living in the apartment the day the boy came home. I was curled up on the floor, with Felix the kitty sleeping up against me. I’d given up trying to shove him away; Felix apparently thought I was his mother, which was insulting, but he was a cat and therefore, in my opinion, completely brainless.
I’d learned to identify our cars by the sounds of their engines as they pulled into the parking lot, so when Mom’s car arrived I jumped to my feet. Felix blinked at me in bewilderment while I trotted over to the window and jumped up, pressing my paws against the frame so I could watch Mom come up the steps.
What I saw down in the parking lot caused my heart to race: it was the boy, struggling to stand up out of the car. Mom was bending to help him, and it took several seconds for him to get upright.
I couldn’t help myself; I was barking and spinning, racing from the window to the door to be let out and then back to the window so I could see. Felix panicked and dove under the couch and watched me from there.
When keys jangled in the lock, I was right there at the door, quivering. Mom opened the door a crack, and the boy’s smell wafted in on the air currents.
“Now, Bailey, get back. Down, Bailey, stay down. Sit.”
Well, I couldn’t do that. I briefly touched my butt to the floor and then jumped up again. Mom put her hand in and snagged my collar, pushing me back as the door swung wide.
“Hey, Bailey. Hey, boy,” Ethan said.
Mom held me away from the boy while he limped in, holding what I would soon learn were called crutches. He went over to the couch and sat down while I twisted and turned in my collar, whimpering. When Mom finally released me I soared across the room in one leap, landing on the boy’s lap, kissing his face.
“Bailey!” Mom said sternly.
“No, it’s okay. Bailey, you are such a doodle dog,” the boy praised me. “How are you, huh? I missed you, too, Bailey.”
Every time he spoke my name, a shiver of pleasure ran through me. I could not get enough of the feel of his hands running through my fur.
The boy was back.
Gradually, over the next couple of days, I came to understand that things were not right with the boy. He had pains that he’d never coped with before, and walking was awkward and difficult for him. A mournful sadness drifted off of him, coupled with a gloomy anger that flared sometimes when all he was doing was sitting there looking out the window.
That first week or two the boy would leave every day for a car ride with Mom, and when he came home he was tired and sweaty and usually wound up taking a nap. The weather turned warm and the leaves came out and Mom had to go to work, so the boy and I were left alone in the apartment with Felix, who spent all of his time plotting to escape out the front door. I have no idea what he thought he was going to accomplish out there, but the boy had a rule against the cat going outside, so that was that—except Felix didn’t follow any rules, which I found to be maddening. He often scratched at a post in the living room, but the one time I decided to lift my leg on the thing everyone shouted. He never finished his dinner, though nobody ever thanked me when I cleaned up after him—in fact, this was something else I got yelled at about. Part of me wanted to see him get away with his plans to run off, just so I wouldn’t have to put up with him anymore. On the other hand, he was always up for a little wrestling, as long as I didn’t get too rough. He would even make a game of chasing a ball when Ethan rolled it down the hallway, usually veering off to let me grab it and take it back, which I thought was very sporting of Felix. He really didn’t have much choice, though, since I was, after all, the dog in charge.
It was not as fun as the Farm, nor even as fun as the house, but I was happy in the apartment because the boy was there nearly all the time.
“I think it is time you should go back to school,” Mom said at dinner one night. I knew the word “school” and looked at the boy, who crossed his arms. I felt the sad anger inside of him.
“I’m not ready,” the boy said. His finger raised up and touched a deep purple scar on his cheek. “Not until I can walk better.”
I sat up. Walk? Were we going for a walk?
“Ethan. There’s no reason—”
“I don’t want to talk about it, Mom!” Ethan shouted.
Ethan never shouted at Mom and I could immediately feel that he was sorry, but neither of them said anything after that.
A few days later, though, there was a knock on the door and, when Ethan answered, the apartment filled with boys. I recognized some of their smells as the boys who played football in the big yards, and most of them called me by name. I glanced over to see how Felix was taking my special status, but he was pretending it didn’t make him jealous.
The boys laughed and shouted and stood around for about an hour, and I felt Ethan’s heart lifting. His happiness made me happy, so I went and got a ball and carried it around in my mouth in the living room. One of the boys grabbed it and rolled it down the hallway, and we played for several minutes.
A few days after all the boys came to visit, Ethan got up early and left with Mom.
School.
The boy was walking with the help of a polished stick called a cane when we moved out of the apartment. The cane was very special: the boy never threw it, and I instinctively understood that I wasn’t supposed to chew on it, not even a little.
I didn’t know where we were going when we all loaded into the car, but I was excited just the same. Car rides were always exciting, no matter where we went.
I grew pretty excited when the familiar smells of the creek and the street came through the window, and I bounded in through the front door of the house as soon as they let me out of the car. Though I could still smell smoke, the air was also filled with the scent of new wood and carpet, and the windows in the living room were larger. Felix seemed very suspicious of his surroundings, but I was out the dog door and racing around in the relative freedom of the backyard within seconds of arriving. When I barked with joy, Duchess answered from down the street. Home!
We’d barely settled in when we took the big car ride to the Farm. Life was finally back on track, though the boy was much less inclined to run than to walk, leaning on the cane.
One of the first places we went was to Hannah’s house. I knew the route pretty well and galloped way ahead, so I saw her first. “Bailey! Hi, Bailey!” she called. I ran up for some of her in-depth cuddling and scratching, and then the boy came up the driveway, panting a little. The girl went down the steps and stood there in the sun, waiting for him.
“Hi,” the boy said. He seemed a little uncertain.
“Hi,” the girl said.
I yawned and scratched at an itch on my jaw.
“Well, are you going to kiss me or what?” the girl asked. Ethan went to give her a long hug.
He dropped his cane.
Some things were different that summer. Ethan began waking up long before sunrise and driving Grandpa’s truck up and down the county roads, shoving papers into people’s boxes. They were the same papers that the boy had once placed all over the carpet in the house, but somehow I didn’t think it would be appreciated very much if I urinated on them, even though there had been a time, when I was a puppy, when wetting down the papers would have gained me high praise.
Hannah and the boy spent many hours together, sitting quietly by themselves, sometimes not talking, just wrestling. Sometimes she even went on the early morning car rides, though normally it was just the boy and me, Bailey the front-seat dog.
“Got to earn some money, Bailey,” he sometimes said. I would wag at my name. “No football scholarship now, that’s for sure. I’ll never be able to participate in sports again.”
At the sadness in him I always pushed my nose under his hand.
“My whole life’s dream. All gone now, because of Todd.”
Ethan had brought the flip with him to the Farm, for some reason, and sometimes he would cut it up and resew it, generally making it even more embarrassing than it had been before. But my favorite time was when we’d swim together in the pond. It seemed the only time that the boy’s leg didn’t give him pain. We even played the sinking game, as we had been doing for years; now, though he was much heavier, harder to drag out of the water than ever before. When I dove after him I felt so happy, I never wanted it to end.
I knew it would, though. I felt the nights growing longer, and that meant we’d soon be going home.
I was lying under the table one evening while Mom and Grandma talked. Ethan had gone on a car ride with Hannah and had not taken me, so I assumed they had to do something that wasn’t very fun.
“I want to talk to you about something,” Grandma told Mom.
“Mother,” Mom said.
“No, just listen. That boy has completely changed since coming here. He’s happy, he’s healthy, he’s got a girl . . . why take him back to the city? He can finish high school right here.”
“You make it sound like we live in the ghetto,” Mom complained with a laugh.
“You’re not answering me because . . . well, we both know why. I know your husband will be against it. But Gary is traveling almost one hundred percent, now, and you said your hours at the school are killing you. The boy needs a family around him while he rebuilds.”
“Yes, Gary’s traveling, but he still wants to see Ethan when he’s home. And I can’t just quit my job.”
“I’m not telling you to. You know you are welcome to come up any time you want, and why can’t Gary fly into our little airport here on a given weekend? Or, and please know that I only want the best for you, wouldn’t it be good for the two of you to be alone right now? If you and Gary are going to fix the problems between you, you need to do it somewhere other than in front of Ethan.”
I pricked up my ears a little at the boy’s name. Was he home? I cocked my head but didn’t hear his car.
When the nights turned cool and the baby ducks were all as big as their mother, Mom packed the car. I paced nervously, afraid I’d be left behind, and when the moment was right I jumped neatly into the backseat. For some reason, everyone laughed. I sat in the car and watched as Mom hugged Grandma and Grandpa and then, curiously, Ethan, who then came over and opened the car door. “Bailey? Do you want to go with Mom, or stay here with me?”
There was nothing in the question that I understood, so I just looked at him.
“Come on, doodle dog. Bailey! Come!”
I reluctantly jumped out into the driveway. No car ride?
Mom drove off in the car, with Ethan and Grandma and Grandpa waving. Though it made no sense, the boy and I were staying on the Farm!
That suited me just fine. Almost every day started with a long car ride in the dark, driving from house to house to drop off papers. By the time we got home, Grandma would be cooking breakfast, and Grandpa always slipped me something under the table—bacon, ham, a piece of toast. I learned to chew silently so that Grandma wouldn’t say, “Are you feeding the dog again?” The tone in her voice when I picked up the word “dog” suggested to me that Grandpa and I needed to keep the whole operation quiet.
The word “school” was back in play, but there was no bus, just Ethan driving off—though sometimes the girl came over and they took a car ride in her car. I understood that there was no reason for alarm, that Ethan would be back by the end of the day and Hannah would eat dinner with us as often as not.
Mom came to visit a lot, and Mom and Dad were there during Merry Christmas. Mom’s hands smelled like Felix the kitty when she reached down to pet me, but I didn’t mind.
I thought the boy and I had decided to stay at the Farm forever, but toward the end of that summer I sensed we were headed for yet another change. The boy started putting things in boxes, a sure signal that we were soon going to be on our way home. Hannah was around nearly all the time, and she felt a little sad and fearful. When she hugged the boy, there was so much love between them I couldn’t help but try to squirm in between their bodies, which always made them laugh.
One morning, I knew it was time. Grandpa loaded the boxes into the car, Grandma and Mom talked, and Ethan and Hannah hugged. I paced, looking for an opening, but Grandpa had gotten pretty good at blocking me and I hadn’t yet managed to get inside the car.
The boy came over to me and knelt beside me. I could feel some sadness coming from him. “You be a good dog, Bailey,” he said.
I wagged to show him that I understood that I was a good dog and that it was time to go on the big car ride home.
“I’ll be home at Thanksgiving break, okay? I’m going to miss you, doodle dog.” He gave me a big, loving hug. I half-closed my eyes—there simply was no better feeling in the world than to be hugged by my boy.
“You’d better hold him; he’s not going to understand,” Ethan said. The girl stepped forward and grabbed my collar. The sadness was coming off of her in waves, and she was crying. I was torn between wanting to comfort her and needing to get in the car. Reluctantly I sat at her feet, waiting for this strange drama to end so I could sit in the seat with my nose out the car window.
“Write me every day!” Hannah said.
“I will!” Ethan called back.
I stared in disbelief as he and Mom got into the car and slammed the doors. I pulled away from Hannah, who didn’t understand that I was supposed to go with them! She held tight. “No, Bailey, it’s okay. You Stay.”
Stay? Stay? The car honked and drove off down the driveway. Grandpa and Grandma were waving—couldn’t anybody see that I was still here?
“He’ll do just fine. Ferris is a good school,” Grandpa said. “Big Rapids is a nice town.”
They all turned from the driveway, Hannah loosening her grip just enough for me to break free.
“Bailey!” she shouted.
Though the car was out of sight, the dust trail was still in the air, easy to follow as I chased after my boy.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ SEVENTEEN }

Cars are fast.
I never really knew this. Back home, before Marshmallow went away, she used to run down into the street, barking at cars, and they usually stopped, or at least slowed down enough that she could catch them, though all she ever did at that point was veer off and pretend she never wanted to attack them in the first place.
As I ran after the boy’s car, I had the sense that it was pulling farther and farther away from me. The scent of dust and exhaust grew thin and tenuous, but I picked up a clear sign of a right turn where the road became pavement, though after that I wasn’t sure I could smell him at all. But I couldn’t give up; I turned myself over to the mindless panic and continued my pursuit.
Ahead of me I heard the loud rumble of a train, clanking and shaking, and when I topped a rise and saw it I finally caught a whiff of the boy. His car, windows down, was parked on the road at the train crossing.
I was exhausted. I had never run so far or so fast in my life, but I ran harder still when the side door opened and the boy stood up.
“Oh, Bailey,” he said.
While every part of me wanted to tackle him and be loved, I wasn’t going to miss my chance, and I veered from him at the last second and bounded into the car.
“Bailey!” Mom laughed.
I licked them both, forgiving them for forgetting me. After the train passed, Mom started the car and turned it around, then stopped because Grandpa showed up in his truck—maybe he was coming home with us this time!
“Like a rocket,” Grandpa said. “Hard to believe he got this far.”
“How long would you have gone, huh, Bailey? You doodle dog,” Ethan told me affectionately.
It was with great suspicion that I jumped into Grandpa’s truck, though—suspicion that proved justified, because while Ethan and Mom drove on, Grandpa turned around and took me back to the Farm.
Mostly I liked Grandpa. From time to time he’d do “chores,” which meant we’d go into the new barn, toward the back, where soft hay was piled, and take a nap. During cold days Grandpa had a couple of heavy blankets he’d wrap around us. But the first few days after the boy left, I sulked in Grandpa’s presence, punishing him for bringing me back to the Farm. When that didn’t work, all I could think to do was chew up a pair of Grandma’s shoes, but that still didn’t bring the boy back.
I just couldn’t get past the utter betrayal of it all. I knew that out there somewhere, probably back home, the boy needed me, didn’t understand where I was.
Everyone was infuriatingly calm, seemingly oblivious to the catastrophic change that had struck the household. I became so frantic I even dug into the boy’s closet and brought out the flip, running down and tossing it into Grandma’s lap.
“What in the world is this?” she exclaimed.
“It’s Ethan’s big invention,” Grandpa said.
I barked. Yes! Ethan!
“You want to go outside and play, Bailey?” Grandma asked me. “Why don’t you take him for a walk.”
Walk? Walk to see the boy?
“I thought I’d watch a little of the game here,” Grandpa replied.
“For heaven’s sake,” Grandma said. She went to the door and tossed the flip out in the yard, barely sending the thing five yards. I bounded over, grabbed it, and then stared in absolute noncomprehension when she shut the door, leaving me outside.
Well, okay then. I spat out the flip and trotted past Flare, heading down the driveway. I went over to the girl’s house, which I had already done several times since Ethan left. I could smell her scent everywhere, but the boy’s scent was gradually fading away. A car pulled into her driveway and Hannah jumped out. “Bye!” she said. She turned and looked at me. “Well, hi, Bailey!”
I ran up to her, wagging. I could smell several other people’s scents in her clothes, but there was no sign of Ethan. Hannah did go for a walk with me back home, and when she knocked on the door Grandma let her in and fed some pie to her but not to me.
I often dreamed of the boy. I dreamed of him jumping into the pond, with me swimming down and down to play rescue. I dreamed of him doing the go-kart, how happy and excited he was. And sometimes I dreamed of him jumping out of the window, the sharp crack of pain rising in a shout from his lips as he fell in the flaming bushes. I hated those dreams, and I was just awakening from one of them one night when I saw the boy standing above me.
“Hi, Bailey!” he whispered, his scent flowing off of him. He was back on the Farm! I jumped to my feet, putting my paws on his chest to lick his face. “Shhh,” he told me. “It’s late; I just got here. Everybody’s sleeping.”
It was Happy Thanksgiving time, and life was back to normal. Mom was there, but not Dad. Hannah came over every day.
The boy seemed happy, but I could also feel that he was distracted. He spent a lot of time looking at papers instead of playing with me, even when I brought him the stupid flip to try to shake him out of it.
I wasn’t surprised when he left again. This was my new life, I realized. I lived on the Farm with Grandpa and Grandma, and Ethan only came home for visits. It wasn’t what I wanted, but as long as the boy always returned, I had an easier time seeing him leave.
It was on one of his visits, when the air was warm and leaves were freshly out, that Ethan and I went to see Hannah running around in a big yard. I could smell her, as well as other boys and girls, because the wind flowed off the yard and their bodies were sweating as they ran. It looked like fun, but I stayed by Ethan’s side, because it seemed that while we stood there the ache in his leg became more pronounced, spreading through his body. Odd, dark emotions swirled inside him as he watched her and the others run.
“Hey!” Hannah came over to see us. I licked her leg, which was salty with sweat. “What a nice surprise. Hi, Bailey!” she said.
“Hi.”
“My times are really coming down in the four hundred,” the girl said.
“Who was that guy?” Ethan asked.
“Oh. Who? What do you mean?”
“That guy you were talking to and hugging, you two seemed really friendly,” Ethan said. His voice sounded strained. I glanced around but couldn’t see any danger.
“He’s just a friend, Ethan,” the girl said sharply. The way she spoke his name, it sounded like the boy had been bad.
“Is it that guy, what’s his name, Brett? He’s certainly fast on his feet.” Ethan stabbed at the ground with his cane, and I sniffed at the tuft of earth that he overturned.
“Well, what is that supposed to mean?” Hannah asked, her hands on her hips.
“Go on back; your track coach is looking over here,” Ethan said.
Hannah looked over her shoulder, then back at Ethan. “I do, I do need to get back . . . ,” she said uncertainly.
“Fine,” Ethan said. He turned and limped away.
“Ethan!” Hannah called. I looked at her, but the boy just kept walking. The dark, confused mixture of sadness and anger was still there. Something about the place apparently made Ethan feel bad, because we never went back.
That summer brought some big changes. Mom came to the Farm, and this time a truck followed her up the driveway and men unloaded some boxes and carried them up to her bedroom. Grandma and Mom spent a lot of time talking quietly to each other, and sometimes Mom would cry, which made Grandpa uncomfortable, so he’d go out to do chores.
Ethan had to leave all the time to go to “work,” which was just like school in that I couldn’t go with him, but when he came home he smelled deliciously of meats and grease. It reminded me of the time, after Flare abandoned us in the woods, that Grandpa fed me food out of a bag in the front seat of the truck.
The biggest change in our lives, though, was that the girl no longer came around to see us. Sometimes the boy would take me for a car ride and as we passed her house I would smell Hannah, so I knew she was still around, but the boy never stopped or turned in her driveway. I found that I missed her; she loved me and smelled wonderful.
The boy missed her, too. When we drove past Hannah’s house, he always stared out the side window, always slowed down a little, and I could feel his yearning. I didn’t understand why we couldn’t just drive up to her house and see if she had any biscuits, but we never did.
That summer Mom went down to the pond and sat on the dock and was very sad. I tried to make her feel better by barking at the ducks, but she could not be cheered up. Finally she pulled something off her finger, it wasn’t food and was made of metal, a small round thing that she threw into the water, where it slipped beneath the surface with a tiny plop.
I wondered if she wanted me to go after it, and gazed up at her, ready to give it a shot even though I knew it was hopeless, but she just told me to come, and the two of us went back to the house.
After that summer, life settled into a comfortable pattern. Mom started doing work, too, and came home smelling of fragrant and sweet oils. Sometimes I would go with her past the goat ranch and over the rumbling bridge and we would spend the day in a big room full of clothes and stinky wax candles and uninteresting metal objects and people would come in to see me and sometimes they would leave with items in bags. The boy came and went for Happy Thanksgiving and Merry Christmas and Spring Break and Summer Vacation.
I pretty much had gotten over my resentment toward Flare, who didn’t do anything anymore but stand and stare into the wind all day, when Grandpa showed up with a creature who moved like a baby horse and smelled unlike anything I’d ever encountered before. His name was Jasper the donkey. Grandpa liked to laugh as he watched Jasper skip around in the yard, and Grandma would say, “I don’t know why you think we need a donkey,” and go back inside.
Jasper was not at all afraid of me despite my position as top predator on the Farm. I played with him a little, but it seemed as if I was so easily tired all the time, it just wasn’t worth investing myself in a creature who didn’t know how to pick up a ball.
One day a man named Rick came to dinner. The feeling from Mom was happy and embarrassed, and from Grandpa it was suspicious, and from Grandma it was ecstatic. Rick and Mom sat on the porch just like Hannah and Ethan used to do, but they didn’t wrestle. After that, though, I started seeing more and more of Rick, who was a big man with hands that smelled of wood. He would throw the ball for me more than anybody, so I liked him a lot, though not as much as the boy.
My favorite time of day was when Grandpa did chores. Sometimes when he didn’t do chores I would go and take a nap in the barn just the same. I was taking a lot of naps and no longer had any interest in going out on long adventures. When Mom and Rick took me for a walk, I was always exhausted when we got back.
About the only thing that could make me excited was when the boy would come to the Farm for a visit. I’d still dance and wiggle and whimper, and I would play at the pond or walk in the woods or do anything else he wanted, even chase the flip, though the boy thankfully seemed to have forgotten where it was. Sometimes we went to town to the dog park, and while I was always glad to see the other dogs, I thought the younger ones were juvenile with their relentless playing and wrestling.
Then one evening the oddest thing happened: Grandpa set dinner down before me, and I didn’t feel like eating. My mouth filled with drool, and I drank some water and went back to lie down. Soon a thick, heavy pain came through my body, leaving me panting for breath.
I lay there all night on the floor by my food bowl. The next morning, Grandma saw me and called to Grandpa. “There’s something wrong with Bailey!” she said. I could hear the alarm in her voice when she said my name, and wagged my tail so she’d know I was okay.
Grandpa came and touched me. “You okay, Bailey? What’s wrong?”
After some conversation, Mom and Grandpa carried me to the truck and we went to the clean, cool room with a nice man, the same nice man we’d been visiting more and more often in recent years. He felt me all over and I wagged a little, but I didn’t feel very well, and didn’t try to sit up.
Mom came in, and she was crying, and Grandma and Grandpa were there, and even Rick came. I tried to let them know I appreciated all of their attention, but the pain was worse, and it was all I could do to roll my eyes to look at them.
Then the nice man brought out a needle. I smelled a sharp and familiar smell and felt a tiny jab. After a few minutes, my pain felt a lot better, but now I was so sleepy, I just wanted to lie there and do chores. My last thoughts, as I drifted off, were, as always, of the boy.
When I woke up, I knew I was dying. There was a sense within me of a rising darkness, and I had faced this before, when I was named Toby and was in a small, hot room with Spike and some other barking dogs.
I hadn’t given it any thought at all, though I suppose deep down I knew that one day I would wind up like Smokey the cat. I remembered the boy crying the day they buried Smokey in the yard, and I hoped he wouldn’t cry over my death. My purpose, my whole life, had been to love him and be with him, to make him happy. I didn’t want to cause him any unhappiness now—in that way, I decided it was probably better than he wasn’t here to see this, though I missed him so much at that moment the ache of it was as bad as the strange pains in my belly.
The nice man came into the room. “You awake, Bailey? You awake, fella? Poor fella.”
My name, I wanted to say, is not Fella.
The nice man leaned over me. “You can let go, Bailey. You did a good job; you took care of the boy. That was your job, Bailey, and you did a good job; you are a good dog, a good dog.”
I had the sense that the nice man was talking about death; there was a feeling of kind finality and peace emanating from him. Then Mom and Grandma and Grandpa and Rick all came in, and they hugged me and said they loved me and told me I was a good dog.
Yet from Mom I felt a tension, a sure sense of something—not danger, exactly, but something I needed to protect her from. I gave her hand a feeble lick and, as the darkness came from within me, I pushed back against it. I had to stay alert; Mom needed me.
The tension seemed to rise after another hour went by, first Grandpa joining in Mom’s mood, then Grandma, and then even Rick, so that just as I felt myself flagging, a new resolve to protect my family from this unknown threat would renew my strength.
And then I heard the boy. “Bailey!” he shouted. He burst into the room and the tension left everyone at once—this, I realized, was what they had been waiting for. Somehow, they’d known the boy was coming.
The boy buried his face in my neck and sobbed. It took everything I had to lift my head up and lick him, to let him know it was all right. I wasn’t afraid.
My breathing turned raspy, and everyone remained with me, holding me. It felt wonderful to receive so much attention, but then a shudder of pain shot through my stomach so sharp I couldn’t help but cry out loud. The nice man came in then, and he had another needle.
“We need to do this now; Bailey shouldn’t have to suffer.”
“Okay,” the boy said, crying. I tried to wag my tail at the sound of my name, but I found I couldn’t manage even a twitch. There was another jab in my neck.
“Bailey, Bailey, Bailey, I’m going to miss you, doodle dog,” Ethan whispered in my ear. His breath was warm and delightful. I closed my eyes at the pleasure of it, the sheer pleasure of love from the boy, love by the boy.
And then, just like that, the pain was gone—in fact, I felt like a puppy again, full of life and joy. I remembered feeling like this the first time I ever saw the boy, coming out of his house and running to me with his arms open wide. That made me think of diving after the boy during rescue, the fading light as I dove deeper, the way the thick water pushed against my body, just like now. I could no longer feel the boy’s hands touching me; I could just feel the water on all sides: warm and gentle and dark.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ EIGHTEEN }

Awareness came long after I’d come to recognize my mother’s smell and learned how to fight my way to her teat for nourishment. My eyes were open and my vision was starting to sharpen well enough for me to see my mother’s dark brown face the day I understood, with a jolt, that I was a puppy again.
No, that wasn’t quite it. It was more that I was a puppy who suddenly remembered being me again. I had this sense of drifting in my sleep, aware of nothing but the long, long passage of time, not dreaming, not even thinking, and then, in a blink, I was looking at the world through the eyes of a very young dog. Yet somehow I remembered being this same puppy since birth, scrambling for my mother’s milk without any awareness of my previous lives.
Now that I remembered everything that had come before, I was truly puzzled. I’d felt so complete, there just didn’t seem to be any reason for me to go on—how could I possibly have a more important mission than loving the boy?
I missed Ethan so much I sometimes whimpered, which my new siblings always mistook for a weakness and jumped on me with the intent to dominate. There were seven of them, all dark brown with black markings, and I was impatient with the idea that they didn’t recognize who was going to be in charge, here.
A woman took care of us most of the time, though there was a man who often came down into the basement to feed us and it was he who carried us in a box to the backyard when we were a few weeks old. A male dog in a cage sniffed at us when we all ran over to see him, and I understood instinctively that this was our father. I’d never met a father before, and was curious as to what he was doing there.
“He seems fine with them,” the man said to the woman.
“You going to be okay, Bernie? You want to come out?” The woman opened Father’s cage—his name was obviously Bernie—and the male dog bounded out, sniffed at us, and then went over to pee on the fence.
We all galloped after him, falling on our faces because our puppy legs could barely move. Bernie put his face down and one of my brothers jumped up and disrespectfully bit at his ears, but Bernie didn’t seem to mind. He even played with us a little, knocking us around before trotting over to the back door to be let in.
A few weeks later I was in the yard, showing one of my brothers who was boss, when I stopped and squatted and all at once realized I was a female! I sniffed in amazement at my urine, snarling a warning when my brother took the opportunity to barrel into me. What would Ethan think?
How could I, Bailey, be a girl dog?
Except I wasn’t Bailey. One day a man came and played with us in an unusual fashion. He clapped his hands, and the puppies who didn’t cower from the noise (I was one of these) he put into a box. Then one at a time he took those of us in the box out into the yard—when it was my turn, he turned and walked away from me as if he had forgotten I was there, so I followed. He told me I was a good dog just for doing that—this guy was a pushover. He was about the age that Mom had been the day she broke the car window and gave me some water, the first day I ever saw the boy.
The man put me inside a T-shirt and then spoke to me, calling me. “Hey, girl, can you find your way out?” I figured he’d changed his mind about wanting me bagged up inside the shirt, so I jumped out and ran over to him again for more praise.
The woman had come out into the yard to watch.
“Most of them take a minute to figure it out, but this one’s pretty bright,” the man remarked. He flipped me over on my back, and I squirmed with it, playing, thinking to myself that it was unfair since he was so much bigger than I was.
“She doesn’t like that, Jakob,” the woman observed.
“None of them like it. The question is will she stop struggling and let me be the boss, or will she keep fighting? I got to have a dog that knows I’m the boss,” the man said.
I heard the word “dog,” and it didn’t sound angry—I wasn’t being punished, but I was being pinned down. I figured I didn’t know what sort of game we were playing now, so I just relaxed without struggle.
“Good girl!” he said again.
Then he took a ball of paper and showed it to me, waving it around until I became absolutely tantalized. I felt stupid and uncoordinated, trying to get a bite of the thing with my little puppy mouth when it was right there in front of me, but I couldn’t move my head fast enough. Then he tossed it a few feet away, so I ran over and pounced on it. Aha! Try to get it now!
Then I remembered Ethan and the stupid flip, how happy it made him when I brought the thing back to him. I turned around and trotted back to the man, dropping the ball at his feet and sitting for him to throw it again.
“This one,” the man said to the woman. “I’ll take this one.”
I whimpered when I saw the kind of car ride I was going to be taking—in the back of a truck, locked in a cage very similar to the one that had taken me to the hot noisy room with Spike. I was a front-seat dog; anyone could tell that!
My new home reminded me of the apartment where we went to live after the fire. It was small, with a balcony over a parking lot, but it was down the street from a nice park where the man took me several times a day.
I knew I was far away from Ethan by the smell of the trees and bushes—this wasn’t a wet place like the Farm, with frequent rain, though it was lush with flowers and shrubbery. The air was tinged with a strong smell of automobiles, which I could hear driving in the near and far distance every single hour of the day. Somedays a hot, dry wind blew in, reminding me of the Yard, but other days the air was thick with moisture, which never happened when I was Toby.
The man’s name was Jakob, and he named me Elleya. “It’s Swedish for ‘moose.’ You’re not a German shepherd; you’re a Swedish shepherd, now.” I wagged in noncomprehension. “Elleya. Elleya. Come, Ellie, come.”
His hands smelled of oil and his car and of papers and people.
Jakob wore dark clothes and wore metal objects on his belt, including a gun, so I figured he was a policeman. When he was gone during the day a nice woman named Georgia came over every few hours to play with me and take me for a walk—she reminded me of Chelsea, who had lived down the street from Ethan and me and had a dog named Marshmallow and then later Duchess. Georgia had all sorts of names for me, some of them really silly, like Ellie-wellie Cuddle-Coo. It was sort of like being called a doodle dog—it was my name, but different, delivered with an extra dose of affection.
I was doing my best to adjust to this new life as Ellie, so different from my life as Bailey. Jakob gave me a dog bed very similar to the one I’d been given in the garage, but this time I was expected to sleep in it—Jakob pushed me away when I tried to crawl under the covers with him, even though I could see he had plenty of room.
I understood that what was expected of me was to live with the new rules, the way I’d learned to live with Ethan going to do college. The sharp pain I felt when I thought about how much I missed the boy was just something to get used to: a dog’s job was to do what people wanted.
There was, though, a difference between obeying commands and having a purpose, a reason for being. I thought my purpose was to be with Ethan and that I’d fulfilled that purpose, being by his side as he grew up. If that was the case, why was I now Ellie? Could a dog have more than one purpose?
Jakob treated me with a calm patience—when my little bladder suddenly signaled and let go all in the same rush, he never yelled and ran me out the door like the boy used to; he just gave me such praise for when I went outside that I resolved to get my body under control as soon as I could manage. But Jakob didn’t gush affection the way the boy did. Jakob focused on me in the businesslike fashion Ethan focused on Flare, the horse, and to an extent I liked the sense of direction it gave me—though there were other times I pined for the feel of the boy’s hands on my fur and couldn’t wait for Georgia to come over and call me Ellie-wellie Cuddle-Coo.
There was, I came to feel, something broken inside Jakob. I didn’t know what it was, but I could sense something drawing energy from his emotions, a dark bitterness that seemed to me very similar to what I felt inside Ethan when he first came home after the fire. Whatever it was, it kept Jakob’s feelings toward me in check—whenever he and I did something together, I could feel him evaluating me with cool eyes.
“Let’s go to work,” Jakob would say, and he would load me in the truck and off we’d go to a park for games. I learned “Drop,” which meant to lie down, and I learned that to Jakob “Stay” really meant “stay” and I was expected to remain in the same spot until he told me, “Come.”
The training helped me keep my mind off Ethan. At night, though, I often fell asleep thinking of the boy. I thought of his hands in my fur, the smell of him as he slept, his laugh and his voice. Wherever he was, whatever he was doing, I hoped he was happy. I knew I would never see him again.
Georgia started coming over less often as I got older, but I found that I didn’t miss her, as I became more and more immersed in our work. One day we went to some woods and met a man named Wally, who petted me and then ran away. “What’s he doing, Ellie? Where’s he going?” Jakob asked me. I watched Wally, who was looking over his shoulder at me, waving excitedly.
“Find him! Find!” Jakob told me.
Uncertainly I started trotting off after Wally. What was this? Wally saw me coming after him and dropped to his knees, clapping, and when I caught up to him he showed me a stick and we played with it for a few minutes. Then Wally stood up. “Look, Ellie! What’s he doing? Find him!” Wally said.
Jakob was strolling off, and I ran after him. “Good dog!” Jakob praised.
As intelligent games go, I’d probably put it right up there with chasing the flip, but Wally and Jakob seemed to enjoy it, so I went along with it, especially since afterward we got to play Tug-On-a-Stick, which in my mind beat Find Wally hands down.
It was around the time I started learning Find that a strange sensation gripped me, a restless anxiousness accompanied by an embarrassing odor from my rear end. Mom and Grandma used to complain any time I released fragrant gasses from under my tail, so when I started discharging this smell I knew I was a bad dog. (Grandpa was so offended by bad odors that he’d say, “Oh, Bailey!” even when the smell came from him.)
Jakob didn’t notice the odor, but he did register alarm at all the dogs lifting their legs on the bushes around the apartment, dogs I knew instinctively were milling around because of me.
Jacob’s reaction was most curious: he put me into a pair of shorts like the ones he wore under his pants, my tail sticking out of a hole in the back. I’d always felt sorry for dogs who wore sweaters and other clothes, and here I was, playing dress up in front of all those male dogs. It was more than a little embarrassing, especially given that there was something compelling about the attention I was being shown by the motley pack of males who were so busy wetting the shrubbery outside my home.
Jakob said, “Time to see the vet,” and took me for a car ride to a place that was very familiar, a cool room with bright lights and a metal table. I feel asleep and, predictably, was wearing a stupid cone-shaped collar when I awoke back home.
As soon as the cone came off, Jakob and I were back at the park almost every day for the next several months. The days grew shorter, though it never got cold or came close to snowing, and finding Wally became harder and harder because they kept changing the rules on me. Sometimes Wally wouldn’t even be there when we arrived and I’d have to go find him where he’d wandered off to. He’d be lying around like Grandpa doing chores, and I learned another command, “Show Me!” which meant leading Jakob back to where I’d come across Wally’s lazy body sprawled under a tree. Somehow, Jakob could tell when I had Found something, even when it was just one of Wally’s socks left on the ground—the man was a disaster, always dropping his clothing for us to Find and pick up. Jakob would read my look when I came running back to him. “Show me!” he’d say, but only when I had something to Show.
We did other work, too. Jakob taught me how to climb up a slide and to ease myself down the ladder on the other side, making me do it a step at a time instead of just jumping from the top as I preferred. He taught me to crawl into tight tubes and to leap up on a stack of logs, and one day he had me sit while he removed the gun from his side and shot off some explosions that made me flinch the first couple of times.
“Good girl, Ellie. This is a gun. See? No reason to be afraid. It makes a loud noise, but you’re not afraid, are you, girl?”
I sniffed at it when he held it out to me and was very glad when he didn’t try to make me fetch it. The thing smelled bad and looked like it would fly worse than the flip.
Sometimes Jakob would sit at an outside table with other people with guns and drink from bottles. It was at times like these that his internal turmoil was most evident to me: the people at the table would laugh, and sometimes Jakob would join in, and other times he’d turn inward, dark and sad and alone.
“Isn’t that right, Jakob,” one of the men said one time. I heard the name, but Jakob was staring off into space, not paying attention. I sat up and nuzzled his hand, but when he petted me I sensed he didn’t really register that I was there.
“I said isn’t that right, Jakob.”
Jakob turned and looked at everyone watching him, and I sensed he felt embarrassed. “What?”
“If Y2K is as bad as they say it’s going to be, we’re going to need every K-9 unit we can get. Be like Rodney King all over again.”
“Ellie’s not that kind of dog,” Jakob said coldly. I straightened at the sound of my name, conscious as I did so that all the men at the table were looking at me. I felt uneasy for some reason, just as some of the men seemed uncomfortable with Jakob’s stare. When they started talking again, it was to each other, ignoring Jakob. I nuzzled his hand once more, and this time he responded by scratching my ears.
“Good dog, Ellie,” he said.
Find Wally evolved into just Find. Jakob and I would go somewhere and sometimes I’d be given something to sniff, an old coat or a shoe or a glove, and I’d have to Find the person who belonged to the item. Other times there’d be nothing to sniff and I’d course back and forth over a huge area, alerting any time I picked up the scent of something interesting. I Found a lot of people who weren’t Wally, and sometimes they were obviously not informed of the game and would call, “Here, boy!” or otherwise react to me when they saw me. I’d always Show Jakob these people, and he always praised me, even if the people I’d Found weren’t bright enough to know what was going on. The point, I realized, was to Find people and to take Jakob to them and let Jakob decide if they were the right people or not. That was my job.
I had been with Jakob for about a year when he started taking me to his work every day. A lot of people dressed like Jakob milled around and were mostly friendly to me, though they drew back respectfully when Jakob told me to heel. He took me to a kennel in back with two other dogs, Cammie and Gypsy. Cammie was jet-black, and Gypsy was brown.
Despite the fact that we were all caged together, my relationship with Cammie and Gypsy was different than I’d ever had with other canines. We were working dogs and didn’t feel free to play much because we always needed to be ready to serve our masters—most of the time we just alertly sat at the fence.
Gypsy worked with a policeman named Paul and was gone a lot, and sometimes I watched Paul and Gypsy work in the yard. They did it all wrong: Gypsy would just smell in between boxes and piles of clothing and would alert for no reason, though Paul always praised her anyway, pulling out a package from the items and telling Gypsy she was a good dog.
Cammie was older and didn’t bother to watch Gypsy, probably feeling embarrassed for the poor dog. Cammie worked with a policewoman named Amy and didn’t go out much. When he did, though, he went out fast—Amy would come get him and they’d leave at a run. I never knew what Cammie’s work was, but I suspected it wasn’t as important as Find.
“Where you working this week?” Amy asked Paul once.
“Back out at the airport until Garcia comes off sick leave,” Paul told her. “How’s life on the bomb squad?”
“Quiet. I’m worried about Cammie, though. His scores have been a little off; I’m wondering if his nose is going.”
At the sound of his name Cammie raised his head, and I looked over at him.
“He’s what, ten years old, now?” Paul asked.
“About that,” Amy said.
I stood up and shook myself off because I could sense Jakob coming, and a few seconds later he walked around the corner. He and his friends stood and talked while we dogs watched them, wondering why they didn’t let us out in the yard to be with them.
Suddenly I felt some excitement off Jakob. He spoke to his shoulder. “10-4, unit Eight-Kilo-Six responding,” he said while Amy ran over to the gate. Cammie jumped up. “Ellie!” Amy commanded. “Come!”
We were out of the yard and I was up in the truck in just moments. I found myself panting, picking up on Jakob’s excitement.
Something told me that whatever was happening, it was far more important than Find Wally.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ NINETEEN }

Jakob drove us to a large flat building, where several people were gathered in a circle. I could feel the tension in them as we pulled up. Jakob came around and petted me but left me in the truck. “Good dog, Ellie,” he said absently.
I sat and watched him anxiously as he approached the group of people. Several of them spoke at once.
“We didn’t notice her missing until lunch, but we don’t have any idea how long she’s been gone.”
“Marilyn’s an Alzheimer’s patient.”
“I don’t understand how she got away with no one seeing.”
While I sat there, a squirrel climbed down the trunk of a tree and busied itself foraging for food in the grass. I stared at it, astounded at its audacious disregard for the fact that I, a vicious predator, was a mere ten feet away!
Jakob came to the cage and opened the door. “Heel!” he commanded, giving me no chance to catch the squirrel. I snapped to it: time to work. Jakob led me away from the people, to a corner of the front yard of the building. He held out two shirts that smelled reminiscent of Grandma, a little. I stuck my nose into the soft cloth, inhaling deeply. “Ellie. Find!”
I took off, running past the knot of people. “She wouldn’t have gone that way,” someone said.
“Let Ellie work,” Jakob replied.
Work. I carried the sense memory of the clothing in my mind as I held my nose up to the air, coursing back and forth as I’d been trained. There were a lot of people smells, dog smells, car smells, but I couldn’t Find. Frustrated, I turned back to Jakob.
He read my disappointment. “That’s okay, Ellie. Find.” He began walking down the street, and I leaped ahead, cruising up and down the yards. I turned the corner and slowed down: there it was, tantalizing, coming to me. . . . I zeroed in on it and raced ahead. Forty feet in front of me, lying at the base of some bushes, her scent was clear. I turned and ran back to Jakob, who had been joined by several police officers.
“Show me, Ellie!”
I took him back to the bushes. He bent, poking at something with a stick.
“What is it?” one of the officers asked, coming up behind Jakob.
“A tissue. Good dog, Ellie, good dog!” He grabbed me and wrestled with me briefly, but I sensed there was more work.
“How do we know that’s hers? It could have been dropped by anybody,” one of the policemen objected.
Jakob bent down, ignoring the men behind him. “Okay, Ellie. Find!”
I could follow her scent, now, faint but traceable. It went ahead two blocks, then turned right, getting stronger. At a driveway it made an abrupt right, and I tracked her through an open gate, to where she was sitting on a swing set, moving gently. There was a real sense of happiness flowing from her, and she seemed glad to see me.
“Hello, doggy,” she said.
I ran back to Jakob, and I could tell from his excitement that he knew I’d found her before I got up to him, though he waited for me to reach him before he reacted. “Okay, Show me!” he urged.
I took him to the lady on the swing set. I felt Jakob’s relief when he saw the woman. “Are you Marilyn?” he asked gently.
She cocked her head at him. “Are you Warner?” she replied.
Jakob spoke into the microphone on his shoulder, and soon we were joined by the other policemen. Jakob took me aside. “Good dog, Ellie!” He pulled out a rubber ring and sent it bouncing across the lawn, and I jumped on it and brought it back, holding it out for him to grip and tug on. We played for about five minutes, my tail whipping the air.
As Jakob shut me in the cage on the back of the truck, I could feel the pride coming off of him. “Good dog, Ellie. You are such a good dog.”
It was, I reflected, as close as Jakob could come to the unrestrained adoration I once felt from Ethan, and from it I realized that today I truly understood my purpose as Ellie: not just to Find people but to save them. The worry that poured off the knot of people in front of the building could not have been more clear, just as their relief when we returned was clear. The lady had been in some sort of danger, and by Finding her Jakob and I saved her from the danger. That is what we did together, that was our work, and that’s what he cared most about. It was like the game I played with Ethan: Rescue.
The next day Jakob took me to a store and purchased some fragrant flowers, which he left in the truck while we did some work. (Wally was hiding on top of a strong-smelling trash Dumpster, but he couldn’t fool me.) Then Jakob and I went for a long car ride—so long that I became tired of holding my nose up to the side of the cage and lay down on the floor.
When Jakob came to let me out, there was a heaviness in him—whatever was always hurting him inside seemed stronger than ever. We were in a big yard filled with stones. Subdued, not sure what we were doing, I stayed next to Jakob as he walked a few dozen yards, carrying his flowers. He knelt and put the flowers down next to one of the stones, the pain twisting in him so deeply that tears fell silently down his cheeks. I nuzzled his hand, concerned.
“It’s okay, Ellie. Good dog. Sit.”
I sat, grieving with Jakob.
He cleared his throat. “I miss you so much, honey. I just . . . sometimes I don’t think I can get through the day, knowing you’re not going to be there when I get home,” he whispered hoarsely.
I lifted my ears at the word “home.” Yes, I thought, let’s go home, let’s leave this sad place.
“I’m on K-9 patrol right now, search and rescue. They don’t want me on regular patrol because I’m still taking anti-depressants. I’ve got a dog, her name is Ellie, a one-year-old German shepherd.”
I wagged my tail.
“We just got certified, so we’ll be going out, now. I’ll be glad to get off the desk; I’ve gained about ten pounds from all the sitting.” Jakob laughed and the sound of it was so peculiar, such a sad, tortured laugh, with no happiness in it at all.
We remained there, nearly motionless, for about ten minutes, and gradually the feeling from Jakob shifted, became less raw pain and more like what I felt when Ethan and Hannah would say good-bye at the end of the summer—something similar to fear. “I love you,” Jakob whispered. Then he turned and walked away.
From that day forward, we spent a lot more time away from the kennel. Sometimes we would ride on airplanes or helicopters, both of which vibrated so much they made me sleepy despite the noise. “You’re a chopper dog, Ellie!” Jakob told me whenever we rode on the helicopters. One day we even went to the biggest pond I’d ever seen, a huge expanse of water full of exotic smells, and I tracked a little girl down the sand to a playground full of children who all called to me when I approached.
“Want to play in the ocean, Ellie?” Jakob asked me after I Showed him the little girl, and a mother and father took her away for a car ride. We went to the pond and I splashed and ran in the water, which was very salty when the spray came up into my nose. “This is the ocean, Ellie, the ocean!” Jakob laughed. Playing in the ocean, I felt the thing that had such a tight clench on his heart loosen just a little.
Running through the shallow water reminded me of chasing Ethan on his sled—I had to lunge upward to make any progress, exactly the same gait I’d used in the snow. It made me realize that though the sun’s cycles suggested a couple of years had passed, there was never any snow here. It didn’t bother the children, though—they had sleds they rode on the waves. I stood and watched them play, knowing Jakob would not want me to chase them. One boy looked something like Ethan when he was younger, and I marveled that I could remember my boy when he was little and also when he was a man. An ache overtook me then, a sharp stab of sadness that didn’t go away until Jakob whistled me back to his side.
When I did go to the kennel, Cammie was often there, but Gypsy almost never was. On one such day I was trying to interest Cammie in a glorious game of I’ve Got the Ball when Jakob came out to get me. “Ellie!” he called.
I’d never heard such urgency in his voice.
We drove very fast, the tires making screeches as we turned corners that I could hear above the wail of the siren. I lay down on the floor of my cage to keep from sliding around.
As usual, when we arrived at the place to work, there were a lot of people standing around. One of them, a woman, was so afraid she couldn’t stand up, and two people were holding her. The anxiety rippling off Jakob as he ran past me to talk to these people was so strong it made the fur on my back stand up.
It was a parking lot, big glass doors on a building swinging open for people carrying small bags. The woman who had collapsed reached into her bag and pulled out a toy.
“We’ve got the mall locked down,” someone said.
Jakob came to my door and opened it. He handed me a toy to sniff. “Ellie, okay? Got it? I need you to Find, Ellie!”
I leaped out of the truck and tried to sort through all the smells, to Find one that matched the toy. I was concentrating so hard I didn’t notice that I’d trotted out in front of a moving car, which rocked when the driver hit the brakes.
Okay, I had it. There was a scent, a scent that was oddly married to another, a strong male smell. I tracked them both, sure of myself.
The smell vanished at a car—rather, next to the car, telling me that the people we were working had driven away in a different vehicle and this one had pulled in to take its place. I alerted Jakob, cringing at his sense of frustration and disappointment.
“Okay, good girl, Ellie. Good girl.” His play was perfunctory, though, and I felt like a bad dog.
“We’ve tracked her to here—it looks like she got into a vehicle and left. Do we have surveillance on the parking lot?”
“We’re checking now. If it is who we think it is, though, the car’s stolen,” a man wearing a suit told Jakob.
“Where would he take her? If it’s him, where would he go?” Jakob asked.
The man in the suit turned his head, squinting at the green hills behind us. “The last two bodies we found were up in Topanga Canyon. The first one was in Will Rogers State Park.”
“We’ll head up that way,” Jakob said. “See if we can pick up anything.”
I was startled when Jakob put me in the front seat of the truck. He’d never let me be a front-seat dog before! His mood was still tense, though, so I stayed focused and didn’t bark when we passed some dogs who yipped at me with unrestrained jealousy. Jakob and I drove out of the parking lot, and he held the same toy out to me, which I dutifully sniffed. “Okay, girl, I know this is going to sound strange, but I want you to Find.”
At the command, I turned and stared at him in bewilderment. Find? In the truck?
The smells coming in the window lured my nose in that direction. “Good girl!” Jakob praised. “Find! Find the girl!”
My nose was still filled with the scent from the toy, which was why I alerted when a stray breeze brought me her smell, still entwined with the man’s. “Good girl!” Jakob said. He stopped the car, watching me intently. Behind us, cars honked. “Got it, girl?”
I couldn’t smell her anymore. “That’s okay; that’s okay, Ellie. Good girl,” he said.
I understood, now—we were working from inside the truck. He drove and I kept my nose out the window, straining, rejecting everything except the smell from the toy.
I felt the tilt of the truck as we headed uphill, and with it a rising sense of disappointment from Jakob.
“I think we’ve lost her,” he muttered. “Nothing, Ellie?”
At my name, I turned, then went back to my work.
“Unit Eight-Kilo-Six, what’s your twenty?” the radio squawked.
“Eight-Kilo-Six, we are proceeding up Amalfi.”
“Any luck?”
“We had something on Sunset. Nothing since.”
“Roger that.”
I barked.
I normally didn’t bark when I caught a scent, but when this hit it was strong and steady, carried on a current of air that filled the cab of the truck. “Eight-Kilo-Six, we’ve got something, corner of Amalfi and Umeo.” The truck slowed, and I stayed on point. I could still smell her, and the man’s scent was strong as ever. Jakob eased to a stop. “Okay, which way here, Ellie?” Jakob asked.
I climbed across the seat, shoving my face out his window. “Left on Capri!” Jakob shouted excitedly. A few minutes later the truck started to bump. “We’re on the fire road!”
“10-4, we’re on our way,” the radio said.
I was on alert, focused dead ahead, while Jakob wrestled with the truck to keep it on the narrow road. Suddenly we banged to a stop, facing a yellow gate. “Be advised, we need the fire department up here; there’s a gate.”
“10-4.”
We jumped out of the car. A red car was parked off to the side, and I ran right to it, on alert. Jakob was holding his gun out. “We’ve got a red Toyota Camry, empty; Ellie says it belongs to our man.” Jakob led me around to the back of the vehicle, watching me intently. “No indication anyone is in the trunk of the car,” Jakob stated.
“Roger that.”
The scent from the car wasn’t as strong as what was coming from the air currents rising up from the canyon below. A steep road held the man’s scent as it descended, while the girl’s was more delicate. He’d carried her.
“Be advised, suspect took the road down to the camp. He’s on foot.”
“Eight-Kilo-Six, hold and wait for backup.”
“Ellie,” Jakob said to me, putting his gun back on his belt. “Let’s go find the girl.”
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ TWENTY }

I felt strong fear from Jakob as we descended down into the canyon, so strong I kept returning to him for reassurance. Then the girl’s scent pulled me forward and I galloped ahead, racing toward a collection of small buildings.
I spotted the little girl sitting quietly on some steps that led up to a big porch while a man pulled at the front door to the building with some sort of tool. She seemed sad and scared, but she perked up when she saw me approach, holding out a tiny little hand.
The man suddenly whirled, staring at me. My hackles rose when our eyes met—I felt the same dark sickness from him that I’d felt in Todd, only stronger, more vicious. He jerked his head up, looking over toward the road I’d come from.
I ran back to Jakob, the little girl calling, “Doggy!” as I peeled away.
“You got her,” Jakob said. “Good girl, Ellie. Show me!”
I took him back to the building. The little girl was still sitting on the porch, but the man was nowhere to be seen.
“Eight-Kilo-Six, victim is secured and unharmed. Suspect fled on foot,” Jakob said.
“Stick with the victim, Eight-Kilo-Six.”
“Roger that.”
I could hear in the distance the wap-wap-wap of a helicopter blade beating the air, and the sound of footsteps running down the road behind us. Two policemen came around the bend, sweating.
“How are you, Emily? Are you hurt?” one of them asked.
“No,” said the little girl. She picked at a flower on her dress.
“My God, is she all right? Are you okay, little girl?” a third policeman asked breathlessly as he ran up, putting his hands on his knees. He was larger than the other men, both taller and built more heavily. I smelled ice cream on his breath.
“Her name is Emily.”
“Can I pet the doggy?” the little girl asked shyly.
“Yes, sure. Then we’ve got to go back to work,” Jakob said kindly.
I perked up my ears at the word “work.”
“Okay, I’ll . . . go with you,” the large policeman said. “Johnson, you guys remain here with the girl. Watch that he doesn’t circle back around.”
“If he were close, Ellie would tell us,” Jakob said. I looked at him. Were we ready to go to work?
“Find!” Jakob said.
The brush was thick in places, the soil underneath sandy and loose. I could easily track the man, though—he was headed steadily downhill. I found an iron rod coated with his scent and ran back to Jakob. “Show!” Jakob commanded.
When we returned to the tool, we had to wait more than a minute for the bigger policeman to catch us. “I fell . . . couple times,” he gasped. I could sense his embarrassment.
“Ellie says he was carrying this crowbar. Looks like he dropped his weapon,” Jakob observed.
“Okay, now what?” the policeman wheezed.
“Find!” Jakob commanded.
The man’s scent was painted on bushes and hanging in the air, and it wasn’t long before I could hear him ahead, scuffling along. I closed in on him in a place where the breeze was moist from a tiny stream and the trees lifted their limbs high overhead, providing shade. He saw me and ducked behind one of these trees, just like Wally might do. I ran back to Jakob.
“Show me!” Jakob said.
I stayed close to Jakob as we entered the woods. I knew the man was hiding, I could smell his fear and his hate and his fetid odor. I led Jakob straight to the tree, and when the man stepped out from behind it I heard Jakob shout, “Police! Freeze!”
The man raised his hand and a shot rang out. Just a gun. I’d been assured guns were okay, except that I sensed a flash of pain from Jakob and he fell to the ground, his warm blood spraying the air. Jakob’s gun clattered away.
I got it, then, connecting separate pieces of information in a flash: Grandpa’s guns, and the way Ethan’s cans leaped off the fence. Todd’s firecrackers, and the snap of pain when he threw one too close to me. The man by the tree was using his gun to hurt Jakob.
He was still standing there, his gun pointed at us. His fear and fury had turned to elation.
What came over me then was exactly the same primal impulse that had seized me when I attacked Todd on the night of the fire. I didn’t growl; I just lowered my head and charged. Two loud shots rang out, and then I had the man’s wrist in my mouth, his gun falling to the dust. He screamed at me and I held on, shaking my head violently, feeling my teeth tear into his arm. His foot smacked into my ribs.
“Let go!” he shouted.
“Police! Freeze!” the big policeman yelled, coming forward.
“Get the dog off me!”
“Ellie, it’s okay. Down, Ellie, Down!” the policeman commanded. I let go of the man’s arm and he fell to his knees. I smelled his blood. His eyes met mine and I growled. I could feel his pain but also his cunning, his sense that he was going to get away with something.
“Ellie, come,” the policeman said.
“Dog ripped off my arm!” the man shouted. He waved at something behind and to the left of the policeman. “I’m over here!” he yelled.
When the policeman quickly turned to see who the man was shouting at, the man lunged forward, scooping up his gun. I barked. He fired and then the policeman fired, several shots punching deep pain into the man. The man lay down in the dirt. I felt the life go out of him in a whoosh, the black, angry sickness unclenching its hold on him and letting him slide away peacefully.
“Cannot believe I fell for that one,” the policeman muttered. He still pointed his gun at the now dead man, cautiously advancing and kicking the other man’s gun away.
“Ellie, you okay?” Jakob asked faintly.
“She’s okay, Jakob. Where you hit?”
“Gut.”
I anxiously lay down by Jakob’s side, nuzzling his unresponsive hand. I could feel the pain working its way through his body, and the blood smell was alarming for how much of it there was.
“Officer down, suspect down. We’re . . .” The man looked up at the sky. “We’re under some trees down the canyon. Need medivac for the officer. Suspect is 10-91.”
“Confirm suspect 10-91.”
The policeman walked over and gave the man a kick. “Oh, he’s dead all right.”
“Who is the officer?”
“Eight-Kilo-Six. We need help down here now.”
I didn’t know what to do. Jakob seemed unafraid, but I was so filled with fear I was panting and trembling. I was reminded of the night when Ethan was caught inside the fire and I couldn’t get to him, the same feeling of helplessness. The policeman came back and knelt next to Jakob. “They’re on their way, bro. You just got to hang on, now.”
I felt the concern in the policeman’s voice, and when he gingerly opened Jakob’s shirt to get a look inside the shock of fear shooting through him made me whimper.
Soon I could hear crashing and stumbling as several people ran toward us. They knelt by Jakob, shouldering me aside, and began pouring chemicals on him and wrapping him in bandages.
“How’s Emily?” Jakob asked them faintly.
“Who?”
“The little girl,” the policeman explained. “She’s fine, Jakob; nothing happened. You got to her before he was able to do anything.”
More people arrived and eventually they carried Jakob out on a bed. When we got to where the cars had been parked, a helicopter waited.
The policeman held me as they loaded Jakob on the helicopter, his limp arm hanging off of the bed. As the loud machine rose into the air I twisted free and ran beneath it, barking. I was a chopper dog; why didn’t they let me go? I needed to be with Jakob!
People watched as I circled helplessly, my front legs in the air.
Eventually Amy came and put me in a cage on a different truck, one filled with Cammie’s scent. She took me on a car ride back to the kennel and exchanged me for Cammie, who trotted past me and leaped up into the truck as if offended I’d been in it. Gypsy was nowhere to be seen.
“Someone will check on you, and we’ll figure out where you’re going to live, Ellie. You be a good dog; you are a good dog,” Amy said.
I lay down on my bed in the kennel, my head swimming. I did not feel like a good dog. Biting the man with the gun was not part of Find, I knew. And where was Jakob? I remembered the scent of his blood, and it made me whine in anguish.
I’d fulfilled my purpose and found the girl and she was safe. But now Jakob was hurt and was gone and I was sleeping at the kennel for the first night ever. I couldn’t help but feel that somehow I was being punished.
The next several days were confusing and distressing for everyone. I lived in the kennel and was only let out into the yard a couple times a day, always by a policeman who radiated awkwardness with the unexpected new duty of dog care. Amy talked to me and played with me a little, but she and Cammie were gone a lot of the time.
There was no sign of Jakob, and gradually his scent faded from the surroundings, so that even when I concentrated, I couldn’t locate him anymore.
One day Cammie and I were in the yard together. All Cammie wanted to do was nap, even when I showed him a rubber bone one of the policemen had given me. I didn’t understand what Cammie’s purpose was, why anyone would want to have a nap dog.
Amy brought her lunch out to a table in the yard, and Cammie was willing to wake up for that. He walked over to where Amy sat and lay down heavily at her feet, as if burdened with many cares that could only be cured with a bite of her ham sandwich. A woman came out and joined Amy.
“Hi, Maya,” Amy said.
Maya had dark hair and dark eyes and was tall for a woman, with strong-looking arms. Her pants smelled faintly of cats. She sat down and opened a little box and began chomping on something spicy. “Hi, Amy. Hello, Ellie.”
The woman didn’t greet Cammie, I noted smugly. I moved closer to her, and she petted me with a fragrant hand. I caught a whiff of soap and tangy tomatoes.
“Did you put in your paperwork?” Amy asked.
“Fingers crossed,” Maya replied.
I lay down and gnawed on the rubber bone so that Maya would conclude I was having so much fun I could only be enticed into paying attention to her with a little lunch.
“Poor Ellie. She’s got to be so confused,” Amy said.
I looked up. Lunch?
“You sure you really want to do this?” Amy asked.
Maya sighed. “I know it’s hard work, but what isn’t, you know? I’m just getting to that point, it’s the same old thing every day. I’d like to try something new, do something different for a few years. Hey, you want a taco? My mom made them; they’re really good.”
“No thanks.”
I sat up. Taco? I wanted a taco!
Maya wrapped up her lunch as if I weren’t even there. “You people in K-9 are all in such good shape. Losing weight is so hard for me . . . do you think I can hack it?”
“What? No, you’re fine! Didn’t you pass the physical?”
“Sure,” Maya said.
“Well, there you go,” Amy said. “I mean, if you want to run with me, I usually go to the track after work. But I’m sure you’ll be great.”
I felt a tinge of anxiety come off Maya. “I sure hope so,” she said. “I’d hate to let Ellie down.”
I decided that no matter how many times they said my name, this conversation wasn’t going to result in anything edible. I sprawled out in the sunshine with a sigh, wondering how much longer it would be before Jakob came back.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ TWENTY-ONE }

Maya was happy and excited the day she took me for a car ride.
“We’re going to work together; isn’t that great, Ellie? You won’t have to sleep in the kennel anymore. I bought a bed for you; you can sleep in my room.”
I sifted through her statement: “Ellie,” “kennel,” “bed,” “room.” There was nothing there that made any sense to me whatsoever, but I was glad to stick my nose out the window and breathe the scent of something besides Cammie and Gypsy.
Maya parked in the driveway of a small house that I knew, as soon as we crossed the threshold, was where she lived—painted everywhere was her smell, plus the distinctly disappointing odor of cats. I inspected the dwelling, which was tinier than Jakob’s apartment, and immediately encountered an orange feline, sitting on a chair at the table. She regarded me with cold eyes, and when I approached her, wagging, she opened her mouth and gave an almost silent hiss.
“Stella, be nice. That’s Stella. Stella, this is Ellie; she lives here now.”
Stella yawned, unimpressed. A flash of gray and white motion out of the corner of my eye drew my attention.
“Tinker? That’s Tinkerbell; she’s shy.”
Another cat? I followed her into the bedroom, where a third feline, a heavy black and brown male, sauntered out and sniffed at me with fish breath. “And that’s Emmet.”
Stella, Tinkerbell, and Emmet. Why on earth would a woman want three cats?
Tinkerbell was hiding under the bed, thinking I couldn’t smell her there. Emmet followed me into the kitchen and looked curiously into the bowl Maya filled with food, then lifted his head and walked away as if he didn’t care that I was eating and he was not. Stella watched me unwinkingly from her perch on the chair.
After eating, Maya let me out into her tiny yard, which was unmarked by dogs. I did my business with dignity, aware that at least some of the cat population were observing me. “Good girl, Ellie,” Maya enthused. Apparently she was of the “excited to see you peeing in the yard” persuasion.
Maya made her own dinner, which smelled pretty good and drew the attention of Stella, who jumped right up on the table and waltzed around like a bad cat! Maya didn’t say anything to her, apparently feeling that cats were worthless, untrainable animals.
We went for a walk on the leash after dinner. There were a lot of people out in the yards, many of them children, which made me feel restless. I had not done any work in several weeks and there was a tension in my muscles; I wanted to run, to Find, to save people.
As if picking up on my mood, Maya began to trot. “Want to run a little, girl?” she asked. I increased my pace, sticking right to her side as Jakob had taught me. Before long she was huffing, and I could smell her sweat break out from her pores. The heat was coming off the pavement and into my paws, and as we passed houses dogs barked enviously.
And then Maya abruptly stopped. “Whew!” she panted. “Okay, we’re going to need to spend more time on the treadmill, that’s for sure.”
I didn’t really get what was happening until that night. I was lying on the rug while Maya took a bath and dressed in different clothing, and then she called me into her bedroom. “Okay, lie down here, Ellie. Good girl,” she said, patting a dog bed. I obediently curled up in it, but I was mystified. Apparently I would be staying here for a while. Was this where I lived, now? What about Jakob? What about my work?
The next morning Maya and I did do work, though it was a little strange. Wally was there and greeted me like an old friend, along with a woman who sometimes came along to play Find with us. Her name was Belinda, and Wally’s smell was always all over her, so I suspected that when we weren’t there Belinda and Wally played Find with each other.
Wally stayed with Maya while Belinda went off into the woods. He talked with Maya, teaching her the hand signals and commands we used during work. Then Maya said, “Ellie, Find!” and I raced off while Wally and Maya followed. Belinda was sitting inside a car, which fooled me not at all, and I returned to Maya.
“See now; see how she looks?” Wally said. “She Found Belinda; you can tell by her expression.”
I waited impatiently for Maya to tell me to Show, but she and Wally were too busy talking.
“I’m not sure; she doesn’t look much different than the other times she came back,” Maya said.
“Look at her eyes, the way her mouth is tightened. Her tongue’s not out. See? She’s on alert; she has something to show us.”
At the word “show” I trembled, caught in half lunge. It hadn’t really been a command.
“So now I tell her to Show?” Maya asked.
Quit teasing me! Were we working, or not?
“Show!” Maya finally called.
Belinda came out of the car laughing when we Found her. “Such a good dog, Ellie,” she told me.
“Now you play with Ellie. It’s important; it’s her reward for such hard work.”
When Maya played with me, it was different from Jakob’s play. Maya seemed to actually enjoy it; it wasn’t just something she did at the end of Show. She had the rubber bone from the kennel, and I dug in my feet and clenched it in my jaws while she tried to take it away.
Maya had a life different from anyone else I had ever encountered. Not only was she burdened with too many cats, but most nights she went to a larger home with lots of people and a wonderful-smelling woman named Mama. Mama was like Grandma, always cooking, and there were little children running around playing with each other every time we went for a visit. The children climbed on me until Maya asked them to stop, and the boys played ball with me, which I loved, and the girls put hats on me, which I tolerated.
Maya had a neighbor named Al who liked to come over and ask Maya about “help.” “Do you need help carrying those boxes, Maya?” he would ask. “No, no,” she would say. “Do you need help fixing your door?” “No, no,” Maya would say. Maya always seemed anxious, her skin warming and her palms sweating, when Al came over, but she wasn’t frightened of him. When Al walked away, Maya’s feelings changed to sadness.
“Did you get a new dog?” Al asked. He reached down and scratched me behind the ears in a way that made me instantly love him. He smelled of papers and inks and coffee.
“Yes, she’s the department search-and-rescue dog.”
I knew they were talking about me, and wagged my tail in friendship.
“Do you need help training your new dog?” Al asked.
“No, no,” Maya said. “Ellie has already been trained. We need to learn to work together as a team.”
I wagged over the words “Ellie” and “work.”
Al stood up from his scratching. “Maya, you . . . ,” he started to say. He felt nervous.
“I probably should go,” Maya said.
“Your hair is very pretty today,” Al blurted.
The two of them stared at each other, both so anxious it felt as if we were under danger of imminent attack. I glanced around but could see nothing more threatening than Emmet, watching us through the window.
“Thank you, Al,” Maya said. “Would you like . . .”
“I’ll let you go,” Al said.
“Oh,” Maya said.
“Unless . . . ,” Al stammered.
“Unless . . . ?” Maya repeated.
“You . . . do you need help with anything?”
“No, no,” Maya said.
Maya and I worked almost every day. Maya would tell me to Find and we would plunge off into the woods, sometimes chasing Wally or Belinda and sometimes chasing one of the older boys from Mama’s house.
Maya was much slower than Jakob, panting and sweating from the moment we started. Often real pain would come off of her, and I learned not to be impatient when I returned to her and all she could do was put her hands on her knees for a few minutes. Sometimes a burst of helplessness and frustration would overtake her and she would cry, but she always cleaned up her face before we came to Wally.
One afternoon she and Wally sat at a picnic table and drank cool beverages while I lay in the shade of a tree. Maya’s worry was clear to me, but I had learned to live with it and not to let it interfere with the work.
“We’re not good enough to get certified, are we?” Maya said.
“Ellie’s about the best dog I’ve ever seen,” Wally replied. I sensed some alarm and caution in his voice and looked at him curiously.
“No, I know it’s me. I’ve always been heavy.”
“What? No, I mean . . . ,” Wally said, his alarm increasing. I sat up, wondering what the danger was.
“It’s okay. I’ve actually lost some weight, like four pounds.”
“Really? That’s great! I mean, but you weren’t fat or anything,” Wally stammered. I smelled the sweat pop on his forehead. “You, I don’t know, maybe go to the track, that would help, or something?”
“I do go to the track!”
“Right! Yes!” Wally radiated pure fear, and I yawned anxiously. “Well, okay, I should go now.”
“I don’t know, I didn’t realize there would be so much running. It’s a lot harder than I thought it would be. Maybe I should resign, let somebody take over who is in better shape.”
“Hey, why don’t you talk to Belinda about this?” Wally said desperately.
Maya sighed and Wally, full of relief, got up and left. I lay back down. Whatever horrible danger had been lurking was now apparently no longer a threat.
The next day, Maya and I didn’t work. She put on some soft new shoes, grabbed my leash, and took me to a long road that ran along the sand next to the big pond, the ocean. Dogs were everywhere, but though we weren’t doing work I sensed a grim determination in Maya and ignored them as we ran and ran down that road, the sun rising steadily in the sky. It was the longest run we’d ever taken together, it went on and on, and it wasn’t until I could feel her body fill with pain and exhaustion that Maya turned around to head back. She stopped a few times for me to drink water out of faucets set into the concrete next to very smelly buildings, but for the most part the return trip was as determined, just slower. By the time we got to the truck, she was limping. “Oh my,” Maya said.
We were both panting pretty hard. She drank water and hung her head between her legs, and I watched in sadness as she vomited in the parking lot.
“You okay?” a young woman asked sympathetically. Maya waved a hand without even looking up.
The next day we did Find Belinda for work. Maya’s gait was so stiff and painful I deliberately did Find at half speed, slowing down as soon as I was out of sight. I returned for direction far more than was necessary, just to check on her, and when I finally found Belinda sitting under a tree she had fallen asleep.
“Good dog, you are such a good dog, Ellie,” Maya whispered to me. We woke up Belinda, who checked her wrist and emanated a quick shock of surprise.
“Just . . . had an off day,” Maya said. Belinda didn’t reply.
That night Maya called me while she was in the bathtub. I sniffed curiously at the bubbles in the tub and lapped up a little of the water, wondering why anyone would want to swim in such a small enclosure. Certainly the cats weren’t interested. Tinkerbell was, as usual, hiding from the world, Stella was conducting an unauthorized examination of my bed (I could tell by the smell of it that she’d even tried sleeping there!), and Emmet was in the bathroom with me, licking himself and waiting for something to happen that he could ignore.
Maya was sad. She reached a wet hand out and stroked my head. “I’m sorry, Ellie; I’m just not good enough. I just can’t keep up with you in the field. You’re such a good dog, you need someone who can handle you.”
I wondered if she would be happier if I got into the tub with her. I put my paws up on the edge of the tub, testing the theory a little. Emmet stopped licking himself and looked at me without any of the proper respect, then lifted his tail and waltzed out of there as if daring me to chase him down and reduce the cat population in the house.
“Tomorrow, I have a surprise for you, Ellie,” Maya said, still sad.
Well, okay, I’d gone this far . . . I climbed into the tub, sinking through the insubstantial bubbles.
“Ellie!” Maya laughed, her delight blowing out the sadness like a candle.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ TWENTY-TWO }

The next morning I was excited to go for a car ride because, well, it was a car ride! I also picked up some happy anticipation from Maya, so I knew we weren’t going to work, because lately there hadn’t been much happiness associated with that. But it wasn’t until she stopped and opened the door that I realized where I was.
Jakob’s apartment.
I ran ahead of Maya, bounding up the stairs and barking at the door, which I would never have done when I lived with him. I could smell Jakob inside and hear him moving to the door. He opened it and I barreled into him, leaping and twisting joyously.
“Ellie! How are you, girl? Sit,” he commanded.
I dropped my bottom onto the floor, but it didn’t want to stay there.
“Hi, Jakob,” Maya said from the doorway.
“Come on in, Maya,” Jakob said.
I was so thrilled to see Jakob I sat by his side as he eased into a chair. I wanted to climb into his lap and it if had been Ethan I probably would have, but with Jakob there was never any nonsense like that.
I sniffed around the apartment while the two of them talked. My bed was gone, I noticed, but my scent was still in the bedroom and I would have no problem sleeping on the carpet or in Jakob’s bed if he wanted.
Then I trotted back out to be with Jakob, passing by Maya, who reached a friendly hand out to stroke my back, and that’s when it hit me: going back to Jakob would mean leaving Maya.
Dogs are not allowed to choose where they live; my fate would be decided by people. But I nonetheless felt torn inside, conflicted.
Jakob was far better at work than Maya. But Maya didn’t carry that inner core of sadness with her all the time; she felt genuine joy at Mama’s house, where there were all the children to play with. Yet Jakob didn’t have any cats.
I had a clear purpose—to Find, Show, and save people. I was a good dog. Both Maya and Jakob were focused on work, and that meant neither one of them could ever love me with the utter abandon of Ethan. But Maya embraced me with an unguarded affection that Jakob never allowed himself to feel.
I began to pace anxiously.
“Do you need to go out?” Maya asked me. I heard “out,” but she didn’t say it with any enthusiasm, so I didn’t react.
“No, when she needs to do that, she sits by the door,” Jakob said.
“Oh. Right, I’ve seen her do that,” Maya said. “I just leave my back door open a lot of the time, so, you know. She can come and go.”
They were silent for a bit. I eased into the kitchen, but as usual the floor was antiseptically clean, free of anything edible.
“I heard you’re taking disability,” Maya said.
“Yeah, well, I’ve been shot twice in five years; that’d be enough for anybody,” Jakob replied with a gruff laugh.
“You’ll be missed,” Maya observed.
“I’m not leaving town, I’m enrolled at UCLA. Full-time, I only have a year and a half left for my law degree.”
There was another silence. A tiny signal of distress came off of Maya, something I’d noticed before when others tried to talk to Jakob and instead wound up sitting there without saying anything. Something about him made people uncomfortable.
“So when are you up for certification?” Jakob asked.
I picked a neutral spot on the floor between the two of them and lay down with a sigh, unable to figure out what was going to happen.
“Two weeks, but . . .” Maya trailed off.
“But?” Jakob prompted.
“I’m thinking of resigning from the program,” Maya confessed in a rush. “I just can’t keep up. I didn’t realize . . . well, someone else would probably be better.”
“You can’t do that,” Jakob said. I raised my head and looked at him curiously, wondering why he was feeling angry. “You can’t keep switching handlers on a dog. Ellie is the best dog anyone has ever seen. You dump her like that, you could ruin her. Wally says the two of you have a rapport.”
I thumped my tail a little at my name and Wally’s being mentioned by Jakob, but his tone was still very stern.
“I’m just not cut out for it physically, Jakob,” Maya said. I could feel anger stirring in her, too. “I’m not an ex-Marine; I’m just a beat cop who can barely pass the physical every year. I’ve been trying, but it is just too hard.”
“Too hard.” Jakob glared at her until Maya shrugged and looked away. Her anger turned to shame, and I went over to her to nuzzle her hand. “What about how hard it would be on Ellie? Doesn’t that matter?”
“Of course it matters.”
“You’re saying you’re not willing to work.”
“I’m saying I’m not cut out for this, Jakob! I don’t have what it takes inside.”
“What it takes. Inside.”
I could sense that Maya was grappling with the rising tide of emotion that sometimes led to a flood of tears. I wanted to comfort her and shoved my nose under her hand again. When Jakob spoke again, he wasn’t looking at Maya and his voice was quieter.
“When I was shot the first time, my shoulder was so messed up, I had to learn to use it all over again. I went to physical therapy every day, and there was this little two-pound weight on a pulley and that thing hurt . . . and my wife was in her final round of chemo. More than once, I wanted to give up. It was too hard.” Jakob turned his head and blinked at Maya. “But Susan was dying. And she never gave up, not until the very end. And if she could keep going, I knew I had to. Because it’s important. Because failure isn’t an option if success is just a matter of more effort. I know it’s difficult, Maya. Try harder.”
The same old dark pain swirled around inside Jakob like a storm, and the anger left him as if blown away by a gust of wind. He sagged in his chair, suddenly exhausted.
Somehow I knew then that I wouldn’t be staying with Jakob. He just wasn’t interested in Find anymore.
Sadness was flowing through Maya, but through it I felt a rising resolve, a strength like what came over her the day she took me running along the ocean.
“Okay. You’re right,” she told Jakob.
Jakob petted my head when we left, saying good-bye without regret. The last glimpse I had of him was as he shut the door, and he wasn’t looking at me. He and Maya had decided my fate, and it was up to me to do what they wanted.
Later Maya and I drove up into the hills. She ran until she was so tired she stumbled, and the next day, after work, we ran some more. It was gloriously fun, except that Maya often felt full of despair and pain by the end of the course.
A few evenings later, we pulled into the driveway and Maya was literally too tired to get out of the car. We sat there, sweat running from her face, with the windows open. “I’m going to fail, Ellie. I’m so sorry,” Maya said mournfully.
I could see Emmet and Stella both watching from the window—they probably didn’t even know what a car was. Tinkerbell, I assumed, had become alarmed at the sound of our approach and was cowering under something.
“Are you okay, Maya?” Al asked softly. The wind was working against me, so I hadn’t smelled his approach. I put my head out the window for him to pet.
“Oh, hi, Al.” She stood up out of the car. “Yes, I was just . . . thinking.”
“Oh. I saw you pull up in your car.”
“Yes.”
“So I came over to see if you needed any help.”
“No, no. I was just running with the dog.”
I slid out of the front seat and squatted in the yard, staring pointedly at Emmet and Stella, who looked away in disgust.
“Okay.” Al drew in a deep breath. “You’ve lost weight, Maya.”
“What?” Maya stared at him.
Al recoiled in horror. “Not that you were fat, I just noticed, in your shorts, your legs look so thin.” A gust of misery flowed off of him, and he was backing away. “I should go.”
“Thank you, Al; that was sweet,” Maya said.
He arrested his retreat and stood up straight. “In my opinion, you don’t need to exercise anymore; you are perfect the way you are.”
Maya laughed at this, and then Al laughed. I wagged my tail to show the cats at the window that I understood the joke and they didn’t.
A week or so later Maya and I did one of my favorite things, which was to go to the park with a lot of other dogs and work on the toys. At her command I crawled into the tight tube and up and down the tippy board. I climbed slowly down a ladder and demonstrated that I could sit patiently on a narrow beam two feet off the ground, all the while ignoring the other dogs.
Our Find consisted of locating a man who had dropped some old socks as he blundered off into the woods. Maya was bursting with eagerness, so I went at it full speed, even when she began to huff and sweat. I knew he was high in a tree even before I found him, because Wally had tried that on me a few times and it always affected the way the human scent drifted on the wind. Maya was a little mystified, though, that I was alerting at the base of the tree when clearly the man wasn’t standing there. I sat, patiently staring up at the grinning man, until she got it.
That night there was a big party at Mama’s house. Everyone was petting me and saying my name.
“Now that you are certified, you need to eat,” Mama told Maya.
The doorbell rang, which hardly ever happened at that house; people usually just burst in. I followed Mama to the door, and when she opened it Mama’s heart soared. It was Al, and he gave some flowers to Mama. I remembered Ethan giving Hannah flowers, and I was confused because I thought Al liked Maya, not Mama, but I’ll never really understand people when it comes to stuff like this.
The whole family grew quiet when Al stepped out into the backyard where the picnic tables were set up. Maya went over to Al and they both felt nervous as he briefly pressed his mouth to her face. Then Maya said everyone’s name and Al shook hands with the men and everyone started talking and laughing again.
Over the next several days we found and saved two children who had wandered away from their houses, plus backtracked a horse’s path to find a woman who had fallen off and hurt her leg. I remembered Flare dumping Ethan in the woods, and wondered why people even bothered to own horses, since they were obviously unreliable. If people had a dog or two and were still not satisfied, they should probably consider getting a donkey like Jasper the donkey, who at least made Grandpa laugh.
Maya and I also found an old man in the woods who was dead. I was depressed to sniff out his cold body lying in the dirt, because that wasn’t saving people, and though Maya praised me, neither one of us was much interested in playing with the stick afterward.
We went to Al’s house and he served Maya a chicken dinner and they both laughed and then ate a pizza a boy brought over. I sniffed at the chicken pieces Al put on the floor for me and ate them more out of politeness than anything, since they were so encrusted with what tasted like soot.
Later that evening I could tell she was telling him about the dead man, because her feeling of sadness was the same. Jakob and I had found a few dead people, too, but it never made him sad, the same way that finding people and saving them never really seemed to make him glad. He just did the work, not feeling much one way or the other.
When I thought about Jakob, I realized that his cold dedication to Find helped me get over my separation from Ethan—there was no time for grieving; I had too much work to do. Maya, though, was more complex, and the way she loved me made me miss my boy. Not with the same sharp, painful ache in my chest but with a wistful sadness that often came to me as I was lying down for the night and rode with me into my dreams.
One day Maya and I took a plane ride and then a chopper ride straight south. I thought about the day Jakob was taken away, and was glad I was back to being a chopper dog. She was both excited and uneasy on the flight, which wasn’t, frankly, nearly as much fun as a car ride, because the noise hurt my ears.
We landed in a place unlike any I’d ever been to before. There were lots of dogs and policemen, and the air was filled with the sound of sirens and the smell of smoke. Buildings everywhere were in a state of collapse, their roofs sometimes all the way on the ground.
Maya seemed stunned, and I pressed up against her, yawning anxiously. A man approached us; he was dirty and wore a plastic helmet. His hands, when he held them to me, smelled of ashes, blood, and clay. He shook hands with Maya.
“I’m coordinating the U.S. response in this sector; thanks for coming down.”
“I had no idea it was going to be this bad,” Maya said.
“Oh, this is just the tip of the iceberg. The El Salvadoran government is completely overwhelmed. We’ve got more than four thousand people injured, hundreds dead—and we’re still finding folks trapped. There’ve been more than a half dozen aftershocks since January 13, some of them pretty bad. Be careful going in these places.”
Maya put me on a leash and led me through the maze of rubble. We’d come to a house and some men who were following us would check it, and then sometimes Maya would let me off the leash and I’d go in and sometimes she’d keep me on the leash and we would just Find along the outside of the house.
“This one’s not safe, Ellie. I have to keep you on a leash so you don’t go in there,” Maya told me.
One of the men was named Vernon, and he smelled like goats, reminding me of trips to town with Ethan and Grandpa. It was one of the rare times I thought of Ethan while working—doing Find meant putting all of that away and concentrating on the job.
Over the next several hours, Maya and I Found four people. They were all dead. My excitement over Find soured after the second one; by the time I came across the fourth person, a young woman lying beneath a jumble of bricks, I almost didn’t alert Maya. She sensed my mood and tried to reassure me, petting me and waving the rubber bone at me, in which I had very little interest.
“Vernon, would you do me a favor and go hide somewhere?” she asked. I lay down tiredly at her feet.
“Hide?” he asked uncertainly.
“She needs to find someone alive. Would you go hide? Like over in that house we just searched. And when she locates you, act all excited.”
“Um, yeah, okay.”
I registered Vernon’s departure without interest. “Okay, Ellie, ready? Ready to Find?”
I wearily rose to my feet. “Let’s go, Ellie!” Maya said. Her excitement seemed fake, but I trotted over to a house we’d already searched. “Find!” Ellie commanded.
I went into the house and stopped, puzzled. Though we’d all been in here already, I thought Vernon’s smell was somehow more intense. Curious, I padded to the back of the house. Yes! There was a pile of blankets in the corner, from which came a strong Vernon scent, full of sweat and heat and goats. I raced back to Maya. “Show!” she urged.
She followed me at a run, and when she peeled back the blankets Vernon leaped up, laughing.
“You found me! Good dog, Ellie!” he shouted, rolling on the blankets with me. I jumped on him and licked his face, and we played with the rubber bone for a while.
Maya and I worked all night and we Found more people, including Vernon, who became better and better at hiding—but I’d worked with Wally, so no one could fool me for very long. Everyone else Maya and I found was dead.
The sun was coming up when we came to a building from which sharp, acrid smoke still rose. I was back on the leash, my eyes watering at an intense chemical smell coming out from the collapsed concrete.
I Found a dead man lying crushed beneath a flat section of wall and alerted Maya.
“We know about him,” someone told Maya. “We can’t get him out just yet; whatever is in those barrels is toxic. Going to need a cleanup crew.”
Some metal barrels leaked a steady stream of liquid that filled my nose with a scalding odor. I concentrated on pushing the scent away, trying to Find.
“Okay, good dog. Let’s go somewhere else, Ellie.”
There! I smelled another person and alerted, going rigid. It was a woman, and her scent was faint, riding out just behind the chemicals clogging the air.
“It’s okay, Ellie. We’re going to leave this one here. Come on,” Maya said. She tugged gently on my leash. “Come, Ellie.”
I alerted again, agitated. We couldn’t leave!
This one was alive.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ TWENTY-THREE }

“We see the victim, Ellie. We’re going to have to leave him here. Come on,” Maya said.
I understood that she wanted to leave and wondered if perhaps she thought that I was alerting because of the dead person.
“Does she want to Find me again?” Vernon asked.
I stared up at Maya, willing her to understand.
Maya glanced around. “Here? Everything’s collapsed; it’s too dangerous. Tell you what, though, it would be fun for her to chase you a little. Go up the street a little bit and call her, and I’ll let her off the leash.”
I didn’t pay attention to Vernon as he trotted away. My focus was on the person hidden in the rubble. I could smell fear, though the biting odor from the chemicals was clawing at my nose the way I’d once felt the spray from a skunk. Maya unsnapped my leash. “Ellie? What’s Vernon doing? Where’s he going?”
“Hey, Ellie! Look!” Vernon shouted. He started to run slowly up the street. I stared after him: I wanted to chase him and play, but I had work to do. I turned back to the collapsed building.
“Ellie! No!” Maya called.
Had it been Jakob, the word “no” would have stopped me dead, but Maya didn’t command me with the same hard tones. I dove headfirst into a narrow space next to the dead person, digging my way forward. My feet encountered a wet spill and started to sting, and the smell from the chemicals was so intense it blotted out everything else. I was reminded of playing rescue with Ethan, how I could find him in the depths by the merest whisper of his scent in the water.
Choking, I tunneled ahead. Cooler air touched my face, and I squirmed though a hole and dropped into a narrow shaft. An updraft brought cleaner air into this area, though my nostrils were still aflame with the burning wet acid that had splashed on my snout.
After a moment, I saw a woman huddled in the corner of the shaft, pressing a cloth to her face. Her eyes were big as they regarded me.
I barked, unable to return to Maya to Show.
“Ellie!” Maya called, coughing.
“Get back, Maya,” Vernon warned.
I kept barking. “Ellie!” Maya shouted again, sounding closer. This time the woman heard her and started screaming back, the terror tumbling out of her.
“There’s someone in there, someone alive!” Maya yelled.
I sat patiently with the woman, feeling her fear turn to hope when a man wearing a helmet and a mask poked a flashlight into the shaft and waved the light over both of us. My eyes were watering and my nose was running, my whole face still stinging from whatever it was I’d gotten on myself. Soon the sounds of digging and hammering reverberated through the space, and then a square of daylight broke into the shaft from above and a man lowered himself down on a rope.
The woman had obviously never practiced being lifted with a rope harness and was very afraid when the fireman tied her up and they hoisted her out, but I’d been through the maneuver several times and stepped unhesitatingly into the loops of rope when it was my turn. Maya was there at the top when they hauled me through the hole they’d dug in the wall, but her relief turned to alarm when she saw me.
“Oh my God, Ellie, your nose!”
We ran together to a fire truck, where Maya, much to my disgust, talked one of the firefighters into giving me a bath! Well, it was more of a rinsing, cold water flowing down my face and bringing some relief to the burn on my nose.
Maya and I took another chopper ride that day, and then a plane ride, and then we went to the man in the cool room, the vet, who carefully looked at my nose and put some cream on it that smelled awful but felt wonderful.
“What was it, some kind of acid?” the vet asked Maya.
“I don’t know. Is she going to be okay?” I felt Maya’s love and concern, and closed my eyes when she stroked my neck. I wished there were some way I could let her know that the pain wasn’t all that bad.
“We’ll want to watch for any signs of infection, but I don’t see any reason why she shouldn’t heal up just fine,” he told Maya.
For the next two weeks or so, Maya would gently rub the cream into my nose. Emmet and Stella seemed to find this pretty amusing, and would sit on the counter and watch. Tinkerbell, though, loved it. She came out of wherever she’d been hiding and sniffed at the cream and then rubbed her head against mine, purring. When I’d lie down, Tinkerbell would sit and smell me, her tiny little nose bobbing up and down, and she even started curling up against me to sleep.
It was almost more than I could stand.
I was relieved to get away from the cats and go back to work. When Maya and I got to the park, I bounded up to Wally and Belinda, who were excited to see me.
“I hear you are the hero dog, Ellie! Good dog!”
I wagged, excited to be a good dog. Wally then ran off while Belinda and Maya sat at a picnic table.
“So how are you and Wally doing?” Maya said. I sat impatiently—if we went after him now, we could Find Wally right away!
“He’s taking me to meet his parents over the Fourth, so . . . ,” Belinda replied.
“That’s good.”
I groaned at all this conversation. Humans were capable of so many amazing things, but too often they just sat making words, not doing anything. “Down, Ellie,” Maya said. I reluctantly lay down, pointedly looking off in the direction Wally had taken.
After what seemed ages, Maya and I were finally allowed to Find. I joyously took off, not having to slow down, because she was able to keep pace with me.
Wally had done an excellent job of disguising his scent! I lifted my nose, searching for any trace of him. There were few odors on the air today to distract me, but I couldn’t Find Wally. I coursed back and forth, returning to Maya for direction. Carefully she worked the area, and when I didn’t pick up a scent she moved me to a new place and I tried there.
“What’s the matter, girl? You okay, Ellie?”
Oddly, though the wind was coming from behind him, I actually heard Wally before I smelled him. He was walking straight toward us. I rocketed forward until my nose told me it was him, and then returned to Maya, who had already started talking to Wally, her voice a shout.
“We’re having sort of an off day!” she said.
“I guess so. I’ve never seen her fail before. Hey, Ellie, how are you doing?” Wally said to me. We played a little with a stick.
“Tell you what, Maya. You focus her attention away from me. I’m going to go over that ridge, there, and double back a little. Give me about ten minutes,” Wally said.
“You sure?”
“She’s been out of action for a couple of weeks; let’s allow her to have an easy one.”
I was conscious of Wally leaving, even though Maya had handed me the rubber bone and was now trying to get it away from me. I could hear him and knew he was hiding again, which made me happy. When Maya finally shouted, “Find!” I took off eagerly, heading in the direction I’d heard him go.
I ran up a small hill and stopped, uncertain. I didn’t know how he was doing it, but somehow Wally was keeping his scent out of the air. I ran back to Maya for direction, and she sent me off to my right. I snaked back and forth, searching.
No Wally.
Then she directed me to the left. Again, no sign of Wally. This time, she had me return left and walked with me, leading me around the base of the hill. I was virtually upon Wally when I found him—he moved, and I alerted. There was no need to run back, because Maya was standing there.
“This isn’t good, is it?” Maya asked. “The vet said she should be fully recovered by now.”
“Well . . . let’s give it another week, see if she gets any better,” Wally said. He felt sad, for some reason, so I nuzzled his hand.
Maya and I didn’t work very much over the next couple of weeks, and when we did, Wally continued to fool me, disguising his scent so that I could only pick it up when he was right there in front of me.
“What does it mean that Ellie is decertified? Does it mean you will lose your job?” Al asked one night. I’m not a big fan of feet, but I allowed Al to take off his shoes and rub my tummy with his toes because they didn’t smell as bad as usual.
“No, but I’ll be reassigned. I’ve been on a desk for the past several weeks, but I’m not really cut out for that. I’ll probably request a transfer to go back out on patrol,” Maya replied.
Stealthily Al dropped a tiny piece of meat on the carpet in front of me. It was the main reason why I liked to lie in front of him at dinner. I silently licked it up while Stella gave me dirty looks from the couch.
“I don’t like to think about you being on patrol. It is so dangerous.”
“Albert,” Maya sighed.
“What about Ellie?”
I looked up at my name, but Al didn’t hand down any more meat.
“I don’t know. She can’t work anymore; her sense of smell is too damaged. So she’ll be retired. She’ll live with me. Right, Ellie?”
I wagged, pleased with the way she said my name, full of affection.
After dinner we took a car ride to the ocean! The sun was setting, and Maya and Al set a blanket out between two trees and talked while the waves came in.
“It’s so beautiful,” Maya said.
I figured they probably wanted to play with a stick or a ball or something, but I was on a leash and couldn’t go find one for them. I felt bad that they had nothing to do.
Al got my attention by becoming afraid. His heart started to pound audibly, and I could feel his nervous energy as he wiped his hands on his pants over and over.
“Maya, when you moved here . . . so many months I wanted to talk to you. You are so beautiful.”
Maya laughed. “Oh, Al, I’m not beautiful; come on.”
Some boys down by the water ran by, tossing a saucer at each other. I watched it alertly, thinking of Ethan and the stupid flip. I wondered if Ethan had ever been to the ocean and, if he had, if he brought the flip and threw it out into the waves, where I hope it sank and was never found again.
Ethan. I could remember how he never did anything without taking me with him, except school. I loved the sense of purpose I got from work, but there were certainly days, like this one, when I thought of Ethan and missed being a doodle dog more than anything.
Al was still afraid, and I glanced at him curiously, pulled away from the sight of the boys by his continued alarm. Was there some sort of danger? I couldn’t see any; we were all alone in this part of the park.
“You are the most wonderful woman in the world,” he said. “I . . . I love you, Maya.”
Maya started to feel afraid, too. What was going on? I sat up.
“I love you, too, Al.”
“I know I’m not rich, I know I’m not handsome . . . ,” Al said.
“Oh my God,” Maya breathed. Her heart was beating now, too.
“But I will love you all my life if you will let me.” Al turned on the blanket, rising to his knees.
“Oh my God, oh my God,” Maya said.
“Will you marry me, Maya?” Al asked.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ TWENTY-FOUR }

One day Maya and Mama and all of the brothers and sisters and other family members came together in a big building and sat quietly while I demonstrated a new trick I’d been taught, which was to walk very slowly down a narrow path between wooden benches, mount some carpeted stairs, and stand patiently while Al removed something from a small pack I carried on my back. Then everyone sat and admired me while Maya and Al had a conversation. Maya was wearing a big fluffy outfit, so I knew we weren’t going to the park to play afterward, but that was okay because everyone seemed so glad at how well I’d done the trick. Mama even cried, she was so happy.
Then we went to Mama’s house and children ran around and fed me cake.
A few months later, we all moved into a different house with a much better backyard. It had a garage, too, but thankfully no one suggested I sleep out there. Al and Maya slept together and, though they didn’t mind when I jumped up to be with them, there was frankly no room to get a good night’s sleep and anyway the cats kept climbing up there, too, so I eventually learned to lie on the floor next to Maya’s side, where I could get up and follow her if she awoke during the middle of the night and went anywhere.
Gradually, I came to understand that we wouldn’t be doing work anymore. I could only conclude that we’d Found everybody who needed to be Found and that Wally and Belinda had lost interest in the whole process. Maya still went running, though, and Al sometimes went with us, though he had trouble keeping up.
I was therefore surprised when Maya excitedly loaded me into the truck and took me for a car ride. It felt like we were going to do work, except that Maya’s mood was different, less urgent.
She took me to a big building and told me it was a school. This was confusing to me, as I had learned that school was something where Ethan went away—it wasn’t a place; it was a state of being without the boy. I stuck to Maya’s side, though, as we entered a big noisy room filled with children, who were all excited and laughing. I sat with Maya and watched the children who were doing their best to sit still. I was reminded of Ethan and Chelsea and the children in our neighborhood, always full of energy.
A bright light was in my eyes. A woman spoke, and then all the girls and boys clapped, startling me. I wagged my tail, feeling a collective joy washing off the children.
Maya walked me forward, and when she spoke her voice was very loud and seemed to come from both next to me and at the back of the room.
“This is Ellie; she is a retired search-and-rescue dog. As part of our outreach program, I wanted to come to talk to you about how Ellie has helped find lost children, and what you can do if you ever become lost,” Maya said. I yawned, wondering what this was all about.
After we stood around doing nothing for about half an hour, Maya led me down off the stage and the children lined up and then came up in small groups to pet me. Some of them hugged with unabashed affection, and some of them held back, a little afraid. I wagged my tail in reassurance, and one girl put a timid hand out, which I licked. She snatched her hand back, squealing, no longer frightened.
Though Maya and I no longer did work, we very often did school. Sometimes the children were little, and sometimes they weren’t children at all but people as old as Grandma and Grandpa. Sometimes Maya and I went to places full of chemical smells and people who were in pain or feeling sad and sick as they lay in bed, and we would linger with these people until some of their sadness lifted.
I could always tell when we were doing school, because Maya would take extra time getting dressed in the morning. The days we didn’t do school, she dressed hurriedly and sometimes ran out the door, with Al chuckling. Then Al would leave, too, and I’d be stuck at home with the stupid cats.
Though I no longer wore nose cream, Tinkerbell persisted in hanging near me and cuddling up against me when I’d take a nap. I was glad that Al wasn’t there to see it. Al had a lot of affection for me, but for the cats, not so much. Tinkerbell hid from Al, while Stella only approached him when Al had food, and Emmet would occasionally strut over to Al and loftily rub against him as if putting cat fur on his pants was doing him some kind of favor.
We’d been doing school for several years when Maya broke the pattern. We were in a place called class, which was smaller than some of the rooms in which I’d been and which was filled with children who all seemed about the same age. These particular children were very little and sat on the floor on blankets. I was a little envious—most of my time at home was spent napping and I didn’t seem to have the energy that I’d once had, so I decided that if the children wanted me to lie on a blanket with them, I’d be willing to do so.
Maya called forward one of the children, who approached shyly. Her name was Alyssa, and she gave me a hug. When I licked her face, the children laughed—but Maya and I had never done this before, had a single child come forward, and I wasn’t sure what it was about.
The woman who sat at the big desk, the teacher, said, “Alyssa has never actually met Ellie before, but if it weren’t for Ellie, Alyssa would never have been born.”
Soon all the children were touching me, which was much more typical of how school went. Sometimes the children were a little rough and at this school a boy pulled sharply on my ears, but I just let him do it.
At the end of school, the children raced out the door, but the little girl Alyssa stayed behind, as did the teacher. Maya seemed excited about something, so I waited expectantly, and then a man and a woman came into the classroom and Alyssa ran to them.
The man was Jakob.
I bounded over to him. He stooped down, scratching my ears. “How are you, Ellie! Look how gray you’re getting.”
The woman picked up Alyssa. “Daddy used to work with Ellie; did you know that?”
“Yes,” said Alyssa.
Maya hugged Jakob and the woman, who set Alyssa back down so she could pet me some more.
I sat and regarded Jakob. He was so different than when I last saw him—the coldness in him seemed to have gone away. This little girl Alyssa, I realized, was his child, and the woman was the girl’s mother. Jakob had a family now, and he was happy.
That’s what was different. In all the time I’d known him, Jakob had never once been happy.
“I’m glad you’re doing this community outreach program,” Jakob told Maya. “A dog like Ellie needs to work.”
I registered my name and the word “work,” but there was no sense in the room that we had an urgent need to Find. Jakob just always talked about work; that was his way.
It was very pleasant to be there with Jakob and feel the love pour out of him when he looked at his family. I eased down onto the floor, so happy I thought I might nap.
“We’ve got to get you home,” the woman said to Alyssa.
“Can Ellie come?” Alyssa asked. Everyone laughed.
“Ellie,” Jakob said. I sat up. He bent down again, holding my face in his hands. “You are a good dog, Ellie. A good dog.”
The feel of his rough hands on my fur took me back to when I was a puppy, first learning my work. I wagged my tail, full of love for this man. Yet there was no question that I was happy with Maya, so when we all left each other in the hallway I unquestioningly followed her, my nails clicking.
“Good dog, Ellie,” Maya murmured. “Wasn’t it fun to see Jakob?”
“Bye, Ellie!” little Alyssa called, her tiny voice echoing in the quiet hall. Maya stopped and turned, so I did, too, and my last sight of Jakob was of him picking up his daughter, grinning at me.
That year Emmet and Stella both died. Maya cried and was very sad and Al was a little sad, too. The house seemed empty without them, and Tinkerbell needed constant assurance from me now that she was the only cat—several times a day I’d awaken from a nap to find her pressed up against me or, even more disconcerting, standing and staring at me. I didn’t understand her attachment to me and knew it was not my purpose in life to be the substitute mother for a feline, but I didn’t mind it much and even let her lick me sometimes because it seemed to make her happy.
The best days were when it rained, which it did infrequently—the smells seemed to leap off the ground, the way they did when I was a puppy. I could usually sense when the thickening clouds meant moisture, and remembered how much more often it rained back on the Farm.
I found myself thinking of the Farm much more often, now, the Farm and Ethan. Though my life with Fast and Sister, and the Yard with Coco, had faded to a distant memory, it seemed that sometimes I awoke with a start and lifted my head, thinking I’d just heard Ethan’s car door slam and that he would soon walk in, calling my name.
One day when rain seemed imminent Maya and I were doing school, in a class with children who sat in chairs instead of on blankets. There was a sudden crack of lightning, and all the children jumped and laughed and then turned to look as a huge storm made the sky black and pounded the building with a roar of rain. I inhaled, wishing they’d open the windows to let in the fragrances.
“Settle down, class,” said the teacher.
The door to the classroom suddenly opened and a man and a woman came inside, both of them wet. “We’ve lost Geoffrey Hicks,” the man said. I picked up the tension in his voice and regarded the two of them alertly. The alarm coming off the two people was familiar, an emotion I’d encountered several times when I was doing work. “He’s a first grader,” the man told Maya.
The children all started talking. “Quiet!” the teacher snapped.
“They were playing hide-and-seek when the rain started,” the woman said. “The storm just came up out of nowhere; one minute it was fine, the next . . .” She put her hands to her eyes, which were suddenly full of tears. “When I had everyone come in, Geoffrey wasn’t with them. It was his turn to hide.”
“Could the dog . . . ,” the man asked.
Maya looked at me, and I sat up straighter. “You’d better call 911,” she said. “Ellie hasn’t worked search and rescue in seven or eight years.”
“Won’t the rain wash away the scent? It’s really coming down out there,” the woman asked. “I’m worried that by the time another dog got here—”
Maya bit her lip. “We will certainly help look. You need to call the police, though. Where do you think he might have gone?”
“There are some woods behind the playground. There’s a fence, but the kids can lift it up,” the man said.
“This is his backpack; will that help?” the woman asked, holding out a canvas bag.
I felt Maya’s nervous excitement as we ran down the hallway. We stopped at the door, and a sense of defeat came over her. “Look at it rain,” she muttered. “Okay. Ellie?” She lowered her face down to mine. “Ellie, you ready, girl? Here, smell this.”
I took a deep whiff of the canvas bag. I could smell peanut butter, chocolate, crayons, and a person. “Geoffrey, Geoffrey,” Maya said. “Okay?” She opened the door and the rain whipped into the hallway. “Find!”
I leaped out into the rain. In front of me was a wide expanse of wet pavement, and I coursed back and forth, my nails clicking. I could faintly smell many children, though the rain was beating the scents down. Maya was out, running away from the school. “Here, Ellie, Find here!”
We tracked all the way back to the fence: nothing. Maya felt frustrated and frightened as she sloshed through the wet ground. We found a section of fence that was bent back, but I could find nothing to alert on. “Okay, if he’s in there, you’d smell him, girl, right? Geoffrey!” she shouted. “Geoffrey, come on out; it’s all right!”
We hugged the fence heading back to the school, sticking to the other side of the yard. A police car pulled up, lights flashing, and Maya jogged over to speak to the man driving.
I continued to Find Geoffrey. Though I wasn’t picking up much of anything, I knew if I just concentrated, as I had been trained, if I just focused, I could separate the smell from the backpack from all the others, if I didn’t quit . . .
There. I had something, and whipped my head around. There was a small gap in the fence, two poles between which no adult person could climb, but I could smell Geoffrey—he’d squeezed through here. He had left the playground.
I ran back to Maya and alerted. She was speaking to the policeman and didn’t notice at first, but then she turned to me, shocked. “Ellie? Show me!”
We ran back through the rain to the two poles. Maya peered through the small gap. “Come on!” she shouted, running along the fence toward the front of the school. “He left the school grounds! He’s on the other side of the fence!” she yelled at the policeman. He ran after us.
From the other side of the fence I could smell Geoffrey at the two poles, and from there I could track which direction he’d headed. Yes, he had gone this way!
Abruptly the scent faded. Just two steps on the route he’d taken and I’d lost all sign of him, though it had been so strong there for a second.
“What is it?” the policeman asked.
“He might have gotten into a car,” Maya said. The policeman groaned.
I dropped my nose, and that’s when I picked it up again. I reversed direction, and the scent got stronger. In the street, water rushed down in a steady stream by the curb, gurgling into a storm drain. I shoved my snout into the gap, ignoring the smells carried into the drain by the rushing water, and concentrated on my nose. If I wanted to, I could wriggle through that gap and into the loud, wet drain, but there was no need to—I could smell Geoffrey now; he was right in front of me even though I couldn’t see him in the darkness.
I looked up at Maya.
“My God, he’s in there; he’s in the sewer!” Maya shouted.
The policeman popped on a flashlight and beamed it into the storm drain. We all saw it at the same time: the pale face of a frightened little boy.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ TWENTY-FIVE }

“Geoffrey! It’s okay; we’re going to get you out of there!” Maya yelled at him. Heedless of the water, she knelt in the street, straining to reach the boy. The water had pressed him back away from the small opening, and he was clinging to the far wall, the terror coming off him so strong it was blinding. Right behind Geoffrey, a black tunnel sucked in the rainwater with a loud roar. Grunting, Maya pushed in as far as she could, but she couldn’t reach the boy.
“How did he get in there?” the policeman shouted.
“It’s a tight fit; he must have squeezed in before it started raining. God, it’s really coming down!” Maya’s voice was full of frustration.
A circular iron plate was set into the concrete right above Geoffrey’s head. The policeman pried at it with his fingers, muttering. “I need to get a tire iron!” he bellowed. He handed the flashlight to Maya and ran off, his feet sloshing in the water.
Geoffrey was shivering with cold, and his eyes were dull when they looked into the beam from Maya’s flashlight. He had the hood of his thin yellow rain slicker pulled up over his head, offering him scant protection from the chill. “Hold on, okay, Geoffrey? You hang on; we’re going to get you out of there, okay?”
Geoffrey didn’t respond.
The patrol car’s siren came on and within less than a minute it was whipping around the corner, sliding a little as it came to a stop next to us. The policeman jumped out and ran to his trunk.
“Fire and rescue are on the way!” he hollered.
“There’s no time!” Maya shouted back. “He’s slipping into the water!”
The policeman came around the trunk with a bent piece of iron. “Geoffrey, hang on; don’t let go!” Maya yelled. The policeman went to work on the circular plate with his tool. When Maya jumped up to watch I went with her, which was how I saw the spatter of mud fall on Geoffrey’s face when the iron plate was knocked aside. He lifted his hand to wipe it away, and as he did so he lost his grip on the wall and fell into the water. For a brief second he was looking up at us, and then he was swept into the tunnel.
“Geoffrey!” Maya screamed.
I was still on Find, so I didn’t hesitate, plunging headfirst after him. The second I hit the water, the brute force of it carried me into the tunnel, and I swam in that direction.
It was dark in the tunnel, and as I bobbed up and down in the current my head struck the cement above me. I ignored all of it, concentrating on Geoffrey, who was ahead of me in the darkness, soundlessly fighting for his life. His scent was faint but there, vanishing and reappearing in the deadly waters.
Without warning the floor fell away beneath me, and in complete darkness I rolled and bounced—the smaller tunnel had joined a much larger one, the water deeper, the sounds louder. I zeroed in on Geoffrey’s scent, swimming strongly. Though I couldn’t see him, he was just a few yards in front of me.
A second before he went under I knew what was going to happen—how many times had Ethan pulled this same stunt on me, waiting until I was close before dropping down into the pond? And, just as I always knew where to find the boy in the dark depths, I now had a clear sense of Geoffrey, tumbling just below me. I dove, straining, my mouth open, blinded and battered by the rushing waters, and then I had his hood in my mouth. Together, we burst through to the surface.
There was no way to go in any direction except the way the water was taking us. I concentrated on holding Geoffrey’s head out of the water, pulling back on the hood. He was alive, but he had stopped kicking.
Some weak light from up ahead flickered on the wet cement walls—the tunnel we were in was square and six feet across, with no way out. How was I going to save Geoffrey?
The light grew stronger, and as it did my ears filled with a loud roar, echoing back toward us. The current seemed to be accelerating. I kept my grip on Geoffrey’s hood, sensing that something was about to happen.
We burst into daylight, tumbling down a cement chute and landing with a splash in a swift-flowing river. I struggled to keep us both on the churning surface, battered by the waves. The banks of the river were lined with cement, but as I tugged Geoffrey toward the nearest one, the current fought me, trying to suck us back. Exhaustedly, my jaw and neck aching from the effort, I dragged Geoffrey toward the bank, swimming as hard as I could.
Flashing lights caught my eye, and I saw men in raincoats downstream from me, running toward the bank. I would be swept past them before I could get Geoffrey to safety.
Two of the men plunged into the water. They were tied together, and the rope went back to all the other men, who braced themselves. The two men stood hip high, straining their hands out to catch us, and I put everything I had into aiming for their arms.
“Gotcha!” one of the men shouted as Geoffrey and I slammed into them. He grabbed my collar as the other man hoisted Geoffrey into the air. The rope went taut and we all thrashed our way through the water to safety.
Once I was on land, the man released me and knelt down over Geoffrey. They squeezed his little body and he vomited up a gush of brown water, coughing and crying. I limped over to Geoffrey, and as his fear drained out of him it took mine with it. He was going to be okay.
The men ripped Geoffrey’s clothing off him and wrapped him in blankets. “You’ll be okay, boy; you’ll be okay. Is this your doggy? She saved your life.” Geoffrey didn’t answer, but he looked briefly into my eyes.
“Let’s go!” one of the men shouted, and they ran Geoffrey up the hill and into a truck, which took off with its siren screaming.
I lay down in the mud. My limbs were shaking violently, and I, too, vomited, a clean pain slicing through me. I was so weak I couldn’t really even see. The cold rain pelted me and I just lay there.
A police car pulled up, cutting its sirens as it did so. I heard doors slam. “Ellie!” Maya screamed from the road. I raised my head, too tired to even wag my tail. She frantically ran down the bank, wiping at her tears. She was soaking wet, but I could feel her warmth and love as she hugged me to her chest. “You are a good dog, Ellie. You saved Geoffrey. You are such a good dog. Oh God, I thought I’d lost you, Ellie.”
I spent the night at the vet’s, and for the next several days I was so stiff I could barely move. Then Maya and I did school, only this one was all adults her age. We sat with lights in our eyes while a man talked in a loud voice, and then he came over and put a silly collar around my neck while even brighter lights, the ones like silent lightning, popped on and off all around us, the way they did when I was with Mom, after the fire that hurt Ethan’s leg. The man also pinned something on Maya’s uniform, and everybody clapped. I felt pride and love coming off of Maya, and when she whispered to me that I was a good dog I felt proud, too.
Not long after that, a new mood swept through the house. Maya and Al were excited and nervous and spent a lot of time having conversations at the table.
“If it is a boy, why can’t it be Albert?” Al asked. “That’s a good name.”
“It’s a great name, honey, but then what do we call him? You are my Albert, my Al.”
“We could call him Bert.”
“Oh, honey.”
“Well, what are we going to call him, then? Your family has so many people in it, you’ve used up every name there is. We can’t call him Carlos, Diego, Francisco, Ricardo—”
“What about Angel?”
“Angel? You want my son to be named Angel? I think maybe we shouldn’t trust the naming of this child to a woman who named her cat Tinkerbell.”
The cat, who was sleeping against me, didn’t even raise her head at the sound of her name. Cats are like that; you can’t get their attention unless they want to give it to you.
Maya was laughing. “How about Charles?”
“Charley? No, my first boss was named Charley,” Al objected.
“Anthony?”
“Don’t you have a cousin named Anthony?”
“His name is Antonio,” Maya corrected.
“Well, I don’t like him. His mustache looks silly.”
Maya collapsed into giggles at this. I thumped my tail once in recognition of all the hilarity. “George?”
“No.”
“Raul?”
“No.”
“Jeremy?”
“Of course not.”
“Ethan?”
I jumped up, and Al and Maya stared at me in surprise. “I guess Ellie likes it,” Al said.
I cocked my head at them, uncertain. Tinkerbell was giving me a surly look. I trotted over to the door, lifting my nose.
“What is it, Ellie?” Maya asked.
There was no sign of the boy, and I was no longer sure I had heard right. Outside, some children rode past on bicycles, but none of them were Ethan. What was I thinking, that Ethan, like Jakob, would suddenly reappear in my life? I knew instinctively something like that would never happen to a dog. Still, Maya had said the boy’s name, hadn’t she? Why would she do that?
I went to Maya for reassurance, then eased down with a sigh. Tinkerbell trotted over and pressed up against me, and I glanced away from Al’s knowing look, a little embarrassed.
Before long we had a new person in the house: little Gabriella, who smelled like sour milk and seemed even less useful than the cat. When she first brought the child home, Maya carefully held Gabriella for me to sniff, but I wasn’t too impressed. From that moment on, Maya would get up frequently during the night and I would go with her and she would clutch Gabriella to her chest while I lay at her feet. The unrestrained love flowing from Maya during those moments always nudged me into a deep, peaceful sleep.
The aches in my bones were familiar to me; I’d felt the same way when I was Bailey and spent most of my time helping Grandpa do chores. Sights and sounds became dim, and this, too, was familiar.
I wondered if Maya knew that the day was soon coming when I would no longer be with them. It only stood to reason that I would die, the way Emmet and Stella died, because that was what happened. When I was Toby, when I was Bailey, it was the same thing.
As I lay in a patch of sun, pondering this, I realized that I had spent my life as a good dog. What I had learned from my first mother had led me to Ethan, and what I had learned from Ethan had enabled me to dive into those black waters and find Geoffrey. Along the way, Jakob had taught me to Find and Show and I had helped save many people.
This had to be why, when I left Ethan, I was reborn as Ellie—everything that I had done, everything that I had ever learned, had been leading up to being a good dog who saved people. It wasn’t as much fun as being a doodle dog, but I now knew why these creatures, these human beings, had so fascinated me from the moment I saw them. It was because my fate was inextricably linked with theirs. Especially Ethan—that was the bond of a lifetime.
Now that I had fulfilled my purpose, I felt sure I was at the end, that there would be no rebirth after this, and I was at peace with that. As wonderful as being a puppy could be, I wouldn’t want to share it with anyone but the boy. Maya and Al had little Gabriella to distract them, making me sort of an afterthought in the family, except, of course, for Tinkerbell, who thought I was the family.
I wondered briefly if cats also came back after death, then dismissed the thought because as far as I had ever been able to tell, cats do not have a purpose.
Embarrassingly, I had started to have trouble containing myself in time to make it outside and was more and more frequently leaving messes in the house. Even worse, Gabriella had the same problem, so that the trash can often contained both of our bowel movements.
Al took me on several front-seat dog car rides to see the vet, who petted me all over while I groaned with pleasure. “You’re a good dog; you’re just getting old,” Al said. I wagged at being a good dog. Maya was very busy with Gabriella, so more and more it was just me and Al, which was okay by me. I could feel his tender affection every time he helped me up so we could take a car ride together.
One day Al had to carry me out into the yard to do my business and I felt the sadness in him break sharply as he came to terms with what this meant. I licked his face in reassurance and put my head in his lap when he sat on the ground to cry.
When Maya came home she brought the baby outside and we all sat together. “You’ve been such a good dog, Ellie,” Maya said over and over. “You’re a hero dog. You saved lives. You saved that little boy Geoffrey.”
A neighbor lady came over and picked up Gabriella. Maya bent over her child, loving her, whispering something in her ear. “Bye-bye, Ellie,” Gabriella said. She held out her hand and the lady stooped so I could lick it.
“Say ‘bye-bye,’ ” the woman said.
“Bye-bye,” Gabriella said again. The lady took Gabriella into the house.
“This is so hard, Al.” Maya sighed.
“I know. If you want, I will do it for you, Maya,” Al said.
“No, no. I need to be there for Ellie.”
Al gingerly picked me up and carried me to the car. Maya got in the backseat with me.
I knew where we were going on this car ride. Groaning with all my aches, I collapsed on the seat, my head in Maya’s lap. I knew where we were going and was looking forward to the peace it would bring me. Maya stroked my head, and I closed my eyes. I wondered if there were anything I would have wanted to do one more time—Find? Swim in the ocean? Stick my head out the car window? These were all wonderful things—I had done them all, though, and that was enough.
I wagged my tail when they laid me on the familiar steel table. Maya was crying, whispering, “You’re a good dog,” over and over, and it was her words, and the sense of her love, that I took with me when I felt the tiny prick by my neck and then was washed away by the wonderfully warm ocean waters.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ TWENTY-SIX }

My new mother had a big, black face and a warm pink tongue. I stared up at her numbly the first time I realized it was all happening again—it didn’t seem possible, not after being Ellie.
I had eight other brothers and sisters, all of them black, all of them healthy and full of play. For the most part, though, I preferred to wander off by myself and ponder what it meant that I was a puppy once more.
It made no sense. I understood how I would never have been with Ethan if, as Toby, I hadn’t learned how to open a gate, and from my days in the culvert learned that there was nothing to fear on the other side of the fence. With Ethan I learned about love and companionship, and felt I was truly accomplishing my purpose, just by accompanying him on his daily adventures. But Ethan also taught me how to rescue from the pond, and so when I was Ellie and learned how to Find and Show I was able to save the little boy from the tunnel of water. I would not have been so good at work if I hadn’t had the experience of being Ethan’s dog—Jakob’s cold distance would have been incomprehensible and painful to me.
But now what? What could possibly happen now that would justify my rebirth as a puppy?
We were in a well-kept kennel with a cement floor, and twice a day a man came in and cleaned it out and took us out into a yard to romp in the grass. Other men and women spent time with us, lifting us and looking at our paws, and while I felt joy coming from them, none radiated that special love that I’d had with Ethan and with Maya and Al.
“Congratulations, you’ve got a fine litter here, Colonel,” one of them said, holding me up in the air as he spoke. “Fetch top dollar.”
“I’m worried about that one you’ve got in your hands, there,” another man replied. He smelled like smoke, and the way my new mother responded to him when he came into the kennel let me know he was her owner. “Doesn’t seem to have much energy.”
“You have the vet look at him?” The man holding me flipped me over, running his thumbs under my lips to expose my teeth. I passively allowed this; I just wanted to be left alone.
“There doesn’t seem to be anything wrong. He just goes off by himself and sleeps,” the one called Colonel replied.
“Well, they can’t all be champions,” the first man said, setting me down.
I felt unhappiness from Colonel as he watched me trot away. I didn’t know what I could have done wrong, but I imagined I wouldn’t be here long anyway. If previous experience had taught me anything, it was that people who had a litter of puppies liked them, but not enough to keep them.
I was wrong, though. A few weeks later, most of my brothers and sisters were taken away by people, leaving just three of us left. I felt a sad resignation from my new mother, who had stopped nursing us but who still lowered her nose affectionately when any of us approached her to lick her face. She had apparently been through this before.
Over the next several days, people came to visit us and play games, like putting us in pillowcases, jangling keys in front of us, and tossing a ball past our noses to see what we would do. None of this struck me as a very rational way to behave around puppies, but everyone seemed very serious about the whole thing.
“Lot of money for one so small,” a man remarked to Colonel.
“Sire’s a two-time national field champion; mother’s placed in state six years in a row, won twice. I think you’ll get your money’s worth,” Colonel said.
They shook hands and then it was just my mother and a sister I’d named Pounce because she always leaped on me as if I couldn’t see it coming. With her other brother gone, Pounce was on me relentlessly, and I found myself wrestling with her in self-defense. Colonel took note of my more active relationship, and I felt something like relief coming off him.
Then Pounce was taken away by a woman who smelled like horses and I was all alone, which I have to admit was how I preferred it.
“Have to lower the price, I guess,” Colonel remarked a few days later. “Shame, that.” I didn’t even raise my head or run over to him to try to convince him not to be disappointed in me, which he apparently was.
In truth, I was feeling heartsick. I just couldn’t understand what was happening to me, why I was a puppy again. The idea of going through training, of learning Find with someone other than Maya or Jakob, of living another life, simply defeated me. I felt like a bad dog.
I didn’t race over to the fence to see people when they visited, not even when they had children—I didn’t want to do that again, either. Ethan was the only child I would ever be interested in.
“What’s wrong with him? Is he ill?” I heard a man ask one day.
“No. He just prefers to be off by himself,” Colonel answered.
The man came into the kennel and picked me up. He had light blue eyes and regarded me kindly. “You’re just a mellow fellow, is that it?” he asked me. I sensed an eagerness inside him, and somehow knew I would be leaving the kennel with him that day. I wandered over to my new mother and gave her a farewell lick on the face. She seemed to know it, too, and nuzzled me in return.
“Give you two fifty,” the man with the blue eyes said. I felt a sharp surprise in Colonel.
“What? Sir, this dog’s paternity—”
“Yeah, I read the ad. Look, it’s for my girlfriend. She’s not going to take him hunting; she just wants a dog. You said you’d make a deal. Now, I have to figure, if you’ve got a three-month-old puppy and breeding dogs is what you do, there’s some reason people don’t want this one. I don’t think you want this one, either. So I can go on-line and adopt a Lab for nothing. I figure, this one has all the papers and the pedigree, I’ll go two hundred and fifty bucks. Anybody else lining up to buy this dog? I don’t think so.”
A little while later, the man was loading me into the backseat of his car. He shook hands with Colonel, who was letting me leave without so much as a farewell pat on the head. The man handed Colonel a small piece of paper. “If you are ever looking for a good deal on a luxury automobile, give me a call,” the man said cheerfully.
I sized up my new owner. I liked that he was letting me be a front-seat dog, but when he gazed over at me I felt nothing like affection coming from him but rather a complete indifference.
I soon found out why: I would not be living with the man, whose name turned out to be Derek. My new home was with a woman named Wendi, who screamed and jumped up and down when Derek brought me into the house. Wendi and Derek immediately started wrestling together, so I found myself exploring the apartment in which I now lived. There were shoes and clothes scattered everywhere, and boxes with dried food stuck to the insides sitting out on a low table in front of the couch. I licked these clean.
Derek didn’t radiate any particular affection toward Wendi, either, even though he hugged her as he was walking out the door. Whenever Al used to leave the house, the quick rush of love he felt toward Maya always made me wag my tail, but this man wasn’t like that at all.
Wendi’s love for me was instant but confusing, a jumble of emotions that I didn’t understand. Over the next several days she named me Pooh-Bear, Google, Snoopdog, Leno, and Pistachio. Then I was Pooh-Bear again, though she soon just stuck with Bear and its variations: Barry-Boo, Bear-Bear, Honey-woney Bear, Cuddle Bear, and Wonder Bear. She would hold me down and kiss me all over and squeeze me as if she couldn’t get enough of me, and then the phone would ring and she’d drop me to the floor to answer it.
Every morning Wendi rummaged through her belongings, her feelings wrapped up in a roiling panic, saying, “I’m late! I’m late!” She would bang out the door and then I’d be alone all day, bored silly.
She put newspapers on the floor, but I couldn’t remember if I was supposed to pee on them or avoid them, so I did a little of both. My teeth were so sore my mouth was watering, so I wound up chewing on a couple of shoes, which sent Wendi into a screaming fit when she saw it. Sometimes she forgot to feed me and then I had no choice but to dive into the trash can for something, and this, too, caused screaming.
As far as I could see, life with Wendi had no purpose whatsoever. We didn’t train together; we didn’t even walk together much—she would open the door and let me run around in the yard at night, but hardly ever during the day, and only then with an odd, furtive fear, as if we were doing something wrong. I became so frustrated, so full of pent-up energy, that I wound up barking, sometimes for hours straight, my voice ringing off the walls and back at me.
One day there was a loud knock on the door. “Bear! Come here!” Wendi hissed at me. She locked me in her bedroom, but I could easily hear a man speaking to her. He sounded mad.
“Not allowed to have a dog! It’s in your lease!” I cocked my head at the word “dog,” wondering if I might be the source of the man’s anger. I hadn’t, as far as I knew, done anything wrong, but all the rules were different at this crazy place, so who could say?
The next time Wendi left for work she broke the pattern, calling me over and sitting me down. She seemed completely unimpressed that I knew how to sit on command without being taught. “Look, Bear-Bear, you can’t bark while I’m gone, okay? I’ll get in trouble with the neighbors. No barking, okay?”
I could feel sadness at the edges of her feelings and wondered what it was all about. Perhaps she was bored all day, too. Why didn’t she just take me with her? I loved car rides! I barked out my pent-up energy all afternoon, but I didn’t chew any shoes.
A day or so later, Wendi opened the door with one hand and pulled a piece of paper off the outside of the door with another. I raced over to her, my bladder bursting, but she didn’t let me out. Instead she looked at the paper and then started shouting angrily. I had no choice but to squat on the kitchen floor, and she smacked me on the bottom with an open palm and then opened the door.
“Here, you might as well go out; everybody knows you’re here anyway,” she muttered. I finished my business in the yard. I was sorry I had made the mess in the kitchen, but I simply hadn’t had an option.
The next day, Wendi slept in late and then we got in the car and went for a long, long car ride. I was a backseat dog because of all the things piled on the front seat, but she did lower the window so I could poke my nose out it. We pulled up in the driveway of a small house with several vehicles in the yard—I could tell by the smell of them that they hadn’t moved in a long time. I lifted my leg on one of them.
An older woman opened the door.
“Hi, Mom,” Wendi said.
“Is that it? It’s huge. You said it was a puppy.”
“Well, I named him Bear; what did you think?”
“This isn’t going to work.”
“Mom! I have no choice! I got an eviction notice!” Wendi yelled angrily.
“Well, what in the world were you thinking, anyway?”
“He was a gift from Derek! What was I supposed to do, take him back?”
“Why would he get you a dog when you can’t have dogs in the apartment?”
“Because I said I wanted him, too, okay, Mom? Are you happy? I said I wanted a dog. God.”
The feelings the two women had toward each other were so complex, there was no way I could sort them out. Wendi and I spent the night in the tiny home, both of us a little afraid: there was a man named Victor who came home when it was dark, and he was so full of rage it made everything feel dangerous and crazy. While Wendi and I slept in a narrow bed in a cramped back room, Victor yelled in another part of the house.
“I don’t want a dog here!”
“Well, it’s my place and I’ll do what I want!”
“What are we supposed to do with a dog?”
“That’s a stupid question; what does anyone do with a dog?”
“Shut up, Lisa; just shut up.”
“It will be okay, Barry-Boo. I wouldn’t let anything happen to you,” Wendi whispered to me. She was so sad I licked her hand in reassurance, but that just made her cry.
The next morning, the two women stood outside and talked next to the car. I sniffed along the door’s edge, waiting to be let inside. The sooner Wendi and I left this place, the better.
“God, Mom, how can you put up with him?” Wendi said.
“He’s not so bad. He’s better than your father.”
“Oh, don’t start.”
They stood silently for a minute. I gave the air a sniff—it carried with it the sour fragrance of the garbage stacked up next to the house, which, frankly, smelled delightful. I wouldn’t mind digging around in there, someday.
“Well, call me when you get home,” the older woman finally said.
“I will, Mom. Take good care of Bear.”
“Yeah.” The woman put a cigarette in her mouth and lit it, blowing smoke out sharply.
Wendi knelt beside me, and her sadness was so strong and familiar I knew what was coming. She stroked my face and told me I was a good dog, and then opened the door and slid inside without letting me in. I watched the car drive away without surprise, though I wasn’t at all sure what I had done. If I was such a good dog, why was I being abandoned by my owner?
“Now what?” the woman standing next to me muttered, puffing her cigarette.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ TWENTY-SEVEN }

Over the next several weeks, I learned to stay away from Victor. Most of the time this was easy, as I was chained to a post in the backyard and Victor never approached me. Often I could see him, though, sitting by a window in the kitchen, smoking and drinking. Sometimes at night he would come out into the backyard to urinate, and that was about the only time he talked to me. “Whatcha looking at, dog?” he’d shout at me. There was never any happiness in his laughter.
The days grew warmer, so for shade I dug out a scoop of earth between the sagging back fence and a machine that sat in the sun.
“Dog got dirt all over my snowmobile!” Victor yelled when he saw what I had done.
“Thing hasn’t run in two years!” the woman, Lisa, screamed back. They yelled at each other a lot. It reminded me a little of when Mom and Dad would get angry and shout, except that at this house I’d sometimes hear a thud and a cry of pain, usually accompanied by the sound of bottles knocking together and falling to the floor.
A nice old lady lived in a place behind the rotten wooden fence, and she started coming over to talk to me through the gaps and holes in the boards. “Such a nice doggy, do you have water today?” she whispered the first really hot morning. She left and soon reappeared with a pitcher, from which she poured a cool stream of water into my dirty bowl. I lapped it up gratefully and licked the thin, shaking hand she extended through the fence hole.
The flies buzzing around my stools landed on my lips and eyes, driving me a little crazy, but mostly I didn’t mind lying in the backyard as long as I could be away from Victor. He scared me; the malevolence flowing from him communicated a real sense of danger. I was reminded of Todd, and the man with the gun who hurt Jakob. I’d bitten both men; did that mean I would someday be biting Victor?
I simply could not believe that my purpose in this life was to attack humans. It was beyond unacceptable. The mere thought made me sick.
When Victor was not home I would bark and Lisa would come out and feed me and let me off the chain a little bit, but I never once barked when he was in the house.
The lady on the other side of the fence brought me little pieces of meat, which she poked through the hole. When I caught the meat as it fell through the air, she laughed with real delight, as if I had performed an amazing trick. It seemed the only purpose I really had, bringing a little bit of joy to a mysterious woman whose face I couldn’t quite see.
“This is a shame, a real shame. They can’t do this to an animal. I’m going to call somebody,” she’d say. I could feel how much she cared about me, though it was strange, because she never came into the yard to play.
One day a truck pulled into the driveway and a woman got out dressed just the way Maya used to dress, so I knew she was a police officer. For a moment it felt as if she had come to fetch me to Find, because she stood at the gate to the backyard and stared at me, writing something down. That didn’t really make sense, though, and when Lisa came outside, her hands on her hips, I lay down. The police officer handed Lisa a piece of paper.
“The dog’s just fine!” Lisa shouted at her, really angry. I sensed the old lady standing behind me, just on the other side of the fence. She was breathing quietly while Lisa raged.
That night Victor yelled about me even more than usual, the word “dog” popping up every few seconds.
“Why don’t we just shoot the damn dog?” he yelled. “Fifty dollars? For what? We’re not doing anything wrong!” Something crashed in the house, a violent noise that made me cower.
“We have to get a longer chain, and clean up all the crap in the yard. Read the ticket!” Lisa shouted back.
“I don’t have to read the ticket! They can’t make us do a damn thing! It’s our property!”
That night, when Victor came out into the yard to urinate, he put his hand out to steady himself against the house and missed, tumbling to the ground. “What are you starin’ at, stupid mutt,” he mumbled at me. “Take care of you tomorrow. Not payin’ any fifty bucks.”
I slunk down low against the fence, not even daring to look back at him.
The next day my focus was distracted by a butterfly who was flittering around in front of my face, so I was startled when Victor suddenly appeared before me.
“You want to go for a car ride?” Victor crooned at me. I didn’t wag at the words; somehow, he made it sound like a threat instead of a treat. No, I thought, I do not want to go for a car ride with you.
“It’ll be fun. See the world,” he said, his laugh turning into a cough that caused him to turn and spit on the ground. He unclipped my chain from the post and led me to his car, yanking me around to the back of it when I stopped at the door. He inserted his key and the trunk popped open. “In ya go,” he said. I sensed his anticipation and waited for a command I understood. “Hokay,” he said. He reached down and gripped me in the loose skin at the back of my neck and above my tail. There was a quick flash of pain as he hoisted me up and then I was in the trunk, sliding on some greasy papers. He unsnapped my leash and let it pool on the floor in front of me. The lid slammed down, and I was in near-total darkness.
I was lying on some smelly, oily rags that reminded me of the night of the fire, when Ethan hurt his legs, and some cold metal tools, so it was hard to get comfortable. One of the tools was easily identifiable as a gun; the acrid fragrance was unmistakable. I turned away from it, trying to ignore the sharp smells.
I lay in a half crouch, my nails extended in a hopeless attempt to keep from slipping from one side to the other in the narrow trunk as the car bounced and swayed.
It was the strangest car ride I’d ever had, and the only one I could remember that wasn’t any fun. Still, car rides always resulted in a new place, and new places were always fun to explore. Maybe there would be other dogs, or maybe I was going back to live with Wendi.
The cramped, dark space soon became quite warm, and I found myself thinking of the room I’d been placed in with Spike, back when my name was Toby and I was taken from the senora. I hadn’t thought about that scary moment in a long time. So much had happened since then. I was a completely different dog now, a good dog who had saved people.
After I spent a long, miserable time in that trunk, the car began to vibrate and ping and dust rose up in the air, a thick, choking cloud. I sneezed, shaking my head. Then the car braked to a sudden halt, sending me crashing against the inside of the trunk. The motor didn’t shut off, though, and we sat for a minute.
Oddly, as soon as we stopped, I could sense Victor inside the car on the other side of the trunk, feel his presence. I had the distinct sense that he was trying to make up his mind about something—there was a feeling of indecisiveness. Then he said something sharply, a word that was muffled, and I heard the front door open. Victor’s feet crunched on gravel as he came around to where I lay cringing, and I smelled him before the trunk popped open and cool air whooshed in around me.
He stared down at me. Blinking, I raised my eyes to his, then looked away so he wouldn’t think I was challenging him.
“All right.” He reached down and twisted at my collar. I expected him to attach my leash, so I was surprised when the collar itself fell away, leaving behind it an odd sensation, as if I were still wearing a collar, only one light as air. “Get on out of there, now.”
My legs were cramped as I stood up. I recognized his hand gestures and jumped out of the car, landing awkwardly. We were on a dirt road, long green grass waving in the sun from both shoulders. Grit from the road painted the insides of my nose and settled on my tongue. I lifted my leg, looking over at him. What now?
Victor got back in his car and the engine made a loud noise. I stared at him in confusion as his tires bit at the road, spitting rocks. He turned the car around, pointing it in the opposite direction. Then he rolled down his window.
“I’m doing you a favor. You’re free, now. Go catch some rabbits or somethin’.” He grinned at me and took off, the car kicking up a huge cloud of dirt behind it.
Baffled, I watched it go. What sort of game was this? Hesitantly, I followed, easily tracking the dust as it drifted through the air.
I knew from my many years of Find that I was quickly losing the scent—Victor must be driving very fast. I gamely picked up the pace, no longer following the dust cloud but focusing instead on the signature smells from the back of his car, where I’d just spent so much time.
I was able to track him when he turned onto a paved road, but when another turn took me to a highway, with cars flashing past at amazing speeds, I knew I’d lost him. So many cars were whizzing by, each one with smells similar to (though not exactly like) Victor’s. Picking out the one scent on which I was doing Find was impossible.
The highway was intimidating; I turned from it and headed back the direction I’d come. With nothing else to do I backtracked along the same scent trail, now faint in the late afternoon breezes. When I came to the dirt road, though, I passed it and kept heading aimlessly up the pavement.
I remembered when I used the trick my very first mother had taught me and escaped from the kennel when I was a puppy the second time, how it seemed like such an adventure to run out in the open, free and full of life. Then the man found me and named me Fella, and then Mom came and took me to Ethan.
This was nothing like that. I didn’t feel free; I didn’t feel full of life. I felt guilty and sad. I had no purpose, no direction. I would not be able to make my way home from here. It was like when Colonel turned away from me, the day Derek took me to live with Wendi—though no feelings came from Colonel, it was nonetheless good-bye. Victor had just done the same thing, except he had handed me to nobody.
The dust and heat made me pant, my thirst itching at my mouth. When I picked up the faint scent of water, it was the most natural thing in the world to turn in that direction, leaving the road and walking through high grasses that tossed themselves back and forth in the breeze.
The smell of water grew stronger, more tantalizing, drawing me through a stand of trees and down a steep bank to a river. I waded in to my chest, biting at the water, lapping it up. It felt glorious.
With my urgent thirst no longer my only concern, I allowed myself to open my senses to my surroundings. The river filled my nose with its wonderful damp smell, and along with the gurgle of the waters I could hear, very faintly, a duck squawking over some imagined outrage. I padded along the bank, my feet sinking into the soft soil.
And then it came to me with such a jolt I lifted my head in surprise, my eyes wide open.
I knew where I was.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ TWENTY-EIGHT }

Along, long time ago I had stood on the banks of this very river, perhaps on this very spot, when Ethan and I had gone for our long walk after Flare, the dumb horse, abandoned us. The scent was unmistakable—doing Find all those years had taught me how to separate out odors, categorize and store them in memory, so that now I could instantly remember this place. It helped that it was summer, the same time of year, and that I was young and my nose so sharp.
I couldn’t possibly fathom how Victor might have known this, or what it meant that he had released me so that I would find the place. I had no sense as to what he wanted me to do. Lacking any better idea, I turned downstream and started trotting, retracing the very same steps Ethan and I had taken, those many years ago.
By the end of the day I was hungrier than I could remember ever being, so hungry my stomach cramped. Wistfully I thought of the old woman’s pale hand poking through the fence and dropping little pieces of meat for me to snatch out of midair; the memory made me drool. The riverbank was choked with vegetation and made for slow going, and it seemed that the hungrier I became, the less certain I was of my course of action. Was this really what I should do, follow this stream? Why?
I was a dog who had learned to live among and serve humans as my sole purpose in life. Now, cut off from them, I was adrift. I had no purpose, no destiny, no hope. Anyone spotting me slinking along the shores at that moment might mistake me for my timid, furtive first mother—that’s how far back Victor’s abandonment had thrown me.
A giant tree that had snapped during the winter and fallen by the water formed a natural hollow on the bank, and as the sun faded from the sky I climbed into this dark place, sore and exhausted and completely puzzled by the changes in my life.
My hunger woke me the next morning, but lifting my nose into the air brought me nothing but the smells of the river and the surrounding forest. I followed the flow of water downstream because I had nothing better to do, but I was moving more slowly than the day before, hobbled by the empty ache in my belly. I thought of the dead fish that sometimes washed up at the pond—why had I merely rolled in them? Why hadn’t I eaten them when I had the chance? A dead fish now would be heavenly, but the river yielded nothing edible.
So miserable was I that when the rough bank gave way to a footpath redolent with the scent of humans I hardly noticed. I ambled lethargically along, only halting when the path rose steeply and joined a road.
The road led to a bridge over the river. I raised my head, the fog lifting from my mind. Sniffing excitedly, I realized I had been here before. Ethan and I had been picked up by a policeman on this very spot and taken for a car ride back to the Farm!
Many years had obviously passed—some small trees I remembered marking at one end of the bridge had grown to be towering giants, so I marked them again. And the rotting planks on the bridge had been replaced. But otherwise, the smells were exactly the same as I remembered.
An automobile rattled by as I stood on the bridge. It honked at me and I flinched back from it. After a minute, though, I hesitantly followed it, abandoning the river for the road ahead.
I had no idea where to go now, but something told me that if I went in this direction, I would eventually arrive in town. Where there was a town there were people, and where there were people there was food.
When the road joined another, the same inner sense told me to turn right, and I did so, though I shrank guiltily away when I sensed a car coming, sliding into the high grasses. I felt like a bad dog, and my hunger only enforced this belief.
I passed many houses, most of them set far back from the road, and often dogs would bark at me, upset by my trespass. Around nightfall, I was slinking past a place with a dog smell when the side door opened and a man stepped out. “Dinner, Leo? Want dinner?” he asked, his voice carrying that deliberate excitement people use when they want to make sure a dog knows something good is happening. A metal bowl was dropped with a loud clang on the top step of a short set of stairs.
The word “dinner” arrested me in my tracks. I stood riveted as a squat dog with enormous jaws and a thick body eased down the steps and did his business a few feet into the yard. The way he moved suggested he was an old dog, and he didn’t smell me. He went back and nosed around in his bowl a little, then reached up and scratched the door. After a minute, it opened back up.
“Are you sure, Leo? Are you sure you can’t eat anything?” the man asked. There was a sadness in his voice that reminded me of the way Al cried in the yard, that last day I spent with him and Maya. “Okay, then. Come on in, Leo.”
The dog groaned but couldn’t seem to pull his back legs up the last step, so with tender gentleness the man bent and picked the dog up, carrying him inside.
I felt myself powerfully drawn to the man and was struck with the sudden thought that this could be a home for me. The man loved his dog, Leo, and would love me. He would feed me, and when I was old and weak he would carry me back inside his home. Even if I didn’t do Find or school or any other work at all, if all I did was devote myself to the man in the house, I would have a place to live. This crazy, purposeless life I had led as Bear would be over.
I approached the house and did the sensible thing: I ate Leo’s dinner. After the weeks of tasteless, gritty dog food at Lisa and Victor’s home, the succulent, meaty meal in Leo’s bowl was the best thing I’d ever tasted. When it was gone I licked the metal, and the clang of the bowl against the side of the house alerted the dog inside, who woofed warningly. I heard him approach his side of the door, wheezing, a low growl mounting in volume as Leo became more sure I was there.
It didn’t sound as if Leo would be very receptive to the idea of me living in his house.
I bolted off the steps, so that by the time the light flicked on to illuminate the yard I was already back in the trees. The message in Leo’s hostile growl was clear; I would have to find my own home. And that was okay—with my hunger sated, my longing to live here had gone away.
I slept in some tall grasses, tired but much more content, my stomach full.
I was hungry again by the time I found town, but I knew it was the right place. The approach fooled me; I passed so many houses, their streets bustling with cars and children, where my memory told me there should have been only fields. But then I came upon the place where Grandpa used to sit with his friends and spit vile juices out of his mouth, and it smelled the same, though there were sheets of old wood over the windows and the building next to it was gone, replaced by a raw, muddy hole. At the bottom of the hole was a machine that pushed great piles of dirt in front of it as it moved.
Humans can do that, take down old buildings and put up new ones, the way Grandpa built a new barn. They alter their environment to suit themselves, and all dogs can do is accompany them and, if they’re lucky, go for car rides. The volume of noise and all the new smells told me that humans here had been very busy changing their town.
Several people stared at me as I trotted down the street, and each time I felt like a bad dog. I had no real purpose, now that I was here. A bag of trash had fallen out of a big metal bin, and it was with a huge sense of guilt that I tore the bag open and pulled out a piece of meat covered in a sticky, sweet sauce of some kind. Rather than eat the meal right there, I ran behind the metal bin, hiding from people just as my first mother had taught me.
My wanderings eventually brought me to the dog park. I sat at the edge, under some trees, and watched enviously as people threw soaring disks for their dogs to catch in the air. I felt naked without a collar and realized I should hang back, but the way the dogs were wrestling in the middle of the big yard drew me like a magnet, and before I could stop myself I was out there with them, rolling and running and forgetting myself in the sheer joy of being a dog at play.
Some dogs didn’t come out to wrestle; they stayed with their people or sniffed along the perimeter of the park, pretending that they didn’t care how much fun we were having. Some dogs were drawn to tossed balls or flying disks, and all of them eventually were called away by their people and given car rides. All except me, but none of the people seemed to notice or care that I didn’t have anyone there with me.
Toward the end of the day, a woman brought a big female yellow dog to the park and let her off the leash. By this time I was exhausted from all the play and was just lying in the yard, panting, watching two other dogs wrestle. The yellow dog excitedly joined them, interrupting the play for sniffing and tail wagging. I lurched to my feet and went to greet this new arrival and was shocked by what I smelled along her fur.
It was Hannah. The girl.
The yellow dog grew impatient with my feverish examination of her scent and spun away, eager to play, but I ignored her inviting bow. I excitedly dashed across the park to the dog’s owner.
The woman on the bench was not Hannah, though she, too, carried Hannah’s smell. “Hello, doggy, how are you?” she greeted me as I approached, my tail wagging. The way she sat reminded me of Maya, shortly before Gabriella the baby arrived. There was a sense of tiredness, excitement, impatience, and discomfort, all mixed together and focused on the belly just below her hands. I thrust my nose at her, drinking in Hannah’s scent, separating it from the woman, from the happy yellow dog, from the dozens of odors that clung to a person and were a jumble to a dog not trained in Find. This was a woman who had spent time with the girl very recently; I was sure of it.
The yellow dog came over, friendly but a bit jealous, and I finally allowed myself to be drawn into a tussle.
That night I folded my black body into the shadows, watching alertly as the last cars pulled out of the parking lot, leaving the dog park in silence. My stealth came to me so easily it was as if I’d never been taken from the culvert, as if I were still there with Sister and Fast and Hungry, learning from our first mother. Hunting was easy; trash cans were brimming with containers full of delicious scraps, and I avoided headlights and pedestrians with equal caution, hidden, dark, feral once more.
But there was a purpose to my life, now, a sense of direction even more powerful than the one that had brought me to town in the first place.
If, despite all the time and changes, the girl Hannah was here, then maybe the boy was here, too.
And if Ethan was still here, I would track him. I would Find Ethan.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ TWENTY-NINE }

After more than a week, I was still living in the dog park. Most days the woman with Hannah’s scent would bring her happy yellow canine—Carly was the dog’s name—to the park. The smell of the girl reassured me, somehow, made me feel that Ethan was nearby, though Carly never had the boy’s smell on her fur, not once. Seeing the woman and Carly always brought me racing joyously out from the bushes; it was the high point of my day.
Otherwise, I was a bad dog. Regulars to the park were starting to act suspicious toward me, staring at me and radiating caution as they pointed at me and spoke to each other. I no longer approached their dogs for play.
“Hey there, fella. Where’s your collar? Who are you here with?” a man asked me, reaching out with gentle hands. I danced back from him, sensing his intention to grab me and not trusting the name Fella. That’s when I felt the deep suspicion in him and realized my first mother had been right all along—to remain free, one had to steer clear of people.
My thought was to find the Farm the way I’d found the town, but that proved more difficult than I would have supposed. Whenever I’d gone for a car ride to town with Ethan or Grandpa, I’d always used the smell of the goat ranch as my point of reference, a beacon for my nose. But all traces of the goats had mysteriously vanished from the air. Also vanished was the bridge whose rattle signaled the divide between car ride and car ride in town—I couldn’t find the place at all, not by smell, nor by any other sense. Padding along quiet streets after dark, I’d be confident of my direction, and then a large building would block both my path and my nose with the smells of hundreds of people and dozens of cars. A fountain of water in front of the place added even more confusion to the air, the mist carrying with it a faint chemical smell, like when Maya washed clothes. I lifted my leg against the thing, but that provided only momentary comfort.
At night, my black fur felt like protection from discovery. I melted into shadows, hiding from cars, emerging when there was no one around, always on Find, always concentrating on what I could remember about the Farm and its scent when I breathed in the night air. Frustratingly, I couldn’t pick up a trace of anything.
Meals came from trash cans and the occasional dead animal by the side of the road—rabbits were best, crows the worst. I had competition: an animal the size of a small dog, with a very heavy scent, thick, bushy tail, and dark black eyes, prowled the bins, adroitly climbing up their sides. Whenever I encountered one of these things it snarled at me and I gave it a wide berth, seeing nothing in those teeth and claws but an invitation to pain. Whatever they were, they were obviously too stupid to realize I was much bigger and that they should be afraid of me.
Also stupid were the squirrels in the park, who descended from their trees and bounced around in the grass as if the entire area weren’t protected by dogs! I had come very close to catching one, except they always darted up trees and then sat up there complaining. Carly the yellow dog often joined me in the hunt, but even together we were thus far unsuccessful. I knew if we kept trying, one day we’d capture one, though I wasn’t sure exactly what we would do then.
“What’s the matter, honey? Why are you so skinny? Don’t you have a home?” Carly’s owner asked me. I picked up the concern in her voice and wagged my tail, wishing she would just take me for a car ride and drop me off at the Farm. When she stood up off the bench, struggling to get to her feet, I sensed a hesitation in her, as if she was going to invite me to walk with them. I knew it would be okay with Carly, who always ran out into the dog park looking specifically for me, but I pulled away from the woman’s magnetic concern, acting as if I had someone nearby who loved me and was calling me. I trotted a dozen yards away before I stopped and glanced behind me—she was still watching me, one hand on her hip, the other hand resting on her stomach.
That afternoon a truck pulled into the parking lot with such a strong dog smell I instantly picked it up from where I lay in the grass at the edge of the park. A policeman got out and chatted with a few dog owners, who pointed at various places in the park. The policeman pulled out a long pole with a noose on the end, and I felt a chill go through me. I knew exactly who that pole was for.
The policeman walked around the edges of the park, gingerly peering into the bushes, but by the time he approached my hiding place I was gone, deep in the woods that lay beyond the park.
My panic kept me running; when the woods petered out into a neighborhood filled with dogs and children, I avoided human contact and did my best to stay in the foliage. I was far from town when I finally doubled back, taking comfort in the fact that my ally, darkness, was descending from the sky.
When the smell of dozens of dogs drifted toward me, I turned in that direction, curious. A volley of barking was coming from the back of a large building, a couple of dogs in cages howling at each other. A shift in the wind and they were barking at me, the timbre in their voices changing.
I had been here before: this was where the nice man the vet took care of me when I was Bailey. It was, in fact, the very last place I had ever been with Ethan. I decided to give the place a wide berth. I scooted around to the front of the building, and as I crossed the driveway I stopped dead, quivering.
When I was Bailey, a new baby donkey named Jasper had joined old, unreliable Flare in the yard one day. Jasper grew up to be much smaller than a horse but was built along similar lines, and he made Grandpa laugh and Grandma shake her head. I’d been nose-to-nose with Jasper; I’d sniffed him carefully when Grandpa brushed him; I’d played with him as best as I could. I knew Jasper’s smell like I knew the Farm, and there was no mistaking that scent now, right here in the driveway. Tracking back toward the building, I could find a concentrated area in the parking lot where the scent was overwhelming and fresh—there was even a dusting of straw and dirt with Jasper painted all over it, lying thick in the gravel.
The dogs were still baying at me, outraged that I was free while they were penned, but I ignored the racket. Drinking in the rich mixture of smells in the dirt, I trailed down the driveway and out onto the road.
The first time a car rushed up behind me, honking as its lights played out into the night, I was startled, so focused was I on following Jasper’s scent. I veered into the ditch by the side of the road, cringing from the accusatory wail of the car as it sailed past.
After that, I was more careful. While I was focused on Jasper, my ears were aware of the sounds of automobiles, and I slunk away from them long before their lights picked me up.
Though the track was long, it was easier than Find Wally—for more than an hour I traced in a straight line, finally making a left turn, and then another. Jasper’s scent was weaker the farther I went, which meant I was trailing him backward and that there was a danger I might lose him altogether. But after a right turn I no longer needed the scent; I knew where I was. Right here was where the train crossed the road, the train that had stopped Ethan’s car the first day he left to do college. I picked up the pace, Jasper’s scent validating the instinctive turn I took to the right. Soon I was passing Hannah’s house, which curiously emitted no scent of the girl herself, though the trees and the moss-covered brick wall by the road were still the same.
Turning up the driveway to the Farm was such a natural move it felt as if I had just been there yesterday.
Jasper’s smell tracked right up to a large white trailer, a pile of grit and hay beneath it. His odors were painted everywhere and there was a new horse watching me with drowsy suspicion as I sniffed along the fence, but I was no longer interested in horses. Ethan, I could smell Ethan; he was everywhere. The boy must still live on the Farm!
Never before in my entire existence had I felt the joyous excitement that coursed through me then: I was dizzy with it.
The lights were on in the house, and as I circled around to the side, staying on the small grassy hill, I could see through the window into the living room. A man Grandpa’s age sat in a chair, watching television, but he didn’t look like Grandpa. Ethan was not in the room, nor was anyone else.
The dog door was still there in the outer metal door, but the big wooden door on the inside was firmly shut. Frustrated, I scratched at the metal door, then barked.
I heard vibrations within the house as someone approached. My tail was wagging so hard I couldn’t sit down; it pulled my whole body back and forth. The light blinked on overhead, and the wooden door made a familiar scratching sound before it eased open. The man I’d seen sitting in the chair stood on the threshold, frowning down at me through the glass.
I scratched again at the metal; I wanted him to let me in so I could run in and be with the boy.
“Hey,” he said, his voice muffled by the closed door. “Stop that.”
I heard the rebuke and tried to sit obediently, but my butt bounced right back up.
“What do you want?” he asked finally. I heard the question in his voice, wondered what he was asking me.
Then I realized I didn’t have to wait for him to make up his mind—with the inner door open, the dog door was free. I lowered my head and pushed through the plastic curtain, bursting into the house.
“Hey!” the old man shouted, surprised.
I was surprised, too. The second I was in the house, I clearly smelled the person blocking my way. I knew who he was: I would recognize that scent anywhere.
Unmistakably Ethan.
I’d found the boy.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ THIRTY }

Though Ethan was standing, I tried to leap into his lap. I lunged up, straining to lick him, nuzzle him, climb on him. I couldn’t stop the sobs coming from my throat; I couldn’t keep my tail from flying.
“Hey!” he said, backing away and blinking. He tried to steady himself on his cane, and then he sat down heavily on the floor. I jumped on him, licking his face. He pushed my mouth away. “Okay, okay,” he grumbled. “Stop it. Okay.”
The feel of his hands on my face was the most wonderful sensation I’d ever encountered in my life. I half-closed my eyes with the pleasure of it. “Get back now; get back,” he said.
The boy laboriously climbed back to his feet. I pressed my face into his hand, and he briefly stroked me. “Okay. Goodness. Who are you?” He snapped on another light, peering at me. “Whoa, you’re a skinny one. Doesn’t anybody feed you? Huh? Are you lost or something?”
I could sit there all night and just listen to his voice and feel his gaze on me, but it wasn’t to be. “Well, look, you can’t come inside.” He opened the outer door and held it. “Out now, go on outside.”
It was a command I recognized, so, reluctantly, I went. He stood and looked at me through the glass. I sat expectantly. “You’re going to have to go home, dog,” he said. I wagged. I knew I was “go home,” I was finally, finally “go home,” on the Farm where I belonged, with Ethan, where I belonged.
He shut the door.
I waited obediently until the strain was just too much and then yipped a bark full of impatience and frustration. When there was no response, I yipped again, giving the metal door a good pawing as well.
I’d lost count of how many times I’d barked when the door opened again. Ethan was carrying a metal pan, succulent odors wafting off of it. “Here,” he muttered. “You hungry, buddy?”
As soon as he set the pan down I dove into the dinner, bolting the food.
“It’s mostly lasagna. I don’t have much in the way of dog food around here. You look like you’re not fussy, though.”
I wagged.
“You can’t live here, though. I can’t have a dog; I don’t have time for it. You’re going to have to go home.”
I wagged.
“Good lord, when was the last time you ate? Don’t eat so fast; you’ll make yourself sick.”
I wagged.
When I was done, Ethan bent slowly down to pick up the pan. I licked his face. “Yuck, you have really bad breath, you know that?” He wiped his sleeve on his face and stood back up. I watched him, ready to do anything he wanted. Go for a walk? Go for a car ride? Play with the stupid flip? “Okay then. You go on home; dog like you obviously isn’t a mutt. Somebody must be looking for you. Okay? Good night.”
Ethan shut the door.
I sat there for a few minutes. When I barked, the light over my head went off with a click.
I went around to the small grassy hill by the side of the house and looked into the living room. Ethan was moving slowly across the floor, leaning on his cane, turning off one light after another.
My boy was so old, I never would have recognized him. But now that I knew it was him, the gait was familiar, if more stiff, and the way he turned his head and peered out into the night before snapping off the final lamp, ears cocked as if listening for something, was pure Ethan.
I was confused over being an outside dog, but the food in my belly and the exhaustion in my limbs soon overtook me and I curled up on the spot, tucking my nose near my tail even though the night was warm. I was home.
When Ethan came outside the next morning I shook myself off and ran over to him, trying to restrain myself from showering so much affection on him. He stared at me. “Why are you still here, huh, boy? What are you doing here?”
I followed him into the barn, where he let a horse I’d never seen before out into the yard. Naturally, the dumb animal didn’t react when he saw me—just gazed at me the way Flare used to, no comprehension registering. I’m a dog, you idiot! I marked the yard while Ethan gave the horse some oats. “How are you doing today, Troy? You miss Jasper, don’t you? You miss your pal Jasper.”
Ethan was talking to the horse, which I could have told him was a complete waste of time. He stroked the horse’s nose, calling him Troy and mentioning the name Jasper more than once, though when I went into the barn the donkey wasn’t there, just his smell. Jasper’s scent was particularly strong in the trailer.
“That was a sad day, the day I had to take Jasper in. He lived a good long time, though. Forty-four is pretty old for a little donkey.”
I felt sorrow in Ethan and nuzzled his hand. He regarded me absently, his mind somewhere else. He gave Troy a final pat and went back into his house.
A few hours later I was sniffing around the yard, waiting for Ethan to come out to play, when a truck swung up into the driveway. As soon as it stopped I recognized it as the one I’d seen in the parking lot of the dog park, and the man who eased himself out of the front seat was the same policeman I’d smelled who’d been probing the bushes with the pole and noose, which he now grabbed from the back of the truck.
“You won’t need that!” Ethan called, stepping outside. I turned from the man and went wagging over to my boy. “He’s really cooperative.”
“Just wandered up last night?” the policeman replied.
“That’s right. Look at the ribs on the poor animal. You can tell he’s a purebred, but someone sure hasn’t been treating him right.”
“We’ve heard reports of a nice-looking Labrador running loose down at the city park. Wonder if this is the same one,” the policeman said.
“Don’t know about that. Pretty far,” Ethan replied dubiously.
The man opened a cage on the back of his truck. “You think he’ll just go in? I’m not in a mood to chase him down.”
“Hey, dog. Up here. Okay? Up here.” Ethan patted the inside of the open cage. I regarded him curiously for a moment and then gave a little leap, landing lightly inside. If that’s what the boy wanted me to do, that’s what I’d do. I would do anything for my boy.
“Appreciate it,” the policeman said. He swung the cage door shut.
“So what happens now?” Ethan asked.
“Oh, dog like that will be adopted out pretty easy, I imagine.”
“Well . . . would they call me, let me know? He’s a really nice animal; I’d like to know he’s okay.”
“I don’t know about that. You’ll have to call the shelter, ask them to notify you. My job is just to pick them up.”
“That’s what I’ll do, then.”
The policeman and the boy shook hands. Ethan came over to my cage as the policeman slid into the front of the truck. I put my nose up against the bars, trying to make contact, breathing in Ethan’s scent. “You take care of yourself, okay, buddy?” Ethan said softly. “You need a nice home with kids to play with. I’m just an old man.”
I was astounded when we drove off, Ethan still standing there, watching us go. I couldn’t help myself, I started barking, and I barked and barked all the way down the driveway and down the road past Hannah’s and beyond.
This new development left me bewildered and heartbroken. Why was I being taken from Ethan? Was he sending me away? When would I see him again? I wanted to be with my boy!
I was taken to a building full of dogs, many of whom barked with fear all day long. I was put in a cage by myself, and within a day I was wearing a stupid plastic collar and had a familiar pain in my groin—was this why I was here? When was Ethan coming to take me for the car ride home?
Every time someone passed my cage I leaped to my feet, expecting it to be the boy. As the days wore on, I sometimes gave voice to my frustration, joining the nonstop chorus of barking that rang off the walls. Where was Ethan? Where was my boy?
The people who fed me and took care of me were gentle and kind, and I have to admit that I so craved human contact I went to them whenever one of them opened my cage, offering my head for stroking. When a family with three young girls came to visit me in a small room, I climbed into their laps and rolled on my back, so desperate was I to feel human hands on my body.
“Can we keep him, Daddy?” one of the girls asked. The affection pouring off the three children made me squirm.
“He is as black as coal,” the mother of the family said.
“Coaly,” the father said. He held my head, looking at my teeth, and then lifted my front paws one by one. I knew what this meant; I’d been through this type of examination before. A cold fear grew in my stomach. No. I couldn’t go home with these people. I belonged to the boy.
“Coaly! Coaly!” the girls chanted. I regarded them numbly, their adoration no longer welcome.
“Let’s go to lunch,” the man said.
“Dad-eee!”
“But then when we’re done, we’ll come back and take Coaly for a car ride,” he finished.
“Yay!”
I heard the words “car ride” clearly but was relieved when, after a lot more hugging from the girls, the family left. I was put back in my cage, and curled up for a nap, a little mystified. I remembered when Maya and I did school, how it was my job to sit and let children pet me. Maybe this was the same thing, only now the children would be coming to me.
I didn’t mind; what was important was that I’d been wrong, the family had not been here to take me away with them. I would wait for my boy. Human motivation is unfathomable to dogs, so I wasn’t sure why the two of us were separated, but I knew that when the time came, Ethan would Find me.
“Good news, boy, you’ve got a new home,” the woman who fed me said as she passed in a bowl of fresh water. “They’ll be back soon, and we’ll get you out of this place for good. I knew it wouldn’t take long.” I wagged and let her scratch my ears, licking her hand, sharing her happy spirits. Yes, I thought in reply to her good mood, I am still here.
“I’m going to call that man who brought you in. He’ll be happy to hear we found you a good family.”
When she left I circled around a few times and settled down for a nap, back to waiting patiently for the boy.
Half an hour later I sat bolt upright out of my sleep. A man’s voice had just come to me, an angry voice.
Ethan.
I barked.
“My dog . . . my property . . . I’ve changed my mind!” he was shouting. I stopped barking and held perfectly still—I could sense him on the other side of the wall, and I stared at the door, willing it to open so I could smell him. And a minute later it did, the woman who had given me water leading the boy down the hallway. I put my paws up on the cage, wagging.
The woman was furious; I could sense it. “Those children are going to be so disappointed,” she said. She opened my cage and I lunged out, crushing myself against the boy, wagging and licking and whimpering. The woman’s anger left her as she watched. “Well then,” she said. “My goodness.”
Ethan stood at the counter for a few minutes, writing something down while I sat patiently at his feet and tried not to paw him. Then we were outside the door and in the front seat of the car for a car ride!
Though it had been a long time since I’d had the wonderful thrill of a car ride with my nose out the window, what I wanted most was to put my head in Ethan’s lap and feel his hand stroke me, so that’s what I did. “You really do forgive me, don’t you, buddy?”
I gave him an alert look.
“I put you in jail, and you don’t care at all.” We drove a bit in comfortable silence. I wondered if we were headed to the Farm. “You are a good dog,” the boy finally said. I wagged with pleasure. “Okay, well, let’s stop and get you some dog food.”
Eventually we did go back to the Farm, and this time when Ethan opened the front door to the house he held it open for me so I could trot right in.
That night, after dinner, I lay at his feet, more content than I could ever remember being.
“Sam,” he said to me. I raised my head expectantly. “Max. No. Winston? Murphy?”
I wanted so much to please him, but I had no idea what he was asking of me. I found myself wishing he would command me to Find; I loved the idea of demonstrating the kind of work I could do.
“Bandit? Tucker?”
Oh, I knew what this was about. I gazed at him expectantly, waiting for him to make up his mind.
“Trooper? Lad? Buddy?”
There! I knew that word. I barked and he started in surprise.
“Whoa, is that your name? Did they used to call you Buddy?”
I wagged.
“Well, okay, Buddy. Buddy, your name is Buddy.”
By the next day I was fully comfortable responding to “Buddy.” It was my new name. “Here, Buddy,” he would call. “Sit, Buddy! Well, hey, somebody trained you pretty well, looks like. Wonder how you came to find yourself here; were you abandoned?”
For the most part, I was afraid to leave Ethan’s side, that first day. I was surprised when he went to Grandpa and Grandma’s room to sleep, but didn’t hesitate when he patted the mattress, jumping up on the soft bed and stretching out in a groan of pure luxury.
Ethan got out of bed several times that night to use the bathroom, and I loyally went with him on each occurrence, standing in the doorway while he did his business. “You don’t have to follow me every time, you know,” he told me. He also didn’t sleep in as late as he used to but was up with the sunrise, fixing both of us a breakfast.
“Well, Buddy, I’m semi-retired now,” Ethan said. “I still have a few clients I consult with, and I’ve got a phone call scheduled with one of them this morning, but after that we’ve got the day free. I was thinking the two of us should work in the garden today. That sound good to you?”
I wagged. I liked the name Buddy, I decided.
After breakfast (I had toast!) the boy talked on the phone, so I explored the house. Upstairs felt little used—the rooms held a musty odor, with barely any evidence of Ethan’s presence. His room was still the same, but Mom’s room had no furniture and was full of boxes.
A downstairs closet was firmly shut, but as I sniffed along the bottom crack a familiar scent wafted out.
The flip.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ THIRTY-ONE }

There was a sadness in the boy, a deep hurt that was new to him and far more substantial than the pain that had settled in his leg.
“It’s just me living here; I don’t know who you’re looking for,” Ethan told me as I examined every corner of the house. “I always meant to get married—came close to it a couple of times, in fact—but it never seemed to work out. Lived with a woman in Chicago for a few years, even.” The boy stood and stared sightlessly out the window, and the sadness in him increased. “John Lennon said that life’s what happens when you’re making other plans. I guess that sums it up, pretty much.” I went over to him and sat, lifting a paw to press against his thigh. He dropped his gaze down to me, and I wagged. “Well, hey, Buddy, let’s get you a collar.”
We went upstairs to his bedroom, and he pulled a box down off a shelf. “Let’s see. Okay, here it is.”
A jangle sounded from the box as Ethan lifted a collar out of the box and shook it. The noise was so familiar I shivered. As Bailey, I had made that same jangling sound whenever I had moved. “This used to belong to my other dog, a long, long time ago. Bailey.”
I wagged at the name. He showed it to me and I sniffed it, picking up the ever so faint scent of another dog. Me, I realized. I was smelling me—it was a very odd sensation.
He shook the collar a few times. “Now that was a good dog, that Bailey,” he said. He sat for a moment, lost in thought, and then looked at me. When he spoke, his voice was rough, and I felt a surge of strong emotions come from him—sadness and love and regret and mourning. “I guess maybe we’d better get you your own collar, Buddy. It wouldn’t be right to make you try to live up to this one. Bailey . . . Bailey was a pretty special dog.”
I was tense when the car ride the next day led us into town—I did not want to go back to the cage, in the place with all the barking dogs. But it turned out we were just picking up bags of food and a stiff collar for my neck, to which Ethan affixed some jingling tags when we got home.
“It says: ‘My name is Buddy. I belong to Ethan Montgomery,’ ” he told me, holding one of the tags in his hand. I wagged my tail.
After several such trips to town, I learned to relax my guard—it no longer felt as though Ethan were going to abandon me. I stopped haunting his side and took to wandering around on my own, stretching my territory out to include all of the Farm, paying special attention to the mailbox and additional places by the road where other male dogs had been.
The pond was still there, and there was still a flock of stupid ducks living on its banks. For all I knew, they were the very same ducks—it hardly mattered; they acted the same when they saw me, jumping into the water in alarm and then swimming back to look at me. I knew there was no point in chasing them, but I did so anyway, just for the sheer joy of it.
Ethan spent most of his day on his knees in a big, moist plot of ground behind the house, and I learned that he did not want me lifting my leg in that area. He talked to me while he played with the dirt, so I listened, wagging when I heard my name.
“Soon we’ll be going to the farmers’ market on Sundays; now, that’s a fun time. My tomatoes fetch a pretty price,” he said.
One afternoon I got bored with the digging in the dirt game and wandered into the barn. The mysterious black cat was long gone—there was no scent of her left anywhere, and I felt a little disappointed, somehow. She was the only cat I’d ever met whom I enjoyed knowing.
No, that wasn’t really true. Though I’d mostly found it irritating, Tinkerbell’s unabashed affection for me had ultimately been gratifying.
In the back of the barn I found a pile of old blankets, molding and rotting. When I pushed my nose into them and breathed deep, though, I could very faintly pick up a familiar, comforting smell. Grandpa. This was where we used to come to do our chores together.
“It’s good for me, to get out, take walks,” Ethan told me. “I don’t know why I didn’t think to get a dog before. I need the exercise.” Some evenings we’d circle the farm on a well-worn path that smelled of Troy the whole way, and others we’d stroll down the road in one direction or the other. I always felt something from the boy when we passed Hannah’s place, though he never stopped or went up to the house to see her. I wondered why I could no longer smell her, and remembered Carly, in the dog park, positively covered in Hannah’s scent.
One such evening, as we passed Hannah’s house, I was struck by something that hadn’t before occurred to me: the pain I could feel burrowed deep inside the boy was very similar to what I had sensed inside Jakob, long ago. There was a lonely grief, the sense of having said good-bye to something.
Sometimes the mood lifted completely, though. Ethan loved to take his cane and smack it against a ball in the yard, sending it flying down the driveway for me to pursue and return. We played this game often, and I would have worn the pads off my feet to keep him so happy. When I caught the ball on a high bounce, snagging it out of the air like a piece of meat dropped through a fence, he would laugh in delight.
Other times, though, the dark swirl of sadness would overtake him. “I never thought my life would turn out this way,” he said to me one afternoon, his voice hoarse. I nuzzled him, trying to cheer him up. “All by myself, no one to share my days with. Made a lot of money, but after a while the job didn’t give me much pleasure, so I more or less quit, and that didn’t give me any pleasure, either.” I ran and got a ball and spat it into his lap, but he turned his face away, ignoring it, his pain so sharp it made me want to yelp. “Aw, Buddy, things just don’t always go as planned.” He sighed. I dug my nose after the ball, shoving it up between his legs, and finally was rewarded with a weak toss, which I pounced upon. His heart wasn’t in it. “Good dog, Buddy,” he said absently. “I guess I don’t feel like playing right now.”
I was frustrated. I had been a good dog, I had done Find, and I was back with the boy. But he wasn’t happy, not the way most people were at the end of Find, when Jakob or Maya and the others would give them blankets and food and reunite them with their families.
That’s when it occurred to me that my purpose in this world had never been just to Find; it had been to save. Tracking down the boy was just part of the equation.
When I lived with Jakob, he harbored this same dark feeling inside. But when I saw him later, when Maya and I were doing school, he had a family—a child and a mate. And then he was happy, happy the same way that Ethan used to be when he and Hannah sat on the front porch and giggled with each other.
For Ethan to be rescued, he needed to have a family. He needed a woman and to have a baby with her. Then he would be happy.
The next morning, while Ethan worked the dirt, I trotted down the driveway and out onto the road. Though the goat ranch was gone, I’d learned new scent markers on my car rides, so that finding my way into town was as easy as touring the back acres of the Farm. Once in town I quickly located the dog park, though I was disappointed Carly was nowhere around. I wrestled with some dogs in the yard, no longer afraid of being spotted by people—I was Ethan’s dog, now, I was a good dog, I had a collar, and my name was Buddy.
Late that afternoon, Carly came bounding up to me, thrilled to see that I was back in the park. As we played I luxuriated in Hannah’s scent, fresh and strong throughout Carly’s fur.
“Well, hello, doggy, I haven’t seen you in a while. You sure look handsome,” the woman on the bench said. “Glad they started feeding you!” She felt tired, and when she stood after just half an hour she pressed her hands into her back. “Whew. I am so ready,” she breathed. She began making her way slowly down the sidewalk, Carly coursing back and forth in front of her. I stuck with Carly, the two of us sending several squirrels scattering in terror.
When after two blocks the woman turned up a walk and opened the door to a house, I knew better than to follow Carly inside. I settled down on the stoop after the women shut the door, content to wait. I’d played this game before.
A few hours later, a car swung into the driveway and a woman with white hair slid out of the front seat. I trotted down the steps to meet her. “Well, hello there, dog, are you here to play with Carly?” she greeted me, putting out a friendly hand.
I knew the voice before I smelled her: Hannah. My tail wagging, I rolled around at her feet, begging for her hands to touch me, and they did. The door to the house opened.
“Hi, Mom. He followed me home from the dog park,” the woman said, standing in the doorway. Carly bounded out and tackled me. I shouldered her away; I wanted the girl’s attentions right now.
“Well, where do you live, huh, boy?” Hannah’s hands fumbled for my collar, so I sat. Carly shoved her face in the way. “Look out, Carly,” Hannah said, pushing Carly’s head to the side. “ ‘My name is Buddy,’ ” Hannah said slowly, holding my tag.
I wagged.
“ ‘I belong to’—Oh my.”
“What is it, Mom?”
“ ‘Ethan Montgomery.’ ”
“Who?”
Hannah stood. “Ethan Montgomery. He’s a man . . . he’s a man I used to know, a long time ago. Back when I was growing up.”
“Like an old boyfriend, that kind of man?”
“Yes, well, sort of like that, yes.” Hannah laughed softly. “My, um, first boyfriend.”
“Your first? Oh really. And this is his dog?”
“His name is Buddy.” I wagged. Carly chewed on my face.
“Well, what should we do?” the woman asked from the doorway.
“Do? Oh, I guess we should call him. He lives out near the old place, just down the road from there. You sure are a long way from home, Buddy.”
I’d had enough of Carly, who didn’t seem to grasp the whole situation here and was busy trying to climb on top of me. I snarled at her and she sat down, her ears back, then jumped on me again. Some dogs are just too happy for their own good.
I had utter faith that Hannah would take me back to the boy and that when Ethan saw her the girl would no longer be lost to him. It was complicated, but I was doing a sort of Find/Show, only it would be up to the two of them to put it all together.
Which they did. An hour or so later, Ethan’s car pulled into the driveway. I jumped up from where I had Carly pinned to the grass and ran over to him. Hannah was sitting on the stoop, and she stood uncertainly as Ethan got out of the car. “Buddy, what in the world are you doing here?” he asked. “Get in the car.”
I bounded into the front seat. Carly put her paws up on the car door, straining to smell me through the window as if we hadn’t been nose-to-nose for the past four hours.
“Carly, get down!” Hannah said sharply. Carly dropped.
“Oh, it’s okay. Hi there, Hannah.”
“Hi, Ethan.” They stared at each other a minute, and then Hannah laughed. Awkwardly they hugged, their faces coming together briefly.
“I have no idea how this happened,” the boy said.
“Well, your dog was in the park. My daughter Rachel goes there every afternoon—she’s a week overdue, and the doctor wants her to spend a little time on her feet every day. She’d do jumping jacks, if it would help.” Hannah felt nervous to me, but it was nothing like what was happening to Ethan—his heart was pounding so hard I could hear it in his breath. The emotions coming off him were strong and confusing.
“That’s what I don’t understand. I wasn’t in town. Buddy must have gone all that way by himself. I have no idea what would make him do such a thing.”
“Well,” Hannah said.
They stood there looking at each other. “Would you like to come in?” she finally asked.
“Oh no, no. I need to get back.”
“Okay then.”
There was more standing. Carly yawned, sitting down to scratch herself, oblivious to the tension between the two people.
“I was going to call you, when I heard about . . . Matthew. I’m sorry for your loss,” Ethan said.
“Thank you,” Hannah replied. “That was fifteen years ago, Ethan. Long time.”
“I didn’t realize it had been so long.”
“Yes.”
“So are you visiting, for the baby?”
“Oh no, I live here now.”
“You do?” Ethan seemed startled by something, but, as I looked around, I saw nothing surprising except that a squirrel had come down out of the trees and was digging around in the grass a few houses down. Carly was looking the wrong way, I noted with disgust.
“I moved back two years ago next month. Rachel and her husband are staying with me while they finish adding a room to their place for the baby.”
“Oh.”
“They’d better hurry,” Hannah said with a laugh. “She’s . . . big.”
They both laughed. This time, when the laughter stopped, something like sadness came off of Hannah. Ethan’s fear bled away, and he, too, seemed overtaken with an odd gloom.
“Well, it was nice to see you, Ethan.”
“It was great to see you, too, Hannah.”
“Okay. Bye.”
She turned to go back into her house. Ethan came around the front of the car. His mood was angry and scared and sad and conflicted. Carly still didn’t see the squirrel. The girl was on the top step. Ethan opened the car door. “Hannah!” he called.
She turned. Ethan took a deep, shuddering breath. “I wonder if you’d like to come over for dinner sometime. Might be fun for you; you haven’t been to the Farm in a long time. I, uh, put in a garden. Tomatoes . . .” His voice trailed off.
“You cook now, Ethan?”
“Well. I heat things up, pretty well.”
They both laughed, and the sadness lifted from them as if it had never been there.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
{ THIRTY-TWO }

After that day, I saw Hannah and Carly a lot. They came to the Farm to play more and more frequently, which was fine by me. Carly understood that the Farm was my territory, something she could hardly fail to recognize, since I’d lifted my leg on every tree on the place. I was the Top Dog, and she didn’t try to challenge me, though she was irritatingly oblivious to the benefits that the natural order bestowed upon our admittedly small pack. Mostly, she just acted like we were playmates and nothing more.
She was, I concluded, just not very bright. Carly seemed to think that she could catch the ducks if she just crept up on them slowly enough, which was an exercise in pure stupidity. I would watch in utter disgust as she would slink through the grass, her belly in the dirt, moving just inches at a time, while all the while the mother duck watched her with an unblinking eye. Then a quick lunge, a huge splash, and the ducks would be airborne for a few feet, landing just ahead of Carly in the pond. She’d swim for about fifteen minutes, working so hard her body would nearly be lifted out of the water, and would bark in frustration whenever she felt she was within biting distance and the ducks flapped their wings and jumped through the air a few feet out ahead. When Carly finally gave up, the ducks would determinedly swim after her, quacking, and sometimes Carly would spin around and head back out, thinking she had the ducks fooled. I had no patience with any of it.
Ethan and I occasionally went to Carly’s house, too, but this wasn’t as fun, as all there was to do was play in the backyard.
The next summer, dozens of people assembled at the Farm, sitting in folding chairs to watch me perform a trick I’d first perfected with Maya and Al, which was to walk between the chairs at a slow, dignified pace, this time up to where Ethan had built some raised wooden steps so everyone could see me. He untied something from my back, and he and Hannah talked and kissed and everyone laughed and applauded at me.
After that, Hannah lived with us on the Farm. The place was transformed so that it was almost like Maya’s mama’s house, with people arriving for visits all the time. Ethan brought home a couple more horses to join Troy in the yard, smaller ones, and the children who came to visit loved to ride them, even though, in my opinion, horses are unreliable creatures who will leave you stranded in the forest at the first sign of a snake.
Carly’s owner, Rachel, soon showed up with a tiny baby named Chase, a little boy who loved to climb on me and grab my fur and giggle. I lay still when this happened, just as I had when Maya and I did school. I was a good dog; everyone said so.
Hannah had three daughters, and each of them had children, too, so that at any given time I might have more playmates than I could count.
When there were no visitors, Ethan and Hannah often sat out on the front porch, holding hands while the evening air turned cool. I lay at their feet, sighing with contentment. The pain in my boy was gone, replaced by a serene, uplifting happiness. The children who came to visit called him Granddaddy, and each one made his heart soar when they did so. Hannah called him “my love” and darling as well as just plain Ethan.
About the only thing involved with the new arrangement that was less than perfect was the fact that when Hannah started sleeping with Ethan I was summarily dismissed from the bed. At first I assumed this was a mistake—there was, after all, plenty of room for me between them, which was where I preferred to lie. But Ethan ordered me off onto the floor, even though there was nothing wrong with the bed upstairs and the girl could just as easily sleep there. In fact, after I performed my trick in the yard for all the people to see, Ethan had beds put in all the upstairs rooms, even Grandma’s sewing room, but apparently none of them were good enough for Hannah.
Just to test it, though, every single night I put my paws on the bed and slowly raised myself up like Carly inching through the weeds toward the ducks. And every night Ethan and Hannah would laugh.
“No, Buddy, you get down,” Ethan would say.
“You can’t blame him for trying,” Hannah often replied.
When the snow fell, Hannah and Ethan would put a blanket over themselves and sit and talk in front of the fire. When it was Happy Thanksgiving or Merry Christmas, the house would be so full of people I often felt in danger of being stepped on, and I could have my pick of beds where the children were delighted to have me sleep with them. My favorite child was Rachel’s boy, Chase, who reminded me a little of Ethan, the way he hugged me and loved me. When Chase stopped trying to walk on all fours like a dog and started running on two legs, he liked to explore the Farm with me while Carly fruitlessly hunted ducks.
I was a good dog. I had fulfilled my purpose. Lessons I had learned from being feral had taught me how to escape and how to hide from people when it was necessary, scavenging for food from trash containers. Being with Ethan had taught me love and had taught me my most important purpose, which was taking care of my boy. Jakob and Maya had taught me Find, Show, and, most important of all, how to save people, and it was all of these things, everything I had learned as a dog, that had led me to find Ethan and Hannah and to bring them both together. I understood it now, why I had lived so many times. I had to learn a lot of important skills and lessons, so that when the time came I could rescue Ethan, not from the pond but from the sinking despair of his own life.
The boy and I still walked around the Farm in the evenings, usually with Hannah, but not always. I craved the alone time with Ethan, when he would talk to me, his gait slow and careful on the uneven path. “What a great time we all had this week; didn’t you have fun, Buddy?” Sometimes he used his cane to smack the ball down the driveway and I would joyously tear after it, chewing it a little before dropping it at his feet for another whack.
“You’re such a great dog, Buddy, I don’t know what I would do without you,” Ethan said on one such evening. He took a deep breath, turning to survey the Farm, waving at a picnic table full of children, who waved back.
“Hi, Granddaddy!” they shouted.
His sheer enjoyment, his love of life, made me bark with delight. He turned back to me, laughing.
“Ready for another one, Buddy?” he asked me, raising his cane to hit the ball again.
Chase wasn’t the last baby to join the family; they just kept coming. Chase was about the age Ethan had been when I first met him when his mother, Rachel, brought home a little girl they variously called the Surprise, the Last One for Sure, and Kearsten. As usual, they held the baby down for me to sniff, and as usual, I tried to be appreciative—I never knew what they expected from me under these circumstances.
“Let’s go play ball, Buddy!” Chase suggested. Now that I could respond to!
One beautiful spring day I was home alone with Ethan, napping drowsily while he read a book in the warm sunlight streaming through the picture window. Hannah had just left in the car, and, at that particular moment, our home was uncharacteristically empty of visiting family members. Suddenly my eyes snapped open. I turned and looked at Ethan, who met my gaze curiously. “What did you hear, Buddy?” he asked me. “Did a car pull up?”
There was something wrong with the boy; I could sense it. With a slight whimper, I got to my feet. Anxiety washed through me. He’d gone back to his book but laughed in surprise when I put my paws on the couch, as if to climb on top of him. “Whoa, Buddy, what are you doing?”
The sense of impending disaster increased. I barked helplessly.
“Are you okay? Do you need to go out?” He gestured toward the dog door, then pulled his glasses off and rubbed his eyes. “Whew. Little dizzy, there.”
I sat. He blinked, looking off into the distance. “Tell you what, old boy, let’s you and me go back and take a nap.” He got to his feet, swaying unsteadily. Panting nervously, I followed him back to the bedroom. He sat on the bed and groaned. “Oh,” he said.
Something tore inside of his head; I could feel it. He sank back, sucking in a deep breath. I jumped on top of the bed, but he didn’t say anything, just stared at me, glassy-eyed.
There was nothing for me to do. I nuzzled his slack hand, fearfully conscious of the strange forces loose inside him. His breathing was shallow, shuddering.
After an hour, he stirred. Something was still really wrong with him, but I could feel him gathering his resources, struggling to break free of whatever gripped him the way I had once struggled to find the surface of the cold water from the storm drain, when I had the little boy Geoffrey in my teeth.
“Oh,” Ethan panted. “Oh. Hannah.”
More time passed. I whined softly, feeling the fight continue within him. Then his eyes opened. At first they were unfocused, confused, and then they lit upon me, widening.
“Why, hello, Bailey,” he shocked me by saying. “How have you been? I’ve missed you, dog.” His hand groped for my fur. “Good dog, Bailey,” he said.
It wasn’t a mistake. Somehow, he knew. These magnificent creatures, with their complex minds, were capable of so much more than a dog, and the sure conviction coming from him now let me know that he had put it all together. He was looking at me and seeing Bailey.
“How about the day of the go-karts, eh, Bailey? We sure did show them, that day. We sure did.”
I wanted to let him know that yes, I was Bailey, I was his one and only dog, and that I understood that whatever was happening inside him was letting him see me as I truly was. It dawned on me how I might do this, and in a flash I was off the bed and down the hall. I reached up and grabbed the knob to the closet just the way my first mother had taught me, and the old mechanism turned easily in my mouth, the door popping open. I nosed it aside and dove into the pile of musty things at the bottom, tossing aside boots and umbrellas until I had it in my mouth: the flip.
When I jumped back on the bed and dropped the thing in his hand, Ethan started as if I had just awakened him. “Wow! Bailey, you found the flip; where did you get this, boy?”
I licked his face.
“Well now. Let’s just see.”
What he did next was the last thing I wanted. His body trembling with the effort, he hauled himself over to the window, which had been cranked open to admit the fresh air. “Okay, Bailey. Get the flip!” he called. With an awkward motion he managed to fumble the flip onto the windowsill and push it outside.
I didn’t want to leave his side, not even for a second, but I couldn’t disobey him when he repeated his command. My toenails scrabbling on the carpet, I bounded across the living room floor and out the dog door, peeling around the side of the house and scooping the flip up from the bushes where it had fallen. I spun and raced back to the house, resenting every second the stupid flip was keeping me apart from my boy.
When I returned to the bedroom, I saw that things had taken a turn for the worse. Ethan had sat on the floor where he had been standing, and his eyes were unfocused, his breathing labored. I spat out the object I’d brought him—the time for that had passed. Carefully, so as not to hurt him, I crept forward, putting my head in his lap.
He would be leaving me soon; I could hear it in the slowing of his raspy breathing. My boy was dying.
I could not join him on his journey and did not know where it would lead him. People are vastly more complicated than dogs and served a much more important purpose. The job of a good dog was ultimately to be with them, remaining by their sides no matter what course their lives might take. All I could do now was offer him comfort, the assurance that as he left this life he was not alone but rather was tended by the dog who loved him more than anything in the whole world.
His hand, weak and trembling, touched the fur above my neck. “I will miss you, doodle dog,” Ethan said to me.
I put my face to his, I felt his breath and tenderly licked his face while he struggled to focus his gaze on me. Eventually, he gave up, his eyes sliding away. I didn’t know if he saw me now as Bailey or Buddy, but it didn’t matter. I was his dog, and he was my boy.
I felt the consciousness ebb from him as gradually as daylight leaves the sky after sunset. There was no pain, no fear, nothing but the sense that my brave boy was going where he was supposed to go. Through it all, I could feel him aware of me lying in his lap until, with one last, shuddering breath, he was aware of nothing at all.
I lay there quietly with my boy in the stillness of that spring afternoon, the house silent and empty. Soon the girl would be home, and, remembering how hard it had been for everyone to say good-bye to Bailey and Ellie and even the cats, I knew she would need my help to face life without the boy.
As for me: I loyally remained right where I was, remembering the very first time I had ever seen the boy and then just now, the very last time—and all the times in between. The deep aching grief I knew I would feel would come soon enough, but at that moment mostly what I felt was peace, secure in the knowledge that by living my life the way I had, everything had come down to this moment.
I had fulfilled my purpose.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
 
 
 
 
This is a work of fiction. All of the characters, organizations, and events portrayed in this novel are either products of the author’s imagination or are used fictitiously.
A DOG’S PURPOSE
Copyright © 2010 by W. Bruce Cameron
All rights reserved.
A Forge Book
Published by Tom Doherty Associates, LLC
175 Fifth Avenue
New York, NY 10010
www.tor-forge.com
Forge® is a registered trademark of Tom Doherty Associates, LLC.
ISBN 978-1-4299-6027-4
First Edition: July 2010
Printed in the United States of America
0   9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2   1
eISBN 9781429960274
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set

A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
To all the people who work so hard to rescue, foster, and save animals who find themselves lost in the world
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
ONE
As I sat in the sun on the wooden dock that jutted out into the pond, I knew this to be true: my name was Buddy, and I was a good dog.
The fur on my legs was as black as the rest of me, but down at my paws it had, over time, become tinged with white. I had lived a long and full life with a boy named Ethan, spending many lazy afternoons on this very dock, here on the Farm, enjoying a swim or barking at the ducks.
This was the second summer without Ethan. When he died I felt a pain inside me much sharper than any other I’d ever felt. Now the pain was less, more like a stomachache, but I still felt it all the time. Only sleep soothed it away—in my sleep, Ethan ran with me through my dreams.
I was an old dog and knew that someday soon a much deeper sleep would come, as it had always come for me before. It came for me when I was named Toby, in my silly first life, when I had no real purpose but to play with other dogs. It came for me when I was named Bailey, when I first met my boy and loving him became my whole focus. It came for me when I was Ellie, when my job was to Work, to Find people, and to Save them. So when the deeper sleep came for me next, at the end of this life, as Buddy, I felt sure that I would not live again, that I had fulfilled my purpose and there was no reason for me to be a dog anymore. So whether it happened this summer or the next didn’t matter. Ethan, loving Ethan, was my ultimate purpose, and I had done it as well as I could. I was a good dog.
And yet …
And yet as I sat there I was watching one of the many children from Ethan’s family striding unsteadily toward the end of the dock. She hadn’t been walking very long in her life, so every step was a wobble. She wore white puffy pants and a thin shirt. I pictured jumping in the water and pulling her to the surface by that shirt, and I let out a soft whimper.
The child’s mother’s name was Gloria. She was on the dock, too, lying motionless on a reclined chair with bits of vegetables placed on both of her eyes. Her hand had been holding a leash that went to the little girl’s waist, but the leash had gone slack in Gloria’s hand and was now trailing behind the child as she headed for the end of the dock and the pond beyond.
As a puppy my reaction to a limp leash was always to explore, and this little girl’s response was just the same.
This was Gloria’s second visit to the Farm. The previous time was in the wintertime. Ethan had still been alive, and Gloria had handed the baby to him and called him Grandpa. After Gloria left, Ethan and his mate, Hannah, said the name Gloria out loud many times over many nights, with sad emotions underlying their conversations.
They also said the name Clarity. The baby’s name was Clarity, though often Gloria called her Clarity June.
I felt certain that Ethan would want me to watch over Clarity, who always seemed to be getting into trouble. Just the other day I had sat by miserably while the baby crawled under the bird feeder and stuffed handfuls of fallen seeds into her mouth. It was one of my main jobs to terrorize the squirrels when they did this, but I wasn’t sure what to do when I caught Clarity at it, even though I knew that for a child to eat birdseed was probably against a rule. And I was right about that—when I finally barked a few times, Gloria sat up from where she had been lying facedown on a towel and she was very angry.
I glanced at Gloria now. Should I bark? Children often jumped into the pond but never when they were as young as this little girl, though the way she was going it seemed inevitable she was going to get wet. Babies were only allowed in the water with adults holding them. I looked back toward the house. Hannah was outside, kneeling and playing with flowers up by the driveway, too far away to do anything if Clarity fell in the pond. I was pretty sure Hannah would want me to watch over Clarity, too. It was my new purpose.
Clarity was getting closer to the edge. I let out another whimper, a louder one.
“Hush,” Gloria said without opening her eyes. I didn’t understand the word, but the sharp tone was unmistakable.
Clarity didn’t even look back. When she got to the edge of the dock, she teetered briefly and then fell straight off the front.
My nails dug into the wood as I lunged off the side of the dock and into the warm water. Clarity bobbed up a little, her little limbs working frantically, but her head was mostly below the pond’s surface. I reached her in seconds, my teeth gently snagging the shirt. I pulled her head out of the water and turned for the shore.
Gloria started screaming, “Oh my God! Clarity!” She ran around and waded into the water just as my feet found purchase on the mucky bottom of the pond.
“Bad dog!” she shouted as she snatched Clarity from me. “You are a bad, bad dog!”
I hung my head in shame.
“Gloria! What happened?” Hannah shouted as she came running up.
“Your dog just knocked the baby into the water. Clarity could have drowned! I had to jump in to save her and now I’m all wet!”
The distress in everyone’s voices was very plain.
“Buddy?” Hannah said.
I didn’t dare look at her. I wagged my tail a little and it splashed the surface of the pond. I didn’t know what I had done wrong, but clearly I had upset everyone.
Everyone, that is, except Clarity. I risked a glance at her because I could sense her straining in her mother’s arms, her little hands reaching out toward me.
“Bubby,” Clarity gurgled. Her pants were streaming water down her legs. I dropped my eyes again.
Gloria blew out some air. “Hannah, would you mind taking the baby? Her diaper’s all wet and I want to lie on my stomach so I’ll be the same color on both sides.”
“Sure,” Hannah said. “Come on, Buddy.”
Thankful we had that over with, I leaped out of the water, wagging my tail.
“Don’t shake!” Gloria said, dancing away from me on the dock. I heard the warning in her voice, though I wasn’t sure what she was trying to tell me. I shook myself from head to tail, ridding my fur of the pond water.
“Yuck, no!” Gloria shrieked. She sternly lectured me, pointing her finger and using a whole string of words I didn’t understand, though she did say “bad dog” a few times. I lowered my head, blinking.
“Buddy, come,” Hannah said. Her tone was gentle. I followed obediently as we went up to the house.
“Bubby,” Clarity kept saying. “Bubby.”
As we reached the front steps to the house I paused because of the odd taste in my mouth. I’d had it before—it reminded me of the time when I pulled a thin metal pan out of the trash that was lined with sweet flavors and, after licking it clean, experimentally crunched up the pan itself. The metal tasted bad, so I spat it out. This particular taste, though, I couldn’t spit out—it sat on my tongue and invaded my nose.
“Buddy?” Hannah stood on the front porch, regarding me. “What’s wrong?”
I wagged and bounded up onto the porch, leading the way into the house when she opened the door.
It was always fun to walk through that door, whether it was going inside or heading out, because it meant we were doing something new.
Later I stood guard while Hannah and Clarity played a new game. Hannah would carry Clarity to the top of the stairs and then watch while Clarity turned around and went down the stairs in a backward crawl. Usually Hannah would say “Good girl,” and I would wag my tail. When Clarity got to the bottom step I would lick her in the face and she would giggle; then she would raise her arms to Hannah. “Mo’,” she would beg. “Mo,’ Gramma. Mo’.” When she said this Hannah would lift her up and kiss her and then take her to the top of the stairs to do it again.
When I felt satisfied they were safe I went to my favorite spot in the living room, circled, and lay down with a sigh. A few minutes later Clarity came over to me, dragging her blanket. She had the thing in her mouth that she chewed on but never swallowed.
“Bubby,” she said. She dropped to all fours and crawled the last few feet to me and curled up against me, pulling her blanket against herself with her tiny hands. I sniffed her head—nobody in the world smelled like Clarity. Her scent filled me with a warm feeling that nudged me into a nap.
We were still sleeping when I heard the screen door shut and Gloria come into the room. “Oh, Clarity!” she said. I blearily opened my eyes as Gloria reached down and snatched the little girl away from where she’d been sleeping. The place where Clarity had been snuggled against me felt oddly cold and empty without her there.
Hannah came out from the kitchen. “I’m making cookies,” she said.
I eased myself to my feet because I knew that word. Wagging, I went over to sniff Hannah’s sweet-smelling hands.
“The baby was sleeping right up against the dog,” Gloria said. I heard the word “dog” and, as usual, it sounded as if I had made her mad. I wondered if this meant no cookies.
“That’s right,” Hannah said. “Clarity cuddled right up against him.”
“I would just prefer it if my child not sleep next to a dog. If Buddy had rolled over, Clarity might have been crushed.”
I watched Hannah for some clue as to why my name had just been mentioned. She put her hand to her mouth. “I … all right, of course. I won’t let it happen again.”
Clarity was still asleep, her little head against Gloria’s shoulder. Gloria handed the baby to Hannah, then sat with a sigh at the kitchen table. “Is there any ice tea?” she asked.
“I’ll get you some.” Holding the baby, Hannah went to the kitchen counter. She got things out, but I didn’t see any cookies, though I could sure smell them, sugary and warm in the air. I sat obediently, waiting.
“I just think it would be better if, when Clarity and I are visiting, the dog stays out in the yard,” Gloria said. She took a sip of her drink as Hannah joined her at the table. Clarity was stirring and Hannah patted her a little.
“Oh, I couldn’t do that.”
I lay down with a groan, wondering why people always did this: talked about cookies but didn’t give any to a deserving dog.
“Buddy is part of the family,” Hannah said. I drowsily raised my head to look at her, but still no cookies. “Did I ever tell you how he brought me and Ethan together?”
I froze at the word “Ethan.” His name was mentioned less and less often now in this house, but I couldn’t hear it pronounced without thinking about his smell or his hand in my fur.
“A dog brought you together?” Gloria replied.
“Ethan and I had known each other as children. We were high school sweethearts, but after the fire—you know about the fire that crippled his leg?”
“Your son may have mentioned it; I don’t know. Mostly Henry just talked about himself. You know how men are.”
“Okay, after the fire, Ethan … there was just something dark inside him, and I wasn’t old enough, mature enough I mean, to help him deal with it.”
I sensed something like sadness inside Hannah and I knew she needed me. Still under the table, I went over and put my head in her lap. She stroked my fur gently, Clarity’s bare feet hanging limply above me.
“Ethan had a dog then, too, a wonderful golden retriever named Bailey. That was his doodle dog.”
I wagged at hearing the name Bailey and “doodle dog.” Whenever Ethan called me doodle dog his heart would be full of love and he would hug me and I would kiss his face. I missed Ethan more powerfully in that moment than I had in a long time—and I could feel Hannah missing him, too. I kissed the hand petting me, and Hannah lowered her eyes and smiled at my head in her lap.
“You’re a good dog, too, Buddy,” Hannah said. I wagged some more at being called a good dog. It seemed very possible that this whole conversation could lead to cookies after all.
“Anyway, we went our separate ways. I met Matthew, we were married, and I had Rachel and Cindy, and, of course, Henry.”
Gloria made a small noise, but I didn’t look at her. Hannah was still stroking my head and I didn’t want her to stop.
“After Matthew died I decided I missed my kids and I moved back to town. And one day, when Buddy was probably a year old, he was in the dog park and he followed Rachel home. He had a tag on his collar, and when I looked at it—well, I was pretty surprised to see Ethan’s name on it. But not half as surprised as Ethan was when I phoned him! I had been thinking of dropping by to see him, but probably wasn’t ever going to do it. Silly, but things hadn’t ended well between us and even though it was a long time ago, I felt … I don’t know, shy, maybe.”
“Tell me about bad breakups. I’ve had plenty of those, for sure.” Gloria snorted.
“Yes, I’m sure,” Hannah said. She looked down in her lap and smiled at me. “When I saw Ethan, after all those years, it was as if we had never been apart. We belonged together. I wouldn’t say this to my kids, of course, but Ethan was my one, my soul mate. And yet if it hadn’t been for Buddy, we might never have even met again.”
I loved hearing my name and Ethan’s name spoken out loud, and I felt Hannah’s love and her sadness as she smiled at me.
“Oh, look at the time,” Hannah said then. She stood and handed Clarity to Gloria. The baby stirred, poking a tiny fist in the air and yawning. With a clatter the cookies came out of the hot oven and there was a wave of delicious smell, but Hannah didn’t give me any.
As far as I was concerned, having cookies so tantalizingly close to my nose without being given a treat of any kind was the big tragedy of the day.
“I’ll be gone for maybe an hour and a half,” Hannah told Gloria. She reached up to where she kept some toys called keys and I heard the metallic jangling sound I associated with riding in the car. I watched alertly, torn between my desire for a car ride and my duty to stay by the cookies.
“You stay here, Buddy,” Hannah said. “Oh, and Gloria, keep the door to the cellar closed. Clarity loves to climb down any set of stairs she can find and I had to put some rat poison out down there.”
“Rats? There are rats?” Gloria said sharply. Clarity was fully awake now, struggling in her mother’s arms.
“Yes. This is a farm. Sometimes we get rats. It’s okay, Gloria. Just keep the door closed.” I picked up a little anger in Hannah and watched her anxiously for signs of what was going on. As was typical in situations like this, though, the strong emotions I sensed were never explained—people are like that; they have complex feelings that are just too difficult for a dog to comprehend.
When she left, I followed Hannah out to her car. “No, you stay here, Buddy,” she said. Her meaning was clear, particularly when she slid inside the car and shut the door on me, her keys clinking. I wagged, hoping she might change her mind, but once the car was headed down the driveway I knew there would be no car ride for me that day.
I slipped back inside through the dog door. Clarity was in her special chair, the one with the tray in front of it. Gloria was hunched over, trying to spoon some food into Clarity’s mouth, and Clarity was mostly spitting it back out. I’d tasted Clarity’s food and didn’t blame her one bit. Often Clarity was allowed to put small bits of food into her mouth with her own hands, but when it came to the really bad stuff her mother and Hannah still had to force it on her with a spoon.
“Bubby!” Clarity gurgled, slapping her hands against the tray in happiness. Some of the food splattered on Gloria’s face and she stood up abruptly, making a harsh noise. She wiped her face with a towel and then glared at me. I lowered my eyes.
“I can’t believe she just lets you wander around like you own the place,” she muttered.
I never had any hope that Gloria would ever give me a cookie.
“Well, not while I’m in charge,” she said. She regarded me silently for several seconds and then sniffed. “Okay. Come here!” she ordered.
I obediently followed her over to the cellar door. She opened it. “In you go. Go!”
I figured out what she wanted and went through the doorway. A small carpeted area at the top of the stairs was just big enough for me to turn around and look at her.
“You stay,” she said, shutting the door. Instantly it was much darker.
The steps that led down were wooden and made a squeaking noise as I descended. I wasn’t down in the cellar very often and could smell new and interesting things down there that I wanted to explore. Explore and maybe eat.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
TWO
Though the light in the cellar was very dim, the walls and corners were rich with thick, damp odors. Wooden shelves held musty bottles, and a cardboard box, gone soft in the sides, was filled with clothing that held a marvelous jumble of smells from the many children who had been on the Farm over the years. I inhaled deeply, remembering running through summer grasses and plunging through winter snows.
Despite the wonderful scents, though, there was nothing I was interested in eating.
After a time, I heard the easily identifiable sound of Hannah’s car coming up the driveway. With a click, the door at the top of the cellar stairs opened.
“Buddy! Come here right now!” Gloria snapped at me.
I hastily made for the stairs, but I stumbled in the gloom and a pain hit my left rear leg, sharp and deep. I stopped, looking up at Gloria, who was framed in the light in the open doorway. I wanted her to tell me that whatever had just hurt me, it was okay.
“I said come!” she said more loudly.
I whimpered a little as I took my first step, but I knew I had to do what she said. I kept the weight off the leg and that seemed to help.
“Would you come on?” Gloria took two steps down, reaching for me.
I didn’t crave having Gloria’s hand on my fur and I knew she was mad at me for something, so I tried to shy away from her.
“Hello?” Hannah called, her voice echoing upstairs. I put more speed into my gait now, and the leg felt a little better. Gloria turned and she and I entered the kitchen together.
“Gloria?” Hannah said. She put down her paper bags and I went over to her, wagging. “Where’s Clarity?”
“I finally got her down for a nap.”
“What were you doing down in the cellar?”
“I was, I was looking for some wine.”
“You were? Downstairs?” Hannah put her hand down and I sniffed it, smelling something sweet. I was so glad she was home.
“Well, I thought, wine cellar.”
“Oh. Well, no, I think we have some and it’s in the cabinet under the toaster.” Hannah was looking at me and I wagged. “Buddy? Are you limping?”
I sat. Hannah took a few steps back and called me and I went over to her.
“Does he look like he’s limping to you?” Hannah asked.
“How would I know?” Gloria said. “My expertise is children, not dogs.”
“Buddy? Did you hurt your leg?” I wagged with the sheer pleasure of her attention. Hannah leaned down and kissed me between the eyes and I gave her a lick right back. She went over to the kitchen counter.
“Oh, you didn’t want any cookies?” she asked.
“I can’t have cookies,” Gloria said scornfully.
I had never before heard the word “cookies” said so negatively.
Hannah didn’t say anything, but I heard her give a tiny sigh as she began to put away the things she’d brought home in her sacks. Sometimes she’d have a bone when she came home, but I could smell that today she hadn’t been able to find any. I watched her alertly, though, just in case I was wrong.
“I don’t want Clarity to have any, either,” Gloria said after a minute. “She’s chubby enough.”
Hannah laughed, then stopped. “You’re serious.”
“Of course I’m serious.”
After a moment, Hannah turned back to the grocery sacks. “Okay, Gloria,” she said quietly.
A few days later Gloria was sitting in the sun in the front yard with her knees drawn up close to her chest. She had small balls of fur between her toes and was touching them with a tiny stick coated with an eye-watering chemical. Each toe was darker after she was done with it.
The smell was so powerful it overcame the strange taste in my mouth, which otherwise had become stronger and more persistent with each passing day.
Clarity had been playing with a toy but was on her feet and tottering away. I looked over at Gloria, who had her eyes narrowed at her toes and the very tip of her tongue sticking out of her mouth.
“Clarity, don’t wander off,” Gloria said absently.
In the several days that Clarity had been on the Farm she had gone from having a slow, wobbling walk that dropped down to all fours every so often to being able to take off at a near run. She was headed purposefully toward the barn and I followed right behind her, wondering what I should do.
The horse named Troy was in the barn. When Ethan was alive he sometimes rode Troy, which I didn’t approve of very much because horses are not reliable like dogs. One time when he was young Ethan fell off of a horse—nobody ever fell off a dog. Hannah didn’t ever ride Troy.
We went into the barn, Clarity and I, and I heard Troy snort at our presence. The air was filled with the smell of hay and horse. Clarity marched right over to the kennel where Troy stayed when he was in the barn. Troy moved his head up and down in a quick jerk and snorted again. Clarity reached the bars of the gate and gripped them in her tiny hands. “Horsey,” she said excitedly. Her little knees were pumping up and down with glee.
I could feel a rising tension coming off of Troy. The horse didn’t care for me much, and I had noticed from previous visits that when I was in the barn it made him nervous. Clarity reached her hand through the bars to try and pet Troy, who shied away.
I went up to Clarity and touched my nose to her to let her know that if she wanted to pet something there was nothing better than a dog. Her eyes were wide and bright and her mouth was open and she was panting excitedly, her eyes not leaving Troy.
A loop of chain kept the gate shut, but as Clarity leaned against the bars the slack in the loop made for a gap and I knew what she was going to do before she did it. Making happy noises, she slid sideways along the gate up to the gap and then pressed her way through it.
Right into Troy’s kennel.
Troy was pacing now, back and forth, swinging his head and snorting. His eyes were wide open and his hooves seemed to be hitting the ground harder and harder. I could smell his agitation; it popped to the surface of his skin, like sweat.
“Horsey,” Clarity said.
I put my head into the gap and pushed hard, trying to squeeze through. As I did I felt the pain in my left rear leg again, but I ignored it and concentrated on getting my shoulders through, and then my hips. Panting, I made it into the kennel as Clarity started forward, her hands raised up at Troy, who was stamping and snorting. I could see he was going to step on the baby.
I was afraid of the horse. He was big and powerful and I knew that if he hit me with one of his hooves it would hurt me. My instincts were telling me to back up, to get out of there, but Clarity was in danger and I had to do something, something now.
I swallowed my fear and barked at that horse with all the fury I possessed. I tightened my lips, showing my teeth, and lunged forward, putting myself between Clarity and Troy. Troy was making a harsh screaming sound, lifting his front hooves briefly off the ground. I backed up, still barking, pushing Clarity into the corner with my hips. Troy’s pacing was more frantic and his hooves were striking the ground close to my face and I kept snarling and snapping my teeth at him.
“Buddy? Buddy!” I could hear Hannah calling frantically from outside the barn. Behind me, I felt Clarity’s little hands dig into my fur to keep me from knocking her over. The horse might strike me, but I was going to stay between him and the baby. A hoof whistled past my ear and I bit at it.
And then Hannah was rushing in. “Troy!” She unfastened the loop of chain and swung the gate open and the horse bolted past her and through the big double doors and out into the big yard.
I could feel the fear and anger in Hannah now. She reached down and scooped up Clarity in her arms. “Oh, honey, you’re okay, you’re okay,” she said.
Clarity clapped her hands together, grinning. “Horsey!” she exclaimed happily.
Hannah’s other hand came down and touched me and I was relieved to know I wasn’t in any trouble.
“Yes, a big horsey, you’re right, honey! But you shouldn’t be in here.”
When we were back outside, Gloria came up to us. She was walking strangely, taking steps as if her feet hurt her.
“What happened?” she asked.
“Clarity went into Troy’s stall. She could have been … It was terrifying.”
“Oh no! Oh, Clarity, that was so bad!” Gloria reached out and grabbed Clarity, hugging the baby to her chest. “Oh, you must never, ever frighten Mommy like that again, do you understand?”
Hannah folded her arms. “I’m not sure how she got up here without you knowing.”
“She must have followed the dog.”
“I see.” Hannah still felt angry to me, and I lowered my head a little, reflexively feeling remorseful.
“Would you take her?” Gloria asked, holding Clarity out at arm’s length.
The pain in my hip stayed with me, after that, not so bad that I was hobbled, but a dull ache that never left. There was nothing wrong with the leg, though, nothing to lick.
At dinner I liked to stay under the table and clean up when things fell on the floor. When there were lots of children around I could usually count on several morsels, but at that time there was just Clarity and, as I’ve said, her food tasted wretched, though naturally if some fell I ate it anyway. I was lying under there a few nights after the incident with the horse when I noticed that Hannah seemed a little nervous and anxious. I sat up and nosed her, but when she petted me it was in a distracted fashion.
“Did that doctor call for me? Bill?” Gloria asked.
“No. I said I would tell you.”
“I don’t know why men do that. They ask for your number and then they don’t call.”
“Gloria. I was … I was thinking about something.”
“What?”
“Well. First, I want you to know that even though you and Henry are not … you’re no longer together, and you never got married, you’re the mother of my grandchild and I will always consider you family and you are always welcome here.”
“Thank you,” Gloria said. “I feel the same way.”
“And I’m sorry Henry’s job has him overseas. He told me he’s still looking for a position back here so he can spend more time with Clarity.”
When I heard her name, I looked over at Clarity’s little feet, which were all I could see of her under the table. She was kicking them, which was how she acted when she was feeding herself her yucky dinner. When Gloria was feeding her, Clarity would twist and turn in the chair.
“Meanwhile, I know that you’re hoping to get your singing career back on track,” Hannah continued.
“Right, well, having a baby hasn’t exactly helped that. I still haven’t gotten rid of this weight.”
“That’s why I was thinking. What if Clarity stayed here?”
There was a long stillness. When Gloria spoke again, her voice was very quiet. “What do you mean?”
“Rachel will be back in town next week, and when the school year starts Cindy will be off by four o’clock every day. Between us and all Clarity’s cousins, we could give her so much attention and you’d have the chance to pursue your singing. And like I said, any time you wanted to come stay with me, we have plenty of room. You’d have so much freedom.”
“So that’s what this is about,” Gloria said.
“Sorry?”
“I wondered. Inviting me here, telling me I could stay as long as I wanted. Now I know. So Clarity would live with you? And then what?”
“I’m not sure I understand what you mean, Gloria.”
“And then Henry sues to end child support, and I’m left with nothing.”
“What? No, that’s the furthest thing—”
“I know everyone in your family thinks I was trying to trap Henry into asking me to marry him, but I’ve met plenty of men who do just fine. I don’t need to trap anybody into anything.”
“No, Gloria, no one ever said that.”
With a lurch, Gloria stood up. “I knew. I knew it was something like this. Everyone acting so nice.”
I could feel the anger coming off of her, and made sure I was well away from her feet. Suddenly Clarity’s chair was shaking back and forth and her little feet vanished up into the air.
“I’m packing. We’re leaving.”
“Gloria!”
I heard Clarity give off a wail as Gloria stomped up the stairs. Clarity hardly ever cried—the last time I could remember was when she crawled into the garden and pulled a green vegetable off a plant that was so pungent it made my eyes water worse than Gloria’s toes. Though I could plainly tell it was something no one should ever eat, Clarity stuck the thing in her mouth and gummed it. She had a real look of surprise on her face when that happened, and she cried just like she was crying now—part shock, part hurt, part anger.
Hannah cried, too, after Gloria and Clarity drove off. I tried to comfort her as best I could, sitting with my head in her lap, and I’m pretty sure it helped, though she felt very sad when she fell asleep in her bed.
I didn’t really understand what had happened other than Gloria and Clarity leaving, but I figured I would see them both again. People always came back to the Farm.
I slept on Hannah’s bed, which I had started doing shortly after Ethan died. For a time she would hold me at night and sometimes she’d cry then, too. I knew why she was crying: she missed Ethan. We all missed Ethan.
The next morning, when I jumped down off Hannah’s bed, something felt like it broke in my left hip, and I couldn’t help it, I let out a yelp of pain.
“Buddy, what is it? What happened? What’s wrong with your leg?”
I could feel her fear and licked her palm in apology for upsetting her, but I wasn’t able to put my left rear leg on the floor—it hurt too much.
“We’re going right to the Vet, Buddy. You’ll be okay,” Hannah said.
We made our slow, careful way out to the car, me hopping on three legs and doing my best to look as if it wasn’t hurting so I wouldn’t make Hannah any more sad. Though I was a front-seat dog, she put me in the back, and I was grateful because it was easier to crawl up there than to try to jump up front with only three legs working.
As she started the car and drove off, I had that awful taste in my mouth again, horrible as ever.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
THREE
When we got to the cool room and I was lifted onto the metal bed I thumped my tail and shivered with pleasure. I loved the Vet, who was called Doctor Deb. She touched me with such gentle hands. Mostly her fingers smelled of soap, but I could always catch the scent of cats and dogs on her sleeves. I let her feel my sore leg and it didn’t hurt at all. I stood when Doctor Deb wanted me to and was lying patiently with Hannah in a small room when the Vet came in and sat down on a stool and scooted it over to Hannah.
“It’s not good news,” Doctor Deb said.
“Oh,” Hannah said. I felt her quick sadness and looked at her in sympathy, though she had never been sad with Doctor Deb before, so I wasn’t sure what was happening.
“We could take the leg, but these big dogs don’t normally do well with the rear one gone. And there’s no guarantee the cancer hasn’t already spread—we might be simply making him less comfortable in what little time he has left. If it were up to me, I would just do painkillers at this point. He’s already eleven years old, right?”
“He was a rescue, so we don’t know for sure. But yes, around that,” Hannah said. “Is that old?”
“You know, they say that Labs average twelve and a half years, but I’ve seen them go a lot longer. It’s not that I’m saying he’s already at the end of his life span. It’s more that sometimes, in the older dogs, the tumors grow more slowly. That would be another factor to consider if we’re thinking about amputation.”
“Buddy has always been such an active dog. I just can’t imagine taking his leg,” Hannah said.
I wagged at hearing my name.
“You’re such a good dog, Buddy,” Doctor Deb murmured. I closed my eyes and leaned into her as she scratched my ears. “Let’s start him on something for pain right away. Labradors don’t always let us know when they’re hurting. They have an amazing pain threshold.”
When we got home, I was given a special treat of meat and cheese and then I got sleepy and went to my usual spot in the living room and collapsed into a deep nap.
The rest of that summer it just felt better to keep my rear leg curled up off the ground and rely on the other three to get around, so that’s what I did. The best days were when I’d go into the pond, where the cool water felt so good and where my weight was supported. Rachel came back from wherever she had been and all of her children were there and Cindy’s children would come over and they all lavished attention on me as if I were a puppy. I loved lying on the ground while two of Cindy’s little daughters tied ribbons into my fur, their small hands soothing as they worked. Later I ate the ribbons.
Hannah gave me lots of special treats and I took lots of naps. I knew I was getting older, because my muscles were often stiff and my vision was dimming somewhat, but I was very happy. I loved the smell of the leaves as they fell to the ground and curled up, and the dry perfume of Hannah’s flowers as they became brittle on their stalks.
“Buddy is chasing rabbits again,” I heard Hannah say one time when I was sleeping. I awoke at the sound of my name, but I was disoriented and it took me a moment to remember where I was. I had been dreaming very vividly of Clarity falling off the dock, but in my dream, instead of me being a bad dog, Ethan was there, knee-deep in the water. “Good dog,” he told me, and I got the sense that he was glad that I had watched over Clarity. When she came back to the Farm I would watch over her again. It was what Ethan would want me to do.
Ethan’s smell had slowly left the Farm, but I still felt his presence in some places. Sometimes I would go and stand in his bedroom and it would seem as if he were right there, sleeping, or sitting in his chair and watching me. I took comfort from the feeling. And sometimes I would remember Clarity calling me Bubby. Though I knew that her mother, Gloria, was probably taking good care of the baby, I always felt a little anxious when I thought of Clarity. I hoped she’d soon return to the Farm so I could see for myself that she was all right.
The cold weather came and I went outside less and less. Doing my business, I selected the nearest tree and got it over with, squatting because I could no longer lift my leg properly. Even if it was raining, Hannah would come out and stand with me.
The snow that winter was a delight. It would support my weight just like water, and was colder and felt even better. I would stand out in it and close my eyes and was so comfortable I felt as if I could fall asleep.
The bad taste in my mouth never left me, though sometimes it was strong and other times I forgot it was even there. The ache in my leg was the same way, though there were days when I would wake up from my nap with a start, the pain a sharp, breathtaking stab.
One day I got up to look at the snow melting outside the window and it just didn’t seem worth it to go outdoors to play, even though I usually loved it when the new grass would come poking up out of the wet, muddy earth. Hannah was watching me. “Okay, Buddy. Okay,” she said.
That day all of the children came over to see me and they petted me and talked to me. I lay on the floor and groaned with pleasure at all the attention and the little hands on me, stroking me and petting me. Some of the children were sad and some seemed bored, but they all just sat there with me on the floor until it was time for them to go.
“You are a good dog, Buddy.”
“I will miss you so much, Buddy.”
“I love you, Buddy.”
I wagged every time someone said my name.
I didn’t sleep in Hannah’s bed that night. It was simply too delicious to lie there in my spot on the floor and remember all the children touching me.
The next morning I woke up just as the sun was starting to light up the sky. It took all the effort I could muster to struggle to a standing position, and then I limped in next to Hannah’s bed. She awoke when I raised my head and placed it next to her on the blanket, panting.
I had a heavy pain in my stomach and throat, and my leg throbbed with a dull ache.
I didn’t know if she would understand, but I was looking her in the eye, trying to let her know what I needed from her. This wonderful woman, Ethan’s mate, who had so loved both of us—I knew she wouldn’t let me down.
“Oh, Buddy. You’re telling me it’s time,” she said sadly. “Okay, Buddy, okay.”
When we walked out of the house I limped to a tree to do my business. Then I stood and looked around at the Farm in the light from sunrise, everything painted orange and gold. Water dripped from the eaves, water with a cold, pure smell. The ground beneath my feet was moist and ready to burst forth with flowers and grass—I could smell the new growth, just beneath the surface of the fragrant mud. It was such a perfect day.
I made it to the car okay, but when Hannah opened the rear door I ignored it and shuffled sideways until my nose was pointed at the front door. She laughed a little and opened the door and picked up my rear to help me in.
I was a front-seat dog.
I sat and looked out at the day, which carried with it the promise of warmer breezes. Snow still lurked where the trees were most dense, but it had given up in the yard where Ethan and I had played, rolling and wrestling together. It seemed as if I could hear him, at that moment, telling me I was a good dog. My tail thumped at the memory of his voice.
Hannah reached out to touch me often on that ride in to see Doctor Deb. When Hannah spoke, her sadness came off of her in a gust and I licked the hand that was stroking me.
“Oh, Buddy,” she said.
I wagged.
“Every time I look at you I remember my Ethan, Buddy. You good dog. You were his companion, his special friend. His dog. And you led me back to him, Buddy. I know you don’t understand, but when you turned up on my doorstep, it led to Ethan and me getting back together. You did that. It was … No dog could ever do more for his people, Buddy.”
It made me feel happy to hear Hannah say Ethan’s name over and over again.
“You’re the best dog, Buddy. A really, really good dog. Good dog.”
I wagged at being a good dog.
At Doctor Deb’s I just sat there when Hannah opened my door. I knew there was no way I could jump down, not with my leg. I gave her a mournful look.
“Oh, okay, Buddy. You wait right here.”
Hannah shut the door and left. A few minutes later Doctor Deb and a man I had never seen before came out to the car. The man had cat smell on his hands, plus a pleasant meaty odor. He and Doctor Deb carried me into the building. I did my best to ignore the pain that flashed through me as they did so, but it left me panting. They put me on the metal bed and I was hurting too much to wag, I just laid my head down. The cool metal felt good as I sprawled on it.
“You are such a good dog, a good dog,” Hannah whispered to me.
I knew it wouldn’t be much longer, now. I focused on Hannah and she was smiling but also crying. Doctor Deb was stroking me, and I could feel her fingers looking for a fold of skin up by my neck.
I found myself thinking of little Clarity. I hoped she would find another dog soon to watch over her. Everyone needs a dog, but for Clarity it was even more of a necessity.
My name was Buddy. Before that it was Ellie, and before that it was Bailey, and before that it was Toby. I was a good dog who had loved my boy, Ethan, and had taken care of his children. I had loved his mate, Hannah. I knew that I would not be reborn, now, and that was okay. I had done everything a dog was supposed to do in this world.
The love was still pouring off of Hannah as I felt the tiny pinch between Doctor Deb’s fingers. Almost instantly, the pain in my leg receded. A sense of peace filled me; a wonderful, warm, delicious wave of it, supporting my weight like the water in the pond. The touch of Hannah’s hands gradually left me, and, as I floated away in the water I felt truly happy.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
FOUR
Images were just starting to resolve themselves in my bleary eyes when I remembered everything. One moment and I was a newborn puppy with no direction or purpose other than finding my mother’s milk, and the next moment I was me, still a puppy, but one with a memory of being Buddy, and of all the previous times I’d been a puppy in my lives.
My mother’s fur was curly and short and dark. My limbs were dark as well—at least, what I could see of them through my newly opened eyes—but my soft fur was not at all curly. All of my siblings were equally dark colored, though as we bumped into each other I could feel that only one had fur like mine—the rest were as curly as our mother.
I knew that my vision would soon clear, but I doubted that would do much to help me understand why I was a puppy again. My conviction had always been that I had an important purpose and that’s why I kept being reborn. Then everything I had ever learned to do added up to helping my boy, Ethan, and I had been by his side and had guided him through the final years of his life. And that, I thought, was my purpose.
Now what? Was I to be reborn over and over, forever? Could a dog have more than one purpose? How was that possible?
All the puppies slept together in a big box. As my limbs grew stronger I explored our surroundings and it was pretty much as exciting as a box could be. Sometimes I’d hear footsteps descending stairs and then a fuzzy shape would lean over the box, speaking with either the voice of a man or the voice of a woman. The way our mother wagged her tail let me know these were the people who took care of her and loved her.
Pretty soon I could see they were, indeed, a man and a woman—that’s how I thought of them, as the Man and the Woman.
One day the Man brought a friend to grin down at us. The friend had no hair on his head except for around his mouth.
“They are so cute,” the bald one with the hairy mouth said. “Six pups, that’s a nice-sized litter.”
“You want to pick one up?” the Man responded.
I froze as I felt what seemed like huge hands come down and grab me. I held still, a little intimidated, as the man with mouth hair lifted me up and stared at me.
“This one’s not like the others,” the man holding me said. His breath smelled powerfully of butter and sugar, so I licked the air a little.
“No, she has a brother that’s the same way. We’re not sure what happened—Bella and the sire are both AKC poodles, but that one sure doesn’t look like a poodle. We’re thinking … Well, there was this afternoon when we forgot to close the back door. Bella could have gotten out. Maybe another male got over the fence,” the Man said.
“Wait, is that even possible? Two different fathers?”
I had no idea what they were talking about, but if all he was going to do was hold me and blow tantalizing odors at me I was ready to be put down.
“I guess so. The Vet said it can happen, two separate sires.”
“That’s hilarious.”
“Yeah, except we’re not going to be able to sell the two mystery dogs. You want that one? Free since you’re a buddy.”
“No, thank you.” The man holding me laughed, letting me back down. My mother sniffed the stranger’s scent on me and, protective and kind, gave me a reassuring lick, while my brothers and sisters staggered over on their unsteady legs because they had probably already forgotten who I was and wanted to challenge me. I ignored them.
“Hey, how’s your son?” the man with the hairy face asked.
“Thanks for asking. Still sick, has this cough. Probably going to have to take him to the doctor.”
“He been down here to see the pups?”
“No, they’re a little young yet. I want them to get stronger before he handles them.”
The two men walked away, dissolving into the blurry gloom beyond my field of vision.
As the days passed I became aware of a young child’s voice upstairs, a male, and became alarmed over the prospect of starting over again with a new boy. That couldn’t be my purpose, could it? It seemed wrong, somehow, as if I would be a bad dog if I had a boy other than Ethan.
One afternoon the Man scooped up all of us and put us in a smaller box that he carried up the stairs, our mother panting anxiously at his heels. We were set on the floor and then the Man turned the box gently so that we all tumbled out.
“Puppies!” a little boy sang out from somewhere behind us.
I splayed my legs a little for balance and peered around. It was like the living room at the Farm, with a couch and chairs. We were on a soft blanket and naturally most of my siblings immediately tried to get off it, heading off in all directions for the slick floor beyond the edge of the blanket. Me, I stayed put. In my experience, mother dogs liked soft spots more than hard ones, and it’s always smarter to stick with Mother.
The Man and the Woman, laughing, grabbed the fleeing puppies and placed them back in the center of the blanket, which should have given them all the hint that they were not supposed to go running off, though most of them tried to do it again. A boy circled around, older than Clarity but still pretty young, hopping excitedly. I was reminded of Clarity’s little legs bobbing up and down when she saw that stupid horse in the barn.
Though I was reluctant to love any other boy but Ethan, it was difficult not to be swept up in the joy we all felt at the sight of this little human holding his arms out to us.
The boy reached for my brother, the one who, like me, had longer, flatter fur. I could sense my siblings’ distress when the boy snatched him up.
“Be careful, Son,” the Man said.
“Don’t hurt him; be gentle,” the Woman said.
These were, I decided, the mother and father of the little boy. “He’s kissing me!” The little boy giggled as my brother submissively licked the boy on the mouth.
“It’s okay, Bella. You’re a good dog,” the Man said, petting our mother, who was pacing around the blanket, yawning anxiously.
The little boy was coughing. “Are you okay?” the mom asked him. He nodded, setting down my brother and immediately scooping up one of my sisters. My other two brothers were at the edge of the blanket and had stopped, sniffing, unsure of the surface.
“I hate the sound of that cough; it sounds like it’s gotten worse,” the Man said.
“He wasn’t bad at all this morning,” the Woman replied.
The little boy was breathing loudly, now, coughing and making a harsh noise. His coughing was getting worse. Both of his parents froze, staring at him.
“Johnny?” the Woman said. There was fear in her voice. Our mother went to her, wagging anxiously. The Man set the puppy he’d been holding on the floor and grabbed the boy by the arm.
“Johnny? Can you breathe?”
The boy bent over, his hands on his knees. His breathing was thick and loud and heavy.
“He’s turning blue!” the Woman yelled. My siblings and I flinched at the raw terror in her voice.
“Call 911!” The Man shouted at her. “Johnny! Stay with me, Son! Look at me!”
Whether consciously or not, all of us had found our way to our mother and were at her feet, seeking reassurance. She lowered her nose to us briefly, but she was panting and anxious and went over to the Man and tried to nuzzle him. The Man ignored her. “Johnny!” he shouted, anguished.
Several of the puppies were trying to follow our mother and when she saw this she came back to us, pushing us with her muzzle to keep us on the blanket and out of the way.
The Man laid the boy on the couch. The boy’s eyes were fluttering and his breathing was still harsh and painful sounding. The Woman came in with her hands pressed to her mouth, weeping.
I heard the siren and it got louder and then two men and a woman were in the room. They put something on the boy’s face and took him out of the house on a bed. The Man and the Woman went with them, and then we were alone.
It is the nature of puppies to explore, so my siblings immediately left the blanket to sniff the far corners of the room. Our mother paced and whined and kept rising up on her rear legs to look out the front window, and two of my siblings followed her around.
I sat on the blanket and tried to understand. Though he was not my boy, I felt a strong concern for the child. It did not mean I didn’t love Ethan; I was just feeling a fear.
Because we were puppies we made messes all over the house. I knew when I was older I would have more self-control, but at this point I didn’t know I needed to squat until suddenly the need would be upon me. I hoped the Man and Woman would not be angry with me.
We were all asleep when the Man came home by himself. He put us in the basement and I could hear him moving around upstairs and the air carried the scent of soap. We nursed; our mother was finally calm, now that the Man was home.
The next day we were taken to a different basement in a different house. A woman who smelled like cooking and laundry and dogs greeted us with kisses and cooing sounds. Her house had the scent of many, many dogs, though I only saw one: a slow-moving male who walked low to the ground, nearly dragging his big, floppy ears.
“Thanks for this. I’m really grateful, Jennifer,” the Man said to her.
“Fostering dogs is what I do,” she said. “I just adopted out a boxer yesterday, so I knew I’d be getting more. That’s how it always works. Your wife said your son has asthma?”
“Yes. He’s apparently deathly allergic to dogs, but we never knew it because Bella is a poodle and apparently Johnny’s not allergic to poodles. We had no idea. I feel so stupid. His allergic reaction triggered his asthma attack and we didn’t even know he had asthma! I thought we were going to lose him.”
Bella, hearing her name, wagged a little. Our mother was distressed, though, when the Man left. We were in a nice-sized box in the basement, but as soon as the Man walked away Bella left it and then sat at the door to the stairs and cried. This distressed the puppies, who sat subdued, not playing. I’m sure I looked the same way—our mother’s upset was clear and urgent.
That day, we did not nurse. The woman named Jennifer didn’t notice it, but we did, and pretty soon we were all whimpering. Our mother was just too disturbed and saddened to lie down for us, even when her teats became heavy and began to leak a tantalizing odor that made us all dizzy.
I knew why she was so sad. A dog belongs with her people.
Our mother paced all night, crying softly. We all slept, but in the morning we were aching with hunger.
Jennifer came to see why we were crying and told Bella it was okay, but I could hear the alarm in her voice. She left the room and we cried for our mother, but Bella just paced and whined and ignored us. Then, after what seemed like a long time, Bella was at the door, her snout at the crack beneath it, sniffing in with great gusts. Her tail started to wag and then the Man opened the door. Bella was sobbing and jumping up on the Man and the Man was pushing her away.
“You have to stay down, Bella. I need you to stay down.”
“She hasn’t been nursing the pups. She’s too upset,” Jennifer said.
“Okay, Bella, come over here. Come on.” The Man ushered Bella over to the box and made her lie down. He kept his hand on her head and she stayed and we went at her in a mad rush, pushing and sucking and fighting each other.
“I’m just worried that the puppies’ dander is on her and it will get on me and then Johnny will have an attack. He’s got an inhaler and everything.”
“But if Bella doesn’t nurse, her puppies will die,” Jennifer said.
“I have to do what’s best for Johnny. We’re having the entire house steam-cleaned,” the Man said.
My belly was getting warm and heavy. It was a glorious thing to feed.
“Well, what if you took Bella and the poodle puppies home with you? You could bathe them, get rid of any trace of the other two puppies. You’d at least save four of them, and it would be best for Bella, too.”
The Man and Jennifer were quiet for a long time. Completely full, I staggered away, so sleepy I just wanted to climb on one of the other puppies and nap.
“You’d euthanize the other two, then? I wouldn’t want them to starve to death,” the Man said.
“They would not suffer,” Jennifer said.
A few minutes later I was surprised when the Man and Jennifer reached in and picked up a pair of puppies each. Bella hopped out of the box and followed. My brother, the one who had fur like mine, whimpered a little, but we were both really sleepy. We curled up against each other for warmth, my head on his back.
I didn’t know where our mother and our siblings had gone, but I figured they would be back soon.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
FIVE
I awoke cold and hungry. My brother and I were pressed up against each other for warmth and when I stirred he opened his eyes. We groggily made our way around the box, relieving ourselves and touching each other several times, communicating to each other what was pretty obvious. Our mother and our siblings were gone.
My brother started crying.
Soon the woman called Jennifer came over to see us. We looked up at her, so tall above us.
“You poor little puppies, you miss your mommy, don’t you?”
The sound of her voice seemed to soothe my brother. He stood on his rear legs, his front legs against the side of the box, and strained to raise his small muzzle to her. She bent down, smiling. “It’s okay, little one. Everything will be all right, I promise you.”
When she left, my brother went back to his whining. I tried to interest him in a wrestling match, but he was really unhappy. I knew everything was fine because we had a woman to watch us and she would bring our mother back soon so we could feed, but my brother was frightened and hungry and apparently couldn’t think beyond that.
Soon Jennifer returned. “Okay, time to take care of you. You want to go first? Okay,” she said, picking up my brother and carrying him off.
I was alone in the box. I lay down and tried not to think about the empty ache in my stomach. It was easier to ignore my hunger with my brother off with Jennifer. I wondered if maybe I was supposed to take care of my brother but dismissed the thought. Dogs don’t take care of dogs; people take care of dogs. As long as we had Jennifer, we would be fine.
I fell asleep and didn’t wake up until I felt Jennifer lifting me up into the air. She stared into my face. “Well, that didn’t go as well as I had hoped,” she said. “Let’s hope it goes more quickly with you.”
I wagged my tiny tail.
Jennifer and I went upstairs. There was no sign of my brother, though I could smell him in the air. Still holding me, she sat down on her couch, rolling me onto my back in the cradle of her arm. “Okay, okay now,” Jennifer said. “Nice and still.”
She reached over and picked something up, an odd-shaped thing that she slowly lowered toward my face. What was she doing? I squirmed a little.
“You need to be still now, puppy. This will go okay if you don’t fight it,” Jennifer said.
Her voice was soothing, but I still didn’t know what was going on. But then I caught the delicious scent of warm milk—the thing she was holding was oozing food. The tip of it was soft and when she probed my lips with it I seized it and sucked and was rewarded with a warm, sweet meal.
In a way, it was like being nursed by my mother, except that I was on my back and the thing in my mouth was very large. The milk was quite different, too, more sweet and light, but I wasn’t complaining. I sucked and that wonderful warm liquid erased away the ache in my belly.
When I was full I was drowsy and Jennifer held me and patted me on my back and I burped a little. Then she took me down the hall to a soft bed, where the big dog with the huge ears was sleeping, my brother nuzzled up against him.
“Here’s another one, Barney,” Jennifer whispered.
The big dog groaned, but he wagged his tail and didn’t move when I nestled up against him. Though he was a male, his tummy was warm and comforting, just like Mother’s.
My brother squeaked out a greeting and then went right back to sleep.
From that point forward, Jennifer fed us in her lap several times a day. I grew to love the feedings and the way Jennifer would talk to me as she cuddled me. It would be easy to love someone like Jennifer.
My brother was distressed when I was fed before he was, and I think Jennifer decided it made more sense to have me go second than to feed me with my brother crying the whole time.
I think I had known it all along, but one day while I was squatting and smelled my urine it occurred to me that we weren’t brothers but brother and sister. I was a female dog!
I wondered briefly what had happened to our mother and to my other siblings, but it seemed as if I couldn’t really even remember them anymore. We lived here now, my brother and I, a family of two puppies and a lazy dog named Barney. I would have to get used to being a female and being in this odd living situation.
I decided that there were times when all a dog could do was wait and see what would happen next, what choices people would make that would change everything or make it more of the same. In the meantime, my brother and I put our efforts into tugging on Barney’s soft, floppy ears.
Jennifer called my brother Rocky and me Molly. As we grew stronger, Barney wanted to have less and less to do with us, becoming impatient with us chewing on his body parts. That was okay, though, because a big gray dog named Che came to stay with us at the house. Che loved to run around the backyard, where the grass was just starting to pop up in the warming spring sun. He was very fast and Rocky and I could not hope to catch up to him, but he wanted us to chase him and when we would give up he would dart over and bow down to get us to play again. And then there was a stocky dog named Mr. Churchill. He was a bit like Barney in size except that he was heavier, and his ears were very short. Mr. Churchill wheezed and waddled when he walked—he was the exact opposite of Che. I am not sure he even could run. And after eating he smelled pretty bad.
Jennifer’s house, with all the dogs, was just about the most wonderful place imaginable. I sometimes missed the Farm, of course, but being at Jennifer’s was like living full-time at a dog park.
A woman came to see Che after a few days and took him with her when she left. “It’s wonderful, what you do. I think if I tried to foster dogs I’d wind up keeping all of them,” said the woman who took Che.
Che was going to have a new life with a new person, I realized, and I was happy for him, though Rocky appeared completely mystified as to what was going on.
“That’s called ‘foster failure.’” Jennifer laughed. “It’s how I came to have Barney. He was my first foster. I realized, though, that if I didn’t get control of myself I’d adopt a few dogs and then that’d be it and I wouldn’t be able to help any others.”
One day some people came over to Jennifer’s house to play with us—a man and a woman and two girls.
“We’re pretty sure we want a male,” the man said.
The girls were that wonderful age where they couldn’t run much faster than a puppy and were always giggling. They picked us up and kissed us and put us down and played with us.
“You said poodle and what, again?” the man asked.
Jennifer said, “Nobody knows. Spaniel? Terrier?”
I knew what was happening: they were here to take either Rocky or me home with them. I wondered why we had to leave this place—if anyone should go it should be Mr. Churchill, who mostly just stood there emitting odors or, when Rocky goaded him into it, would chase us and knock us over with his chest. But I also knew that people were in charge—they decided dogs’ fates, and I would have to go where they sent me.
In the end, though, Rocky and I stayed. I was relieved not to lose Rocky and happy not to have to say good-bye to the other dogs, but I didn’t understand it, why people would come play with me and then not want to take me with them.
And then one day, I did understand.
Rocky and I were in the backyard with a new brown dog named Daisy. Daisy was very timid around Jennifer—she wouldn’t come when called and whenever Jennifer reached down to pet her Daisy would shy away from her hand. Daisy was very thin and had light brown eyes. She would play with Rocky and me, though, and even though she was much larger, she would let us pin her when we were wrestling.
I heard car doors slamming and then a few minutes later the screen door at the back of the house slid open. Rocky and I trotted over to investigate as Jennifer and a boy and a girl came out into the yard, while Daisy slunk over to a place behind a picnic table where she seemed to feel safe.
“Oh my God, they are so cute!” The girl laughed. She was about the age that Ethan had been when he started driving a car. She dropped to her knees and spread her arms wide. Rocky and I obediently ran over to her. She gathered us into an embrace and her scent flowed from her and that’s when I made an astounding discovery.
It was Clarity.
I went wild, climbing on her and kissing her and smelling her skin. I was leaping and spinning with joy. Clarity!
Never before had it occurred to me that she might come look for me, that she would know I had been reborn and would find me. But humans drive the cars and decide when dogs eat and where dogs live and clearly this was something else in their power—they could find their dogs when they needed them.
That must be why the family with the little girls left without us. They were searching for their dogs, and Rocky and I weren’t them.
I could not get enough of Clarity. My little tail beating the air, I licked her hands, making her laugh. When the boy ran around in the yard Rocky ran with him, but I stayed right with Clarity.
“What do you think, Trent?” Clarity called.
“He’s great,” the boy replied.
“Molly seems pretty smitten with you,” Jennifer said to Clarity. “I’ll be right back.” Jennifer went back inside her house.
“Oh, you are so cute,” Clarity said, smoothing my ears back. I kissed her fingers. “But my mom won’t let me have a dog. We’re here for Trent.”
It was all clear to me now: my purpose was as I had supposed, which was to continue to watch over Clarity. It’s what Ethan would have wanted. That’s why I was a puppy again—I still had work to do.
And I would. I would watch over Clarity and keep her safe. I would be a good dog.
The boy came over carrying Rocky. “See his paws? He’s going to be bigger than Molly.”
Clarity stood and I stretched my forepaws up as high as I could on her legs until she picked me up. Rocky struggled to get down from the boy’s arms, but I held still, gazing into Clarity’s eyes.
“I want him,” the boy said. “Rocky, you want to come home with me?” He gently dropped my brother, who jumped on a rubber toy and shook it.
“This is so exciting!” Clarity said. She set me down and I stayed by her heels as she went over to where Rocky was chewing on his toy. When she tried to pet Rocky I thrust my head under her hand and she laughed.
“Molly likes you, CJ,” the boy said.
I glanced over at the boy because he’d said my name, but then went back to cuddling with Clarity.
“I know. But Gloria, she’d lose it and start foaming at the mouth. I can just hear her. ‘They lick. They’re unclean.’ Like our house is so spotless.”
“Wouldn’t it be fun, though? We’d have a brother and sister.”
I felt a wistful sadness coming from Clarity as she held my face in her hands. “Yes, it would be fun,” she said quietly. “Oh, Molly, I’m sorry, girl.”
Jennifer came back out. “So, are there like papers to fill out?” the boy asked.
“No. I’m not affiliated with any rescue organization or anything. I’m just the neighborhood lady who everybody knows will take in strays and find homes for them. Rocky and Molly are here because a little boy’s asthma was aggravated by them.”
“You said free to a good home, but could I pay something at least?” the boy asked.
“I accept donations, if you like. And please, if for any reason it’s not working out, bring him back.”
The boy handed Jennifer something and then reached down and hoisted Rocky up into his arms. “Okay, Rocky,” he said. “Ready to go to your new home?”
“You let me know if you have any questions,” Jennifer said.
I looked expectantly up at Clarity, but she didn’t pick me up. “Oh, look at her,” Clarity said. She knelt down and stroked my fur. “It’s like she knows I’m leaving without her.”
“Let’s go, CJ.”
We all went to the back door together. Jennifer opened it and the boy went through, still carrying Rocky, and then Clarity, but when I made to follow, Jennifer blocked me with her foot.
“No, Molly,” she said, sliding the screen shut, so that I was left behind in the backyard.
What?
I sat down and stared at Clarity, who stared back through the screen. I did not understand.
When they all turned away, I yipped, frustrated that my voice was so tiny. I cried and yipped and put my paws on the door and scratched at it, trying to claw my way through. Was Clarity leaving me? No, that couldn’t be! I had to go with her!
Clarity and the boy and Rocky went out through the front door of the house, closing it behind them.
“It’s okay, Molly,” Jennifer said. She moved into the kitchen.
Clarity was gone. Rocky was gone.
I barked and barked with my useless little puppy voice, grieving, feeling alone in the world.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
SIX
Daisy, the big, timid dog, came out from her hiding place behind the picnic table and stood and sniffed me as I barked. She could sense my distress but obviously couldn’t understand it.
The back door was getting me nowhere. I went around to the side of the house, but the wooden gate was firmly shut, the knob far out of reach of my tiny teeth. I barked again and again. This yard, which had been so gloriously fun, now seemed a prison. I ran over to Barney and we touched noses, but the slow wag of his tail did nothing to help. I felt desperate. What was happening? How could this be?
“Molly?”
I turned and there was Clarity. She dropped to her knees and I ran to her and threw myself into her arms, licking her face, relieved that I had misunderstood—I thought for a moment she was planning to leave me!
Jennifer and Trent were standing behind her. “She chose me, so what could I do? Molly chose me,” Clarity insisted.
I was happy to be Molly and I was happy to be with Clarity and go with her out to her car. Trent drove and she climbed in the backseat with Rocky and me. Rocky greeted me as if we’d been apart for days and days, and then we went about the business of wrestling with Clarity in the backseat.
“So what is your mother going to say?” Trent asked. Rocky had seized Clarity’s long hair in his teeth and was pulling on it as if he thought it would come off, setting his legs and growling. Clarity was laughing. I jumped on Rocky to get him to cut it out.
“CJ? Seriously.”
Rocky and I were climbing all over Clarity, squirming. She struggled to sit upright. “God, I don’t know.”
“Will she let you keep her?”
“Well, what am I supposed to do? You saw what happened. It’s like Molly and I were meant to be together. It’s fate. Karma.”
“It’s not like you can hide a dog in your house,” Trent said.
Clarity was looking down and seemed unhappy, so I put my paws on her chest and tried to lick her face. In my experience, being licked by a dog can cheer up just about anybody.
“CJ? You seriously think you can hide a dog in your house?” Trent said.
“I could hide a pack of wolves in the house if I wanted. She never looks at anything but the mirror.”
“Okay, sure. So for the next ten years you’re going to have a dog and somehow your mother won’t find out.”
“You know what, Trent? Sometimes things aren’t practical, but you just do them because it’s the right thing.”
“Right, that makes sense.”
“Why do you do this? You always have to argue.”
They were both silent for a moment. “I’m sorry,” Trent finally said. “I was just looking out for you.”
“It will all work out; I promise.”
“Okay.”
“But, um, go past my driveway, okay?” Clarity said. “Don’t pull in.”
The car stopped. Clarity picked up Rocky and passed him up to the front. My brother and I looked at each other. Rocky wagged his tail, his ears back. I had a sense that this was good-bye, that we were going to be apart, now. That was okay, because our fates were always for people to decide and Clarity had decided she needed me and that was that. Going with her was what Ethan would have wanted. What wasn’t okay was that Rocky was a front-seat dog and I wasn’t, except that Clarity opened the door and we got out together, so there was no more car ride for me anyway.
The car drove off. “Okay,” Clarity said. She sounded a little worried. “Let’s see how quiet you can be.”
She set me down and we approached a house. Some dogs had marked the bushes out front, but they were old scents—there was nothing to indicate there were any other dogs here. Clarity picked me up and carried me swiftly inside, up some stairs, down the hall, and into a bedroom.
“Clarity? Is that you?” a woman called from in the house.
“I’m home!” Clarity yelled. She jumped on her bed with me and started to play. Then she froze as footsteps came down the hall.
“Molly! Shhhh!” she said. She thrust her legs under the covers, raising her knees, and shoved me into the tented space. I sniffed her feet as I heard a door open.
“Ta-daa!” a woman’s voice sang out. I knew that voice: it was Gloria, Clarity’s mother.
“You bought a fur?” Clarity said, sounding angry.
“You like?” Gloria responded. “It’s fox!”
“A fur? How could you?”
I decided that the game was for me to get out from the covers. I started to climb toward Clarity’s head, and her hand came in and pushed me back down.
“Well, it’s not like I killed anything. It was already dead when I bought the coat. And don’t worry, I’m sure it was what you call it, free-range.”
“Until they trapped it, you mean. God, Gloria. You know how I feel about this.”
“If you feel that strongly about it, you don’t have to wear it.”
“As if I ever would! What were you thinking?”
“Well, I’m sorry, but I need it for my trip—Aspen is the only place left where you can wear a fur without feeling guilty. And, well, probably France.”
“Aspen? When are you going to Aspen?” Clarity’s hand kept me pinned. I struggled to get out.
“Wednesday. So, I was thinking, we should go shopping tomorrow, just the two of us.”
“Tomorrow’s Monday. It’s a school day,” Clarity said.
“Well, school. It’s just a day.”
Clarity’s legs kicked out from underneath the blankets, which settled softly down on my head. “I need a yogurt,” Clarity said.
I popped out from under the covers, but it was too late—Clarity was leaving. “I hate it when you wear those shorts,” Gloria was saying as Clarity closed the door. “They make your thighs look so heavy.”
Alone on the bed, I quickly determined that the floor was far, far out of range for my little legs. Whimpering my frustration, I paced on the soft blankets, taking the time to sniff deeply at the soft pillow. There were some toys on the bed and I chewed on these a little.
Then the door opened. Clarity was back. I wagged and licked her face when she bent down to me, a sweet milk scent flavoring her breath. Is there anything more glorious than licking someone’s face until she giggles?
When Clarity carried me outside, she shoved me deep inside the shirt she was wearing, to keep me warm. She praised me for squatting in the yard and fed me little pieces of cold, salty meat. The flavor was so strong it burned my tongue.
“I’ll get you some puppy food tomorrow, Molly, I promise promise promise. Do you want more ham?”
That night I slept in the crook of Clarity’s arm. She stroked me with her hand, whispering to me, “I love you, Molly. I love you.” I drifted to sleep with her hand still touching me. The day’s activities had left me exhausted to the point where I didn’t get up once during the night. Clarity woke up when the sun was barely out, putting on her clothes and carrying me with an odd carefulness out to do my business, speaking to me in the barest of whispers. My little bladder had been painfully full. Then she carried me down some stairs to a basement.
“This is my special space here under the stairs, Molly,” she whispered. “I called it my clubhouse. See? There’s a pillow for you, and here’s some water. You just have to be quiet, okay? I’m not going to school, but I have to leave for just a bit. I promise, though, that I’ll come back soon. Meantime, don’t bark. Be quiet, Molly; be quiet.”
I sniffed the little space, which was so low that Clarity had to squat. She handed me some more of the cold, salty meat and petted me in a way that I knew meant she was planning to leave me, so when she abruptly withdrew, sliding boxes to trap me in the space, I nimbly darted out.
“Molly!” Clarity hissed.
I wagged, hoping she understood I didn’t want to be in the small space. I felt that I’d made my feelings clear when we’d been at Jennifer’s house—I wanted to be with Clarity. She picked me up and pushed me back in and this time I wasn’t fast enough to keep the boxes from blocking my exit. What was she doing?
“Be good, Molly,” Clarity said from the other side of the boxes. “Remember, stay quiet. Don’t bark.”
I scratched at the boxes, but Clarity didn’t return and I eventually gave it up. I took a brief nap and then found a plastic toy to chew for a little bit, but once I had to squat in the corner the little space under the stairs lost all its charms for me. I yipped, wishing my voice were stronger. Even with the small enclosure bouncing my barks back at me, they sounded tiny and pathetic. Nonetheless, once I was barking it seemed like a good idea to keep it up.
I paused, cocking my head, when I heard someone moving around upstairs, but there was no indication that Clarity or Gloria was coming to my rescue, so I started up again.
Then I heard the unmistakable sound of the door at the top of the stairs opening. Footsteps came toward me, and when they were directly overhead I barked as loudly as I could. Someone was in the basement.
I thought it might be Clarity, but then I heard something strange: a human yowling, somewhere between crying and wailing. It was an awful noise, a noise of pain and perhaps fear. What was happening? I stopped barking, a little afraid. A strong scent—flowery, oily, and musky—flowed into my space from behind the boxes.
Overhead I heard the front door open and shut. There were footsteps and then I sensed someone else standing up at the top of the stairs.
“Gloria? Are you down there?” It was Clarity.
Still the mournful wailing continued. I was silent—no human had ever made a sound like that in my whole life.
Footsteps came rattling down the stairs. “Gloria?” Clarity’s voice called.
There was a loud scream—“Ahhhhh!” I recognized Gloria.
Clarity screamed, too. “Aghhhh!”
I whimpered—what was happening?
“Clarity June, you scared me to death!” Gloria panted.
“Why didn’t you answer? What were you doing?” Clarity asked.
“I was singing! I had my earbuds in! What are you doing home? What’s in the bag?”
“I forgot something. It’s, um, dog food. We’re having a food drive at school.”
“Do you really think it looks good to give dog food?”
“Mo-ther. It’s not for the people. It’s for their dogs.”
“You mean to tell me they can’t afford to feed themselves, but they have dogs? What’s this country coming to?”
“Are you getting laundry? I’ll help you fold,” Clarity said. “Let’s take it upstairs.”
They went up the stairs, leaving me alone again.
I was really, really hungry.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
SEVEN
Clarity did come back, and I was as glad to see her as I was the bowl of food in her hand.
“She’s finally gone. Oh, Molly, I am so, so sorry.”
I buried my face in the bowl, crunching the food until my mouth was dry and then drinking as much water as I could hold. Then Clarity took me out into the backyard, where the sun was shining and bugs were singing and the grass was fresh and warm. I sprawled out, rolling in sheer joy, and Clarity lay down next to me. We played tug-on-a-towel for a few minutes, but I was exhausted from barking all morning and when she picked me up to cuddle me to her chest I immediately fell into a deep sleep.
When I woke up, I was back in the small space. The second I yipped, though, I heard running footsteps and then Clarity shoved aside the boxes. “Shhh, Molly! You need to be quiet!” Clarity said. I thought I understood what she was saying: when I wanted her, I needed to bark and then she would come.
She let me play in the basement and she fed me more food. When I needed to squat on the cement floor, she cleaned it up and wasn’t upset that I couldn’t yet hold it until I made it outside. She hugged me and kissed me up and down my face, pure adoration flowing from her with such power I squirmed with happiness.
We played and played until I was sleepy. She even woke me up that night to wrestle in the cool air of the backyard, all the bugs gone silent. It was so much fun to be outside when everything was so quiet!
The next morning there were loud noises from upstairs, plus I heard Gloria’s voice: “Would you please turn down the music?” I barked and scratched at the boxes that were blocking my exit, ready to get upstairs to play with Clarity.
When I both felt and heard the vibration from a door slamming I quieted down, trying to figure out what was going on. Was I alone again? No, there was still someone upstairs; I could hear walking. Then there was a sigh of air as the door from the outside to the basement opened. The boxes slid away and I jumped out and into Clarity’s arms, my heart leaping with joy. Time to have more fun!
“You have to be very quiet,” she told me. She carried me out into the backyard and through a gate and then set me down and we went for a walk and then a car ride (front seat!) and then to a park to play all day. We were mostly by ourselves except for a woman with a small black dog named Get Back Here Milo. The black dog ran right over to me and I blinked and sank to the ground submissively, aware that as a puppy I needed to let Get Back Here Milo see I was no threat. “Get Back Here Milo!” the woman called over and over. The black dog pushed me roughly over with his snout and then Clarity reached down and picked me up, holding me the way Jennifer had when she’d fed me the strange milk.
When Get Back Here Milo left, Clarity set me down and played with her face close to mine. I was so happy I yipped and spun.
“She leaves tomorrow,” Clarity said to me. “I just need to keep you hidden one more night and then she’s gone for a week. Can you go without barking tonight?”
I chewed a stick.
“I don’t know what I’m going to do, Molly. She’ll never let me keep you.” Clarity grabbed me and gave me a fierce hug. “I love you so much.”
I felt the affection pouring off of Clarity, but I was really focused on the stick at the moment, so I didn’t do much more than just wag my tail.
I was disappointed that when we got home Clarity took me right down stairs and placed me into the small space under the stairs, sliding the boxes back. I voiced my displeasure with a volley of barks and she appeared instantly.
“I need you to not bark, okay, Molly? My mother will be home any minute.”
She slid the boxes back. Truthfully, I was tired from playing all day, so I settled down for a nap. I woke up, though, when I heard the front door slam. “I’m home!” Gloria’s voice boomed through the house. “Wait until you see what I bought at Neiman’s!”
Though I had been smelling and hearing Gloria for a few days, I hadn’t yet had a chance to greet her. I thought she would probably be as glad to see me as Clarity had been. I yipped a couple of times and then waited, but all I heard was talking. I barked some more and then got the expected results when the door opened overhead and footsteps came down. Clarity shoved the boxes aside.
“Please, Molly, please. Please be quiet.”
Clarity fed me and took me inside her jacket down the street and then we walked and walked. It was dark and cool by the time we returned. Clarity pushed me back into the small space.
“Okay. Go to sleep, okay, Molly? Go to sleep.”
I tried to slip out as she was pushing the boxes back across the entrance, but I wasn’t fast enough. She ran up the stairs, which rattled, and shut the door and then it was quiet.
I slept a little, but then I woke up and remembered I was all by myself. I whimpered. I knew that upstairs Clarity was probably lying in her bed, feeling lonely because I wasn’t with her, and that made me sad. I knew she thought that I liked to lie on the nice pillow under the stairs, but actually I wanted to be with her. I barked. There was no response, so I barked again, and then again.
“Clarity! What’s that sound?” Gloria shrieked. I heard running, and then the door at the top of the stairs opened.
“I think it came from down here!” Clarity shouted. I wagged my tail as she came down the stairs. “Go back to bed, Gloria. I’ll take care of it.”
“It sounded like an animal!” Gloria replied.
I heard Clarity moving around on the other side of the boxes. I scratched at them. I heard Gloria walking through the house and then I could sense her at the top of the stairs.
I barked.
“There it is again!” Gloria hissed. “It’s a dog; there’s a dog in the house!”
Clarity shoved the boxes aside and I tumbled into her arms, licking her face. “No, it’s … Oh my God, it’s a fox!” she yelled. “Stay back!”
“A fox? What? Are you sure?”
“Foxes do bark, Gloria,” Clarity said.
“How did it get in the house? What’s a fox doing here?”
“The basement door must have blown open in the wind. It probably came because it smelled your stupid coat.”
Clarity was smiling at me now. We played tug-on-a-towel and she wasn’t pulling very hard.
“That can’t be right,” Gloria said.
“They have very sensitive noses! I’m going to try to scare it out of the house and down the street,” Clarity said.
“Are you sure it’s a fox? A fox, as in, the animal?”
“I know what a fox looks like. It’s a little one.”
“We should call the police.”
“Like cops would come for a fox. I’m just going to shoo it outside. Stay back in case it makes a run for the stairs.”
I heard Gloria gasp and slam the door at the top of the stairs. Clarity picked me up and ran out the back door and into the cool night. She took me right out the gate and didn’t set me down until we were around the corner.
I didn’t understand the game we were playing, but after shaking and squatting I was ready to keep going. Clarity paced with me up and down the street and then a car came around the corner and stopped. The window rolled down and I smelled Rocky! I put my feet on the metal side of the car and tried to peer in. I smelled Trent then, too.
“Thanks for doing this, Trent,” Clarity said.
“It’s okay,” Trent said.
Clarity picked me up and handed me through the window. I crawled across Trent’s chest, licking him in greeting, and then sniffed along the seat. Rocky wasn’t in the car, but he had been. We were both front-seat dogs.
I went home with Trent that night and Clarity did not come with us. I was distressed when we drove off, and I whimpered, wondering where Clarity was, but when we arrived at Trent’s house Rocky was there! We were overjoyed to see each other and he and I wrestled in the living room and in the backyard and in Trent’s bedroom. Trent had a younger sister named Carolina who played with us and Trent played with us and even his parents played with us. I fell asleep in the middle of it all, suddenly so fatigued I simply had to lie down even though Rocky was chewing my face.
As soon as Rocky and I awoke the next morning we recommenced the play. He was a little bigger than I was and obviously very attached to Trent, because sometimes he’d break off wrestling and run over to Trent to be stroked and praised. It made me miss Clarity, but every time it occurred to me that I should be worried about her Rocky would climb on me and we’d be back at it. I comforted myself that she had to come back to get me, and eventually she did.
Later the back gate clanged and Rocky and I tore over to see who it might be, and there she was. We both jumped up on her and I finally growled at Rocky for acting as if he was as important to her as I was.
Clarity and Trent stood in the backyard to watch me play with my brother. I tried to show her I could pin Rocky when I wanted to, but he wouldn’t cooperate.
“She gone yet?” Trent asked.
“Not yet. Her flight isn’t until one o’clock. I told her I had to leave early for school.”
“Are you going to school?”
“Not today.”
“CJ, you can’t keep skipping school.”
“Molly needs me.”
I froze at the sound of my name and Rocky jumped on my back.
“You’ve had Molly for three days. What about the other times?”
“I just don’t feel like school is relevant in my life.”
“You’re a high school student,” he said. “School is your life.”
“I’ll go Monday,” Clarity told him. “I just want to spend time this week with Molly, while Gloria’s gone.”
“And when Gloria gets back, what’s the plan then?”
“I don’t know, Trent! Sometimes people don’t plan everything, it just happens, okay?”
Clarity and I went for a car ride and I sat in the front seat. We went to a park that had a lot of grass but just one dog in it, an unfriendly brown canine who was only interested in walking with his owner on a path. Then we went home and, thankfully, I wasn’t shoved back into the tiny place under the stairs but had the run of the house. I could smell Gloria, but she was not around.
I slept in Clarity’s bed. I was so excited I kept waking up and licking her face. She would bat my nose away, but there was no heat in the gesture. Finally she was content to just let me gnaw gently on her fingers when I felt the need, and that’s how we spent the night.
The next day it rained and we played inside, only going out for me to do my business in the wet grass. “Molly! Come here!” CJ called to me at one point. I trotted down the hall, Gloria’s smells getting stronger and stronger. CJ was grinning and nodding at me, and I watched her curiously. She pushed open a door and Gloria’s overpowering odors flooded out.
“See the dog in the mirror?” CJ asked.
I heard the word “dog” and figured she wanted me to go through the door. I walked in and immediately stopped dead: there was a dog in there! It looked like Rocky. I bounded forward, then pulled back in surprise as it jumped aggressively at me. It was not Rocky—in fact, it didn’t smell like any dog at all. I wagged my tail and it wagged. I bowed down and it bowed down at the same time.
It was so strange, I barked. It looked like it was barking, too, but it didn’t make a noise.
“Say hi, Molly! Get the dog!” CJ said.
I barked some more, then approached, sniffing. There was no dog, just something that looked like a dog. It was very strange.
“You see the dog, Molly? See the dog?”
Whatever was going on, it wasn’t very interesting. I turned away, smelling under the bed, where there were dusty shoes.
“Good dog, Molly!” CJ said. I liked being praised, but I was glad when we left the room. There was something a bit disquieting about the dog-thing with no smell.
The morning after that, everything was moist and deliciously fragrant and I sniffed at several worms but didn’t eat any because after you’ve done that a few times you learn they’re never going to taste any better than they smell.
We had just gotten home when the doorbell rang. I ran to the front door and barked. I could see a shadow on the other side of the glass in the door.
“Look out, Molly. Stay back,” Clarity said. She opened the door a crack.
“Are you Clarity Mahoney?” the woman on the other side of the door asked. I pushed my face to the crack and tried to squeeze out, but Clarity kept me inside. I wagged my tail so the person would know I wasn’t serious about all the barking; I was just doing my job.
“I go by ‘CJ,’” Clarity said.
“CJ. I’m Officer Llewellyn. I’m a truant officer. Why aren’t you in school today?”
“I’m sick.” CJ turned her head and coughed. The woman outside looked down at me and I wagged harder. Why didn’t we all go outdoors and play?
“Where’s your mother?”
“She’s out shopping. For my prescription,” CJ said.
They just stood there for a long moment. I yawned.
“We’ve left several messages for her and she hasn’t called back,” the woman said.
“She’s very busy. She sells real estate.”
“Well, okay. I want you to give her this, okay?” The woman handed Clarity a piece of paper. “You’ve missed a lot of school, CJ. People are worried about you.”
“I’ve been sick a lot, I guess.”
“Give that to your mother. I’ll be expecting her call. Tell her she can call anytime, leave me a message if I’m not there. Understand?”
“Yes.”
“Good-bye, CJ.”
Clarity closed the door. She seemed afraid and angry. She went into the kitchen and put some things on the table. “Molly, we need ice-cream bars,” she told me. She put a cold, deliciously sweet treat in a bowl for me.
Clarity sat at the table and ate and ate. I sat, too, staring at her intently, but she didn’t give me any more treats. When she was done she put some papers in a tub under the sink and I could smell the same sweet smell on them and couldn’t understand why she didn’t set them down to lick. People are like that; they discard the most delicious things.
A little while later Clarity went into her bathroom and stood on a small, flat, square box, bigger than a dog bowl but not as high off the ground. “Two point six pounds? God! I’m such an idiot!” she hissed unhappily. I picked up on her anguish, but she didn’t seem to notice me trying to comfort her.
She made a ragged sound and then knelt down in front of the water bowl and vomited. I paced behind her, distressed because I could feel her pain and upset. I could smell the sweet scent from the treats she’d eaten earlier, and then she pulled the handle and the smell went away with a whoosh. I wagged my tail as hard as I could, trying to climb on her and lick her, and after a while it seemed to do some good, though she was still a little upset.
A couple of days later we settled into a routine. Every morning Clarity would leave me alone in the basement for hours at a time, blocked into the little space under the stairs. She would come home and play with me and clean up any messes and feed me for a short time in the middle of the day and would run down the stairs calling, “Molly!” in the afternoon and then stay home until the next morning. She was, I decided, doing school. My boy, Ethan, had done school, too. I didn’t like it any better with her doing it.
Clarity and I played a game every night: She would block me in the space using the boxes but would stay outside where I could sense her. If I cried or barked, she would slide the boxes and say, “No!” very harshly. If I sat quietly, she’d slide the boxes back and give me a treat. We’d go longer and longer periods of time with me sitting quietly, and every time I got a treat. I came to understand that when I was under the stairs she wanted me to be quiet as long as she was on just the other side of the boxes.
I didn’t like being alone in there and could think of a lot of other games that were much more fun to play.
When I had to be there all night I was pretty sure it was a mistake, especially when I heard Clarity go upstairs. Every time I barked, though, Clarity came down and said, “No!” And when I finally just gave up and lay down, she woke me up and gave me a treat. I wasn’t sure what to make of any of it.
Then one day Clarity said, “Okay, here she comes. Let’s do this, Molly.” She led me down and put me under the stairs. I sat quietly. Then I heard voices and footsteps and knew that Gloria had come home.
I sat quietly.
Clarity gave me a big treat and took me for a long walk. I smelled a rabbit!
When it was dark Clarity put me in the space and I lay down with a heavy sigh. I was quiet, though, and got a big treat and a walk in the early morning.
“You be good. Stay quiet. I love you, Molly. I love you,” Clarity said. Then she left. I napped for a bit, and then I heard Gloria walking around upstairs. I didn’t know if Gloria knew I was supposed to be fed treats for being quiet.
Clarity hadn’t shoved the boxes all the way across the space and, when I put my nose to it, I found I could move the bottom box just enough to stick my head through. I wriggled and pushed and strained and then I was through!
Though I was big enough to climb stairs, it was not easy work to get to the top. The door there was open and just as I reached the highest step the doorbell rang. I heard Gloria move across the floor to open the front door.
I trotted into the living room, stopping to sniff at a suitcase on the floor that hadn’t been there before.
“Yes?” Gloria said, standing in the doorway. Air flowing in from outside brought the scent of wonderful grasses and trees but also the strong flowery smell that was Gloria, so overpowering it threatened to choke off everything else.
“Miss Mahoney? I’m Officer Llewellyn. I’m the truant officer in charge of CJ’s case. Did she give you the citation?”
I trotted over to say hi to Gloria. The officer on the porch glanced at me as I approached.
“Citation. Clarity? What are you talking about?”
“I’m sorry. I need to talk to you. Your daughter has been absent from school too many times this semester.”
Gloria was just standing there, even though I was right by her side. I put a paw on her leg.
She looked down at me and screamed.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
EIGHT
Gloria jumped out onto the porch and I followed her, wagging my tail at both women.
“That’s not a fox!” Gloria yelled.
The woman bent down and petted me. She had warm, gentle hands that smelled of soap and also nuts of some kind. “A fox? Of course not, it’s a puppy.”
“What’s it doing in my house?”
The woman stood. “I can’t answer that, ma’am; it’s your house. The dog was here when I saw your daughter last week.”
“That’s impossible!”
“Well … look,” the woman said, “here’s another copy of the citation, along with a notice to appear.” She handed Gloria some papers. “You’ll need to come to court with your daughter. Understand? Because she’s a minor, you are legally liable.”
“What about the dog?”
“Sorry?”
I sat at the word “dog.” Gloria seemed upset about something, but I thought the nice lady might be good for a treat. I liked nuts of all kinds, even the salty ones that burned my tongue.
“Take the dog with you,” Gloria said.
“I can’t do that, ma’am.”
“So you mean to tell me you’re more concerned about a high school student skipping a few classes than a woman trapped by a dog?”
“That’s … yes, that’s right.”
“That’s the stupidest thing I ever heard of. What kind of police officer are you?”
“I’m a truant officer, Miss Mahoney.”
“I’m going to file a formal complaint with the police commissioner.”
“You do that. Meanwhile, I’ll see you in court.” The woman turned and walked away, so no treats.
“What do I do about the dog?” Gloria yelled at her.
“Call Animal Control, ma’am; that’s what they do.”
“All right, I will,” Gloria said. I made to follow her back into the house but cringed when she yelled, “No!” at me. She slammed the door, shutting me out.
I wandered out into the front yard. It was another nice day. Maybe that rabbit would be outside looking for me. I trotted down the sidewalk, sniffing at the bushes.
The front yards of the houses on the street reminded me of the home Ethan lived in before he moved to the Farm: they were big enough to play in and often were bordered by shrubs. The air was full of the sweet smell of flowers and all of the growth was lush and full. I smelled dogs and cats and people but no ducks or goats. An occasional car cruised past, stirring the air and adding its metallic and oily odors to the riot of scents.
I felt a little like a bad dog, wandering free without a leash, but Gloria had set me loose, so I reasoned it must be okay.
After an hour or so of sniffing and exploring, I heard footfalls coming toward me, and a man called out, “Here, puppy!” My initial inclination was to trot right over to him, but I stopped when I saw the pole in his hand, a loop dangling from the pole. He advanced on me, holding the loop out. “Come on; that’s a good girl,” he said to me.
I could feel that loop of rope around my neck as if it were already there. I danced back.
“Now don’t run away,” he said softly.
I ducked my head and made to run past him, but he lunged and then I was twisting on the end of that pole. “Gotcha!” he said.
I was afraid. This was not right. I didn’t want to go with the man, who pulled me with his pole over to a truck. The line around my neck tightened, forcing my head toward the truck tire, and then he scooped me up and with a clang I was in a metal cage in the back of the truck.
“Hey!”
The man turned at the sound of approaching footsteps.
“Hey!”
It was Clarity.
“What are you doing? That’s my dog!”
The man held his hands out to Clarity, who stood before him, panting. I put my paws on the cage, wagging, delighted to see her.
“Now wait, just wait,” the man said.
“You can’t take my dog!” Clarity said angrily.
The man crossed his arms. “I am taking the dog. We’ve had complaints, and it was running loose.”
I yipped so she’d know I was right there waiting to be let out.
“Complaints? Molly is just a puppy. Who complains about a puppy?” Clarity said. “What was she, making people too happy?”
“That’s not your business. If it is your dog, you can pick it up at the shelter anytime after noon tomorrow.” The man made to move away.
“But wait! Wait! She’s just…” The tears were flowing down Clarity’s face now. I whimpered, wanting to kiss her sadness away. She put a hand to her mouth. “She won’t understand if you take her. She’s a rescue dog who has already been abandoned once. Please, please. I don’t know how she got out, but I promise you it won’t happen again. Promise, promise. Please?”
The man’s shoulders slumped. He took in a deep breath and then let it out slowly. “Well … All right, look. Okay, but you need to get her chipped and vaccinated and in a few months spay her. Deal? And then get a license. It’s the law.”
“I will. I promise.”
The game of truck was over. The man opened the cage and Clarity reached in and pulled me out. She hugged me and I kissed her face, then looked at the man to see if he wanted a kiss, too.
“All right,” the man said.
“Thank you, thank you,” Clarity said.
The truck drove off. Clarity stood and watched it go, still holding me. “Complaints,” she muttered.
As she carried me to her house, I could feel her heart beating loudly in her chest. We went through the front door and she stooped, setting me down. A piece of paper was right in front of my nose on the floor and I sniffed it, smelling the woman who had been on the porch a little while ago. Clarity picked up the paper and looked at it.
“Clarity? Is that you?”
Gloria came around the corner and stopped, staring at me. I wagged and started to go to her to say hello, but Clarity reached down and picked me up.
“What? What are you doing?” Gloria demanded.
“This is Molly. She’s … she’s my dog.” Clarity’s hands were trembling.
“No, she is not,” Gloria said.
“Not which part? Not Molly? Or not a dog?” Clarity asked.
“Out!” Gloria yelled.
“No!” Clarity shouted back.
“You cannot have a dog in my house!”
“I am keeping her!”
“You can’t say anything to me right now. Do you know what trouble you’re in? I had a visit from the delinquency officer. You’ve been missing so much school that they came out here to arrest you.”
Clarity set me down.
“No! Do not put that animal on my carpet.”
With all the shouting, I shied away from Gloria.
“It’s a dog. She won’t do anything, she just peed outside.”
“A dog—are you sure it’s not a fox?”
“Why? Do you need another coat?”
I wandered over to the couch, but there was nothing underneath it but dusty smells. In fact, most of the odors in the house were coming from Gloria.
“It’s going to lift its leg on the couch! I’m calling someone,” Gloria shrieked.
“Did you even bother to read this?” Clarity said. She rattled the paper in her hand and I watched alertly, wondering if she was going to throw it. “This is a summons for you, you know. You have to appear in court, too.”
“Well, I’m going to tell them you are completely out of control.”
“And I’m going to tell them why.”
“Why what?”
“Why I was able to skip so much school. You go on trips all the time and leave me without any adults in the house, including when I was twelve years old. By myself !”
“I don’t believe this. You asked to be left alone. You hated the babysitter.”
“I hated her because she was a drunk! One time she fell asleep in her car in the driveway.”
“We’re not having this conversation again. If you’re going to imply that I was in any way a negligent mother then I’ll just call Social Services and you can live in an orphanage.”
I turned in circles a few times and lay down on the soft rug. The shouting made me anxious, though, and within a few seconds I was back on my feet.
“Sure, that’s how it works. You just leave me in a box on the front porch and they come by on Tuesdays to pick it up and take me to be an orphan.”
“You know what I mean.”
“Yes. You’re going to call Social Services and tell them you don’t want to be a mom anymore. So then there will be a hearing. And the judge is going to want to know where you were all last week—Aspen—and where you were when you went to Vegas when I was thirteen, and where you were when you went to New York for a month. And you know what he’s going to say? He’s going to say that you need to go to jail. And everyone in the neighborhood will know. They’ll see you getting into a patrol car in handcuffs with your fur coat over your head.”
“My mother left me alone when I was a lot younger than you. I never complained.”
“The same mother who beat you with garden tools? Who broke your arm when you were eight years old? I don’t think you would.”
“My point was, I was fine. You were fine.”
“Well, my point was, they arrested your mom and they’ll arrest you, too, Gloria. The laws are a lot more strict now. You don’t have to actually send your kid to the emergency room to wind up in jail.”
Gloria was staring at Clarity, who was breathing hard. “Unless,” Clarity said in a low voice, “you let me keep Molly.”
“I don’t know what you mean.”
“I’ll tell the judge that I lied to you. That I told you I was going to school, but actually I was skipping. I’ll say it wasn’t your fault.”
“It wasn’t my fault!”
“Or I can tell him about you leaving me all the time on your little trips with your boyfriends. That’s the deal. I keep Molly and I’ll lie to the judge. If you try to make me get rid of her, I’ll tell him everything.”
“You’re as horrible as your father.”
“Oh darn, Gloria. That one doesn’t even upset me anymore. You used it on me too often. So what do you want to do?”
Gloria left the room. Clarity went over to me and petted me and I curled up on the rug and fell asleep. When I woke up, Gloria was no longer in the house. Clarity was in the kitchen and I arose with a yawn and went in to see what she was doing. A delicious odor was in the air.
“Want some, Molly?” Clarity asked me. She sounded sad, but she fed me toast. “No honey butter for you, though,” she said. “That’s people-only food.”
She stood up from the table and opened a bag and soon the air carried with it the tantalizing smell of more toast. She dropped a toy on the floor and I chased it, my nails scrabbling on the smooth floor.
“You want the lid? Okay, you can have the lid,” she told me.
I licked the toy, which had an amazing sweet scent to it, but there was nothing to eat on it. I chewed it. Clarity got up from the table and made more toast, and then more, and then more, while I happily chewed on the toy. Then she stood up. “Out of bread,” she said, throwing a plastic sack into the trash can. I wagged, thinking she would come over to play with the toy, but instead she went to the counter and I heard her open a plastic bag and then she made more toast. She kicked the toy and it slid across the floor and I jumped on it. Every time she got up to make more toast, she would kick the toy and I would chase it. I found that if I put my front paws on it I could slide on it until I hit the wall. What a great game!
“All gone. Come on, Molly,” Clarity said. I followed her into her bedroom. “You want to sleep on this pillow? Molly?” Clarity patted a pillow and I jumped on it and shook it in my teeth.
Clarity didn’t want to play, though. She lay on her back with her eyes open. I put my head on her chest and she ran her fingers through my fur, but there was a change overcoming her, a darkening of her mood. I cuddled with her, hoping I could lift her out of her sadness, but when she moaned I knew I was failing. I went to lick her face, smelling butter and toast and the same sweet, sugary tang that had coated the toy, but she rolled away from me. “Oh God,” she said softly.
Clarity went into her bathroom and I heard her making a choking noise and I smelled the sweet toast. She was vomiting again. Her head was in the water bowl, which she refreshed a few times before standing up and looking at her teeth in the mirror. Then she stood on the small box. “A hundred six point five,” she moaned. “I hate myself.”
I decided I despised that box for how it made her feel.
“Let’s go to bed, Molly.”
Clarity didn’t take me down to the basement—she let me sleep on her bed. I was so excited to be out of that space and back in bed with her that I of course had trouble sleeping, but she put her hand on me and petted me until I got drowsy. I turned around and curled up against her and, as I drifted off, her love flowed into me and my love flowed into her. This was more than just watching over someone out of loyalty—I loved Clarity, loved her as completely and totally as any dog could love a person. Ethan had been my boy, but Clarity was my girl.
I woke up later because I heard Gloria and a man talking outside the house. The man laughed and then I heard a car start and drive away and the front door of the house opened and closed. Clarity was still asleep. I heard someone coming down the hall—my time under the stairs, listening to footsteps, told me it was Gloria.
The door to the hallway was open and Gloria stopped in it, staring in at me on the bed. Her complex scents drifted into the room. I wagged a little.
That’s all she did: just stared at me from the darkened hallway.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
NINE
Clarity had lots of friends who would come over to play with me and gradually I came to understand that her name was now CJ. People can do that, change the names of things, though I was still Molly. Gloria’s name was Gloria and also Mo-ther. Only Gloria called CJ Clarity anymore.
It worked the other way, too—sometimes the names would stay the same, but the people would change. That’s how the Vet, which was another name for Doctor Deb, was now what CJ called Doctor Marty. He was as nice as Doctor Deb, with hair between his nose and his lip, and strong hands that touched me very gently.
My favorite of all of CJ’s friends was Trent, the boy who took care of Rocky. Trent was taller than CJ and his hair was dark and he always smelled like Rocky. When Trent came to visit he usually brought my brother, and the two of us would tear around in the backyard, wrestling with each other. We would play until we collapsed with exhaustion, sprawled out on the lawn. Often I would lie panting on top of my brother, holding his leg in my mouth out of sheer affection.
Rocky was stockier than I was and taller, too, but he usually let me pin him when I wanted. When I had him down I always noticed that the darker brown of his muzzle matched the color of my legs—he was otherwise a lighter brown color. I found that as the days became warmer I could measure my growth by assessing Rocky’s—my brother was no longer a gawky puppy, and neither was I.
Rocky was completely devoted to Trent. In the middle of play he would suddenly break off and run over to Trent to be petted. I’d follow him, and CJ would pet me, too.
“You think he’s maybe schnauzer-poodle?” CJ asked Trent. “A schnoodle?”
“I don’t think so. Maybe a Doberman-poodle,” Trent said.
“A Doodle?”
I wagged at my favorite name and gave CJ a friendly nudge with my nose. Ethan had called me a doodle dog; it was a special name that carried with it all the love a boy could have for a dog. Hearing CJ say it reminded me of the connection between my boy and CJ, my girl.
“Or a spaniel of some kind,” Trent speculated.
“Molly, you could be a schnoodle, a spoodle, or a Doodle, but you’re not a poodle,” CJ told me, holding me close and kissing my nose. I wagged with pleasure.
“Hey, watch this. Rocky? Sit! Sit!” Trent commanded. Rocky stared at Trent alertly, sitting down and holding still. “Good dog!”
“I’m not teaching Molly any tricks,” CJ said. “I get enough orders in my own life.”
“Are you kidding? Dogs want to work. They crave it. Don’t you, Rocky? Good boy, Sit!”
Well, I knew what that word meant. This time, when Rocky sat, I sat, too.
“Look, Molly figured it out by watching Rocky! You are such a good dog, Molly!”
I wagged at being a good dog. There were other commands I knew, too, but CJ didn’t say any of them. Rocky rolled on his back for a tummy rub and I put my teeth on his throat.
“Hey, so…,” Trent said. Rocky froze, then struggled out of my grip. I’d felt it, too—a sudden whiff of fear from Trent. Rocky pushed his muzzle at Trent’s hand, while I checked on CJ, who was smiling up at the sky, unaware of any danger.
“Maybe … CJ? Maybe we should go to prom together this year.”
“What? No, are you kidding? You don’t go to prom with your friends. That’s not what it’s for.”
“Yeah, but…”
“But what?” CJ rolled over, brushing her hair back from her face. “God, Trent, ask someone pretty. What about Susan? I know she likes you.”
“No, I’m … Pretty?” Trent said. “Come on. You know you’re pretty.”
CJ slugged him lightly in the arm. “Ya goof.”
Trent was frowning and looking at the ground.
“What?” CJ asked.
“Nothing.”
“Come on; let’s go to the park.”
We went for a walk. Rocky held us up, sniffing and marking the bushes, while I stuck close to CJ’s side. She reached into her pocket and pulled out a little box, but it wasn’t a treat. There was a flare of fire and then a smelly smoke was coming out of her mouth. I knew that odor: it was in all of CJ’s clothing and was often on her breath.
“So what’s probation like? The whole house arrest thing?” Trent wanted to know.
“It’s nothing. I just have to go to school. It’s not even real probation. Gloria acts like I’m some kind of, like, felon.” CJ laughed, then coughed out more smoke.
“You get to keep the dog, though.”
Both Rocky and I looked up at the word “dog.”
“I’m moving out the second I turn eighteen.”
“Yeah? How are you going to manage that?”
“I’ll join the army if I have to. I’ll go to a nunnery. I just have to survive until I’m twenty-one.”
Rocky and I found something deliciously dead to sniff, but CJ and Trent kept walking and our leashes pulled us away before either one of us could roll in it. Sometimes people let their dogs take the time to smell everything important, but most of the time they walk too fast and the wonderful opportunities are lost.
“What happens at twenty-one?” Trent asked.
“That’s when I get the first half of the trust fund my daddy left me.”
“Yeah? How much?”
“Like a million dollars.”
“No way.”
“Way. There was a settlement with the airline after the crash. It’s enough to pay for college and for me to move to New York to take my acting to the next level.”
A squirrel was hopping along in the grass a few houses ahead of us. It froze, realizing its fatal mistake. Rocky and I lowered our heads and charged, straining against our leashes. “Hey!” Trent said, laughing. He ran with us, but with him and CJ holding us back the squirrel was able to make it to a tree and dashed up, chattering at us. Otherwise we most surely would have caught it. We chased that same squirrel on the way back home. Did the stupid thing want to be caught?
Every so often CJ would say, “Want to go to the Vet?” Roughly translated, this meant “We’re going for a car ride in the front seat to see Doctor Marty!” I always responded enthusiastically, even when I came home one day wearing a stupid collar, a plastic cone that magnified all sounds and made it difficult to eat and drink. It had taken me a long time to get used to the idea, but eventually I had learned that people like to put their dogs in stupid collars from time to time.
When I next saw Rocky, he was wearing the same kind of collar! It made wrestling difficult, but we managed.
“Poor Rocky’s singing soprano now,” Trent said.
CJ laughed, smoke coming from her nose and mouth.
Soon after the stupid collar came off we started doing “art building,” which was where we’d go to a quiet place and I’d munch on a chew toy while CJ sat and played with smelly sticks and papers. Everyone at Art Building knew my name and petted me and sometimes fed me—it was so different from at home, where CJ hugged me and cuddled me and Gloria just pushed me away if I tried to greet her in any fashion.
Gloria never touched CJ, either, which was why it was good I was there. In a way, being held by CJ was my most important function. I could feel the lonely ache inside her melting away as we lay together on her bed. I would wag and kiss her and even nibble lightly on her arm, so happy to be with my girl.
When CJ wasn’t home I lived downstairs. Trent came over and he and CJ put a dog door in the basement door, so that I could go out into the backyard if I wanted. I loved going in and out through that dog door—there was always something fun to do on the other side!
Sometimes when I was out in the yard I could see Gloria standing at the window, watching me. I always wagged. Gloria was mad at me for some reason, but I knew from experience that people can’t stay mad at dogs forever.
One day when CJ came home it was late enough that the sun had set. She hugged me for a long time and was sad and upset. Then we went into her bathroom and she vomited. I yawned and paced anxiously—I never knew what to do when this happened. CJ and I both looked up at the same time and there was Gloria standing in the doorway, watching us.
“You wouldn’t have to do that so often if you didn’t eat so much,” Gloria said.
“Oh, mo-ther,” CJ replied. She stood and went to her sink and drank water.
“How did your auditions go?” Gloria asked.
“Terrible. I didn’t get anything. It’s like, you have to have been doing drama this whole year or they won’t even consider casting you.”
“Well. If they don’t want my daughter in their summer play, it’s their loss. It hardly matters—no one ever got to be an actress by being in plays in high school.”
“That’s right, Gloria. Who ever heard of an actor acting?”
“I am just saying that I never sang in high school and it didn’t slow me down one bit.”
“I am noticing all the record companies beating down our door lately.”
Gloria crossed her arms. “I had a very promising career until I got pregnant with you. Once you have a baby, it’s all different.”
“What are you saying, you couldn’t sing anymore because you’d had a baby? Did you deliver me through your esophagus?”
“You’ve never thanked me, not once.”
“I’m supposed to thank you for giving birth? Seriously? Do they make cards for that, like: ‘Thanks for letting me hang out in your uterus for nine months’?”
I launched myself up and landed with expert placement at the foot of the bed.
“Get off!” Gloria snapped.
Guiltily I jumped down and slumped to the floor, my head lowered.
“It’s okay, Molly. You’re a good girl,” CJ soothed. “What do you got against dogs, Gloria?”
“I just don’t see the attraction. They’re messy and foul smelling. They lick. They don’t do anything useful.”
“You’d feel different if you just spent time with one,” CJ replied, petting me.
“I have. My mother had a dog when I was little.”
“You never told me that.”
“She used to kiss it on the mouth; it was disgusting,” Gloria continued. “She was always loving it up. It was fat and it just lay in her lap all day and didn’t do anything useful, just sat and watched me clean the house.”
“Well, Molly’s not like that.”
“You spend all your money on dog food and vet bills when there are so many nice things we could buy.”
“Now that I have Molly, I don’t need anything else.” CJ scratched my ear and I leaned into it, groaning a little.
“I see. The dog gets all the credit and your mother gets nothing.” Gloria turned away and walked out the door. CJ got up and shut it and then cuddled with me on the bed.
“We’re getting out of here as soon as we can, I promise, Molly,” CJ said. I licked her in the face.
I was a good dog who was taking care of Ethan’s child, but it wasn’t just because it was what he would want. I loved CJ. I loved falling asleep in her arms and walking with her and going to do art building.
What I didn’t love was the boy named Shane who started coming over all the time. Gloria was very often not home in the evening, so Shane and CJ would cuddle on the couch. Shane’s hands smelled of the same smoke that permeated CJ’s clothing. He always said hello to me, but I could tell he didn’t really like me—the way he petted me was too perfunctory. A dog can always tell.
I didn’t trust people who didn’t like dogs.
One evening Trent and Rocky came over when Shane was there. Rocky was very alert, staring up at Trent, who didn’t sit down. I could feel Trent’s anger and sadness, and obviously Rocky could, too. I tried to engage Rocky in a little wrestling, but he wasn’t interested—he was focused on Trent.
“Oh, hey, just thought I’d come by, and…,” Trent said. He kicked at the carpet a little.
“As you can see, she’s busy,” Shane said.
“Yeah,” Trent said.
“No, come in; we’re just watching TV,” CJ said.
“No, I’d better go,” Trent said.
After he left I went to the window and looked out it and saw him standing next to his car, gazing at the house for a long minute before he opened the door and drove off.
Rocky was in the front seat.
The next day CJ didn’t come home from school right away, so I chewed sticks in the backyard and watched some birds hopping from tree to tree. Barking at birds seldom does any good, because birds don’t understand they are supposed to be afraid of dogs and will just go about their business. I had eaten dead birds before and they were not satisfying at all, and I probably wouldn’t eat a live one if I caught it, though I wouldn’t mind trying it to see if its being alive improved the taste any.
I was startled when Gloria slid open the back door. “Here, Molly. Want a treat?” she called.
I cautiously approached, wagging my tail and keeping my rear end lowered submissively. Gloria usually did not talk to me unless I was in trouble for something.
“Well, come on,” she said.
I entered the house and she closed the door behind me. “You like cheese?” she asked.
I wagged and followed her into the kitchen. She headed toward the refrigerator, so I watched her alertly, and was rewarded with the usual rush of delicious odors that swam out on the flood of cold air.
She rustled something. “It’s all moldy, but that’s okay for dogs, right? You want this?”
Gloria held out a big hunk of cheese at the end of a metal fork. I sniffed it, then very, very tentatively chewed at it, waiting for her to get angry. “Hurry up,” she said.
I pulled the cheese off the fork, dropped it to the floor, and then ate it in a few gulps. Okay, so maybe she wasn’t angry at me anymore!
“Here,” Gloria said. With a clang, she dropped a huge hunk of cheese into my food bowl. “Make yourself useful. Ridiculous we spend so much on premium dog food when you could be cleaning up our throwaways.”
I’d never before been given more than a little bit of cheese at a time, so to have all this at once was an unexpected luxury. I picked up the heavy block, unsure as to how to begin. Gloria left the kitchen, so I just concentrated on eating the cheese a bite at a time. By the time I was finished, I was drooling a little, and lapped up most of my water.
Gloria came through the kitchen a little while later. “Finished?” she said. She went to the rear door and slid it open. “Okay, out,” she ordered. I got the drift of what she was saying and hurriedly moved through the door out into the backyard. I felt better out there.
I didn’t know when CJ would be home, and I missed her. I went through the dog door into the basement and curled up on my pillow, wishing she were there with me.
I fell asleep, but when I woke up I felt sick. I paced for a while, panting. I was drooling and was thirsty and my legs were trembling. Eventually all I could do was stand there, shaking, too weak to move.
I heard CJ’s footsteps and knew she was home. She opened the door at the top of the stairs.
“Molly? Come! Come upstairs!” CJ called.
I knew I had to do what she asked. I took a step, dizzy, my head low.
“Molly?” CJ came down the stairs. “Molly? Are you okay? Molly!”
This time when she said my name it was a scream. I wanted to go to her to let her know it was okay, but I just couldn’t budge. When she came to me and picked me up it sounded like my head was buried under the covers—everything muffled and quiet.
“Mom! There’s something wrong with Molly!” CJ yelled. She carried me up the stairs and past Gloria, who was sitting on the couch. CJ ran with me out to the driveway.
When CJ set me down to open her car door I vomited explosively in the grass. “Oh God, what’s that? What did you eat? Oh, Molly!”
I was a front-seat dog for the car ride but couldn’t even lift my head to the window when CJ opened it. “Molly! We’re going to the Vet. Okay? Molly? Are you okay? Molly, please!”
I could feel the pain and fear in CJ, but I couldn’t move. It was getting dark in the car, darker and darker. I felt my tongue flop out of my mouth.
“Molly!” CJ shouted. “Molly!”
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
TEN
When I opened my eyes I could see nothing but a fuzzy light, my vision blurred and indistinct. It was a very familiar sensation—that and having unresponsive limbs and a head too heavy to hold up. I shut my eyes. It did not seem possible that I could be a puppy again.
What had happened to me?
I was hungry and instinctively groped for my mother. I couldn’t smell her, or smell anything, really. I groaned, feeling myself slide helplessly back to sleep.
“Molly?”
I jerked awake. The film left my vision and CJ swam into focus. My girl put her head next to mine.
“Oh, Molly, I was so worried about you.” Her hands stroked my fur and she kissed my face. I wagged, my tail banging softly on the metal table. I felt too weak to raise my head, though I did lick CJ’s hand, relieved I was still alive to take care of her.
Doctor Marty came up from behind her. “Her last seizure was very short and was more than four hours ago. I think we’re out of the woods.”
“What was it?” CJ asked.
“I don’t know,” the Vet said. “She obviously got into something she shouldn’t have.”
“Oh, Molly,” CJ said. “Don’t eat bad things, okay?”
I licked her face as she kissed me again. I was relieved that I was not a puppy, that I was still with my girl.
CJ and Gloria got angry at each other the first night I was home.
“Six hundred dollars!” Gloria shouted.
“That’s what it cost. Molly almost died!” CJ yelled back.
Usually when they fought I would pace and yawn anxiously, but I was simply too fatigued. I lay there while Gloria went down the hall to her room, and when she shut her door it made a very loud noise, her various smells wafting around the house.
That summer Trent wasn’t around much, but CJ and I would sleep until the sun was high in the sky and then have breakfast together and then often lie in the backyard. It was glorious. CJ would cover herself in an oil that smelled bad and tasted worse, though I would still lick her occasionally out of sheer affection. I loved taking naps with CJ.
Sometimes she lay outside almost all day, only going inside to use the bathroom and stand on the small box she had in there. I didn’t understand why she stood on that thing so often. It never made her happy to do so.
I always went with her on these trips, so I was at her side when CJ slid open the back door and saw Gloria lying on a blanket next to where we’d been basking in the sun. “Gloria! What are you doing in my bikini?”
“It fits me just fine. Better, even.”
“God, it does not! It’s gross.”
“I lost eleven pounds. And when I lose weight, it stays off.”
CJ made a loud noise of frustration, her fists clenched, then turned back to the house. “Come on, Molly,” she said. She sounded angry at me, so I padded silently next to her, my head down guiltily. She went straight to her room and went into the closet where she washed herself with water. I lay on the rug, panting because I could hear her crying. My girl was unhappy.
That day she didn’t throw up, but many days she did. She was always very unhappy when this happened, too.
One day CJ took me for a car ride and I sat on the front seat. We went to Trent’s and I played with Rocky in his backyard, which wasn’t as big as CJ’s but had the added attraction of having Rocky in it.
“Thank you so much for doing this,” CJ said.
“Oh, it’s no big deal at all. Rocky appreciates the company—he misses me while I’m at work,” Trent replied. “Did I tell you they made me an assistant manager?”
“Really? So do you get to wear a special paper hat?”
Rocky stopped playing and trotted over to Trent.
“Well … no. But I mean, I’m only in high school and yet they trust me … aw, never mind.” Trent sighed.
“Wait, no. I’m sorry. It was just a stupid joke. I’m proud of you.”
“Sure you are.”
Rocky was nuzzling Trent.
“No, seriously, I am,” CJ said. “It shows how good you are at everything. That’s why you’re class president. You can accomplish anything you want.”
“Not everything.”
“What do you mean?”
“Nothing.”
“Trent?”
“Just tell me about your trip.”
“I’m really excited,” CJ said. “I’ve never been on a cruise before. Two weeks!”
“Try not to push Gloria overboard. I’m pretty sure there’s a rule against it, even if there shouldn’t be.”
“Oh, once we’re on the boat I don’t think we’ll even see each other.”
“Good luck with that,” Trent said.
I wasn’t surprised when CJ left me there—often she would drop me off to play with Rocky, and sometimes Rocky came over to our house to play with me. After a few nights, though, I began to worry, nosing Trent for reassurance.
“You miss CJ, don’t you, Molly?” Trent said to me, holding my head in his hands. I wagged at her name—yes, let’s go back home to CJ.
Rocky didn’t like all the attention I was getting from Trent and jumped on my back. I turned on him and showed my teeth and he fell over, exposing his throat to me, so I had no choice but to straddle him and chew on his neck.
One night I heard Trent say, “CJ!” as if she was there, but when I ran into his room (Rocky jumping on me the whole way) he was by himself. “Molly, you want to talk to CJ on the phone? Here, Molly, the phone.”
He held out a plastic toy. I sniffed at it. Okay, it was a “phone.” I’d seen them before but had never been invited to play with one.
“Say hi,” Trent said.
I heard a tinny, weird noise. I looked at the phone, cocking my head. Trent brought the phone up to his face. “She knows it’s you!” he said. Trent sounded happy.
People often are happy when they talk to their phones, though in my experience talking to a dog is much better.
Trent’s behavior was very strange, I thought. I felt weary from having been fooled into thinking CJ was in his room. I went to the foot of the bed and collapsed, sighing. After a moment, Rocky lay down next to me, his head on my stomach. He could sense my mood—I felt sad, even with him there. I missed my girl.
Somehow, though, I knew CJ would be coming back. She always came back to me.
One day Trent didn’t go to work. He went to his basement and played, grunting as he picked up heavy things and set them down. Then he took a shower and spent a long time putting on different clothes in his room. Rocky picked up on his nervousness well before I did and started panting a little. When Trent went out to the living room and started pacing, stopping every so often to look out the window, Rocky was glued to his heels. I got bored with it and sprawled out on the living room rug.
I heard a door slam outside. Trent’s nervousness spiked. Rocky put his feet on the window to look out. I got up, curious. The front door opened.
“Hi, Rocky! Hi, Molly!” It was my girl. I was so excited to see her I whimpered, circling at her feet and licking her face when she bent down to pet me. When she stood up I tried to leap up and kiss her face all the way up there, and she grabbed my head and hugged me. “Molly, you’re a doodle-schoodle, but not a poodle,” she told me. Everywhere her hands touched me my skin underneath my fur contracted with pleasure.
“Hi, CJ,” Trent said. He reached for her and then stopped. She laughed and jumped to him and hugged him.
Rocky was so wound up he ran around the house, leaping on the furniture. “Hey, get down,” Trent said, but he was laughing, so Rocky kept doing it, tearing around like a crazy dog. I stayed with CJ.
“Want something to eat? I’ve got cookies,” Trent offered.
Rocky and I froze. Cookies?
“God, no,” CJ said. “I’m fat as a pig. They had all this food; it was amazing.”
Trent made Rocky and me go outside to wrestle, but I missed CJ, so after a while I scratched at the door and Trent’s mother let us back in. Trent and CJ were sitting next to each other on the couch, and I curled up at her feet. CJ was holding her phone in her lap.
“Here’s our stateroom,” CJ said.
“What? It’s huge.”
“It was perfect. We had this living area and we each had our own bedroom and bathroom. I don’t know if you’ve noticed, but Gloria and I get along best when we don’t see each other.”
“God, that had to be, like, really expensive.”
“I guess.”
“Does your mom really make that much money?”
CJ looked at him. “I don’t know; I guess so. She’s always going out at night for showings, so I know business must be pretty good.”
I sighed. Across the floor Rocky had a chew toy and was watching me as he gnawed on it, waiting for me to try to make a move for it.
“Who is that guy?” Trent asked.
“Him, oh, he’s nobody.”
“There’s another one of him.”
“He was just a shipboard romance. You know.”
Trent was quiet. Rocky sensed something and went across the room to put his head in Trent’s lap. I seized the opportunity and pounced on the chew toy.
“What’s the matter?” CJ asked Trent.
“Nothing,” Trent replied. “Hey, it’s getting kind of late and I have to work tomorrow.”
We left and after that it seemed as if we didn’t see Trent and Rocky as much as we used to, though we saw a lot more of Shane, whom I didn’t care for very much. He wasn’t ever mean to me; there was just something off about him, something I didn’t trust. Often Gloria and CJ would talk about Shane and CJ would say, “Oh, Mo-ther,” and walk out of the room.
CJ would be unhappy and Gloria would be unhappy. I didn’t understand because there seemed to be so much to be happy about, like bacon, or the days when just the two of us would lie in the backyard, CJ’s fingers lightly touching my fur.
What I didn’t like very much was Bath. Always before in my lives, Bath meant standing outside and being sprayed with water and rubbed with a slippery soap that smelled as bad as Gloria’s hair and lingered in my fur long after being rinsed off. To CJ, Bath meant staying in the house, standing in a small box with very smooth sides. I felt like a bad dog as she poured hot water on me from a dog dish that had a handle sticking out of it. She would rub me with foul-smelling soaps and I would stand miserably under the assault, eyes closed and head lowered. The delicious scents I had accumulated over time—dirt and old foods and dead things—would wilt before the bowl after bowl of warm, stinky water. If I tried to escape, my nails would scratch fruitlessly at the walls, unable to gain purchase, and then CJ would grab me.
“No, Molly,” CJ would say sternly.
Bath was the worst sort of punishment, because I never knew what I had done wrong. But when it was over, CJ would wrap me in a blanket and pull me to her, and that was the very best. Being held so tightly made me feel safe and warm and loved. “Oh Molly dog, oh Molly dog, you are a schnoodle schnoodle dog,” CJ would whisper to me.
Then she would take that blanket and rub me up and down until my skin felt so alive and buzzing that when she let me go I would race around the house, shaking myself of any remaining water and leaping over chairs and on the couch and running with first one shoulder and then another scooting along the carpet, drying and massaging myself.
CJ would laugh and laugh, but if Gloria was there she always yelled at me, “Stop!” I didn’t know why she was mad, but I chalked it up to her always being mad, even when punishment Bath was over and we could all celebrate how great it felt to run around and jump on the furniture.
When the daily routine of locking me in the basement became more regular I knew CJ was back to doing school, and I could hear Gloria moving around upstairs before she, too, left the house. I would wander out through the dog door and lie in my usual spot, missing CJ. Sometimes when I slept it felt as if her fingers were still touching me.
We still did art building on a regular basis. Sometimes other people would be there and they would pet me, and sometimes it would just be CJ alone in the building with me. One night when it was just the two of us there was a tapping on the door, an odd sound that made me growl and raise the fur on the back of my neck.
“Molly! It’s okay,” CJ said. She went to the door and I followed. I smelled Shane on the other side, but that didn’t make me any more comfortable.
“Hey, CJ, open up,” Shane said. There was another man with him.
“I’m not supposed to let anyone in,” CJ said.
“Come on, babe.”
CJ opened the door and the two men hustled in. Shane grabbed CJ and kissed her. “Hi, Molly,” he said to me. “CJ, this is Kyle.”
“Hey,” Kyle said.
“You got that key?” Shane said.
CJ crossed her arms over her chest. “I told you…”
“Yeah, well, Kyle and I would like to pass our art history mid-terms, okay? Come on. You know the whole thing is a joke anyway, like we’re ever going to need to know any of it in real life. We’ll make a copy of the test and be gone.”
I couldn’t tell what was going on with CJ, but I could see she wasn’t happy. She handed something to Shane, who turned and tossed it to Kyle.
“Right back,” Kyle said. He turned and walked away. Shane grinned at CJ.
“You know I could be expelled for this? I’m already on probation,” CJ said.
“Relax; who is going to tell: Molly?” Shane reached out and petted my head. He was a little too rough. Then he grabbed CJ.
“Don’t. Not here.”
“Come on. No one else in the entire building.”
“Stop it, Shane.”
I heard anger in her voice and I growled a little. Shane put his hands out, laughing. “Okay. God. Don’t sic the dog on me. I was just kidding around. I’ll go hang with Kyle.”
CJ went back to playing with her papers and her wet sticks. After a while Shane came back and dropped something on the table next to her, bouncing it with a metallic ring. “Okay, we’re out,” he said.
CJ didn’t reply to him.
A few days later Gloria and CJ were watching television and I was asleep when there was a knock at the door. I got up, wagging, thinking it would be Trent, but it was two men who wore dark clothes and had metal objects on their belts, so I knew from experience they were police officers. CJ let them into the house. Gloria stood up. I wagged and nosed the officers in a friendly fashion.
“Are you Clarity Mahoney?” one of them asked CJ.
“Yes.”
“What’s going on?” Gloria asked them.
“We’re here about the break-in at the art department at the high school.”
“Break-in?” CJ said.
“Laptop computer, some cash, a silver picture frame,” the officer said.
Gloria gasped.
“What? No, that’s not…,” CJ said. I felt the fear rising in her.
“What have you done?” Gloria said to CJ.
“It wasn’t me. It was Shane.”
“We need you to come with us, Clarity.”
“She’s not going anywhere!” Gloria declared.
“‘CJ’, I go by ‘CJ.’”
I went to her side.
“Let’s go,” the officer said.
“No daughter of mine is going with the police! I’ll drive her down myself,” Gloria said.
“It’s okay, Gloria,” CJ said.
“It is not okay. They can’t come in here like the Gestapo; this is our home.”
It seemed to me that the officers were getting angry. “Yes, well, we need your daughter to come down to the station now.”
“No!” Gloria shouted.
The police offer reached to his side and pulled out two metal rings. “Turn around, CJ.”
Everyone left after that. CJ didn’t even pet me before departing, which made me feel like a bad dog. The house was very empty and alone with them gone.
I went downstairs to my pillow in the basement, full of the need to curl up in a safe place.
I got up when I heard the front door open, but I didn’t go upstairs because I could hear that it was just Gloria and not CJ. Gloria shut the door at the top of the stairs.
I waited all night for my girl to come home, but she didn’t. Nor did she come home the next day. I had a chewy bone to gnaw on, but otherwise, I was hungry because there was no dinner, not all day. Water I could get in the backyard, especially when it rained that morning, but I was sad and lonely and hungry.
I eventually gave voice to my feelings, barking out my fears and empty belly. A lone dog answered me from somewhere far away, a dog I’d never heard before. We both barked for a while, and then he stopped abruptly. I wondered who that dog was and if we would ever play together. I wondered if he had eaten that day.
A day lasts much, much longer when you’re hungry and worried about the person you are supposed to take care of. Eventually, though, the sky darkened, and I went through the dog door and curled up in a tight ball under the stairs, my stomach aching and empty. I was starting to become afraid, and my fear kept me from sleeping very much.
Where was CJ?
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
ELEVEN
Most of the next day I spent lying in a pool of shade in the yard, watching some birds hop around in the wet grass. The only time I wasn’t thinking of my hunger was when I saw Gloria standing at the glass doors, staring at me as I lay in the backyard. Whenever Gloria looked at me I felt like a bad dog. Otherwise, I was starving.
Wherever CJ was, I knew she wouldn’t want me to go without dinner. Several times I restlessly went into the house to check my food bowl, but it was always empty and there was nothing else to eat unless you counted some socks I found in a basket. I didn’t eat the socks, because I had chewed up similar items before and knew they would offer no real satisfaction. I licked the bowl anyway, imagining I could faintly taste some food there.
Cruelly, I could sometimes smell food on the air, delicious odors that I associated with people cooking. Somewhere, someone was grilling meat. It was probably far away, but I knew my nose would lead me to it if I got out of the yard.
There were two gates in the yard. The one next to the garage was tall and made of wood, but the one on the other side, through which CJ seldom went, was made of the same steel as the fence and was, in fact, even a little shorter. With a running start, I could probably clear it.
The idea wouldn’t leave my mind. I would leap over the fence and follow my nose and find the cooking meat and a person would give me something to eat.
Though the whole concept made me drool, just thinking about leaving the yard made me feel like a bad dog. CJ would need me to be here. I couldn’t protect her if I ran off in search of a meal.
Whimpering, I went back through the dog door to check my food bowl again. Still nothing. With a moan, I curled up, the sick emptiness in my belly too strong to allow sleep.
I was in the basement when I heard Trent calling my name. I ran out the dog door and he was standing in the yard, whistling for me. I was so happy to see him I barreled right into him, and he laughed and wrestled with me. I could smell Rocky all over him.
“Hi, Molly! Are you okay? You miss CJ, don’t you.”
I heard the back door slide open and Gloria was standing there. “Are you here to take him with you?” she asked.
“Molly is a she,” Trent said. I sat at my name. “Have you been feeding her?”
“Have I been feeding her?” Gloria said. I felt a small jolt of emotion—alarm, maybe—go through Trent.
“You haven’t fed her?”
“Don’t speak to me with that tone. I assumed there was food out for her somewhere. No one told me any different.”
“But … I just can’t believe you’d let a dog go hungry.”
“And that’s why you’re here. For the dog. Right.” An ugly emotion was coming off of Gloria, something like anger.
“Well … yeah. I mean…”
“You’re here because you think feeding the dog will get you in good with Clarity. I know you’ve got the hots for her.”
Trent took a deep breath and then let it out very slowly. “Come on, Molly,” he said quietly.
I followed Trent to the backyard gate, looking over my shoulder at Gloria when he stopped to open it. She was standing with her hands on her hips and staring me in the eyes. It made me frightened, the way she looked at me.
Trent took me to Rocky’s house and fed me. I was really hungry and growled at Rocky when he tried to get me to play before I was ready. When I was finished my belly was pleasantly full and I felt sluggish and just wanted to nap, but Rocky had a rope in his mouth and was running around in the yard as if I could never catch him, which of course was untrue. I ran over to him and grabbed the other end of the rope and we pulled each other around the yard. Trent was watching and he laughed, and when he did Rocky looked over at him, and I took advantage of the lapse in attention and yanked the rope away and took off, Rocky in hot pursuit.
That night Rocky and I lay together on the floor of Trent’s room, utterly exhausted. I’d momentarily forgotten about CJ in the battle for the rope, but now, in the dark room, I missed her and felt sad. Rocky sniffed me and nuzzled me and licked my mouth, eventually resting his head on my chest.
Trent left the next morning, and the way he did so—getting more and more hurried as he dressed, gathering papers—let me to conclude he was doing school. Rocky and I wrestled, played more with the rope, and dug a couple of holes in the backyard. When he returned home Trent fed us and spoke crossly to us as he played with the dirt, filling in the holes we’d made. Apparently we, or at least Rocky, were bad dogs for something, but we didn’t know what. Rocky stood with his head low and his ears down for a while, but then Trent petted him and everything was okay.
We were wrestling and Trent was in the house when the side gate clanged. Rocky and I barked, running over with our fur up, but I dropped my ears and charged joyously when I saw my girl standing there. “Molly!” she called happily. “Hi, Rocky!”
Rocky kept shoving that stupid rope in the way as CJ dropped to her knees and put her arms around me and kissed my face. Then Rocky whipped his head up and ran over to where Trent was coming out of the back door. Rocky greeted Trent as if he’d been gone as long as CJ, which was ridiculous.
“Down, Rocky. Hi, CJ.”
CJ straightened up. “Hi, Trent.”
Trent kept walking right up to CJ and hugged her. “Oh!” CJ said, laughing a little.
They got out the leashes for a walk! The leaves were falling from the trees and Rocky and I strained, dying to pounce on them as they skipped along in the breeze, but the leashes kept us in check.
I was so happy CJ was back, and, I realized, also really happy to be with Rocky and Trent. It was not up to me because I was just a dog, but as far as I was concerned we should just live here, at Trent’s house. If Gloria didn’t move in with us that would be okay with me as well.
There was a click and a flash of flame and then CJ’s mouth was full of the smoke from the small stick. “They won’t let you smoke in there. God,” she said. “The minutes went by so slowly you could practically hear them.”
“What was it like? Was it horrible?”
“Juvie? Not really. Just, I don’t know, strange. I lost about four and a quarter pounds, though, so that’s something good.” CJ laughed. “The guys are on the other side and we never see them, but we can hear them, all right. There’s a lot more of them than us girls. Most the girls in there were in trouble for doing something for their boyfriends, if you can believe it.”
“Like you,” Trent said quietly.
We were having such a great walk! When Rocky passed trees and bushes he had to stop to mark them, and I usually squatted in the same place because I could remember the same compulsion, though it wasn’t as important to me now.
“I didn’t know Shane was going to steal stuff.”
“You knew he was going to steal the test.”
“He was going to copy the test, not steal it. And it’s art history, not like math or something. God, you, too?”
Trent was quiet for a moment. “No, not me. Sorry.”
Rocky leaped on a blowing leaf and picked it up and tried to tease me with it, but once it was in his mouth it was just a leaf.
“So because I was on academic probation, I’m now on academic suspension. Big woo. And you’ve never seen so much paperwork. I’ll bet you international spies don’t have a file as thick as mine.”
“Suspended for how long?”
“Like, just this semester.”
“But that means you won’t graduate with the rest of us.”
“That’s okay. The outfits are ugly, anyway. Those hats? Come on. No, I’ll graduate at mid-year without pomp. It’s all been worth it for how mad it makes Gloria that she won’t be able to sit with all the parents and call attention to herself when they say my name.”
“And that’s it? Suspension?”
“Also community service. I picked the coolest thing—training dogs, service dogs.”
I looked up at her at the word “dog.” She dropped her hand to my head and petted me and I licked her fingers. “Good dog, Molly,” she said.
At the park they unsnapped our leashes and Rocky and I took off, gloriously happy in the cool air, free to race around the park, wrestling and running just as we did in the backyard. We could smell other dogs, but none came.
Dashing alongside my brother, I felt as full of energetic joy as when Bath punishment was over and I was allowed to jump on the furniture. Sometimes Rocky would stop and turn and look to see if Trent was still there. Rocky was a good dog. I could tell CJ was still there because the acrid smell of the smoke wafted off of her even when she wasn’t actively putting fire in her mouth.
Many people emitted the same smoky odor and I’d never much cared for it, but I loved the way it mingled with CJ’s unique scent because it was CJ. Still, I sometimes wished she still smelled the way she did as a baby, when I would sniff the top of her head, drinking her in. I loved that smell.
Rocky and I found a rotting squirrel corpse in the corner of the yard—I loved that smell, too! Before we could roll in it properly, though, Trent called us and we raced back. They put the leashes back on us—time for another walk!
At Rocky’s house, Trent and CJ stood by CJ’s car. I waited by the door, a little anxious that CJ might have forgotten that I was a front-seat dog.
“Good luck with your mom,” Trent said.
“She doesn’t care. She wasn’t even home when the taxi dropped me off.”
“Taxi? I would have picked you up.”
“No, you would have had to cut school. I don’t want to corrupt everyone with my criminal influence,” CJ said.
We took a car ride with me in the front seat. When we got home, a man was sitting with Gloria on the couch. I went over to sniff him, wagging, and he petted my head. Gloria stiffened and pulled her hands up. I didn’t sniff Gloria. CJ remained standing by the front door, so after greeting the man I went back over to be with her.
“Clarity, this is Rick. He has been very helpful during these difficult times you’ve put me through,” Gloria said.
“I have a teenage daughter,” Rick said. He held out his hand and CJ touched it.
“I go by ‘CJ.’ Gloria calls me Clarity because that’s the one thing she’ll never have.”
“Gloria?” The man turned to look at Gloria, so I did, too, though in truth I pretty much avoided her eyes. “She calls you by your first name?”
“I know,” Gloria said, shaking her head.
“See, that’s the first problem right there,” the man said. He seemed nice enough to me. His hands smelled like grease and meat and also Gloria.
“She asked me to call her Gloria and not Mom because she didn’t want strange men in the grocery store knowing she had a daughter my age,” CJ explained. “She’s very concerned about what strange men think about her, as you might have figured out.”
Everyone was quiet for a minute. I yawned and scratched behind my ear.
“Okay, well, good to meet you, CJ. I’m going to take off now; your mom has some things to talk to you about.”
“It’s so very special that you’re here to tell me that,” CJ said.
We went to CJ’s room. I curled up in my usual spot. It was wonderful to be back home with my girl. I was pleasantly tired from wrestling Rocky and couldn’t wait for CJ to crawl into bed so I could lie there with her and feel her hand on the fur on my neck.
The door opened and Gloria came in.
“Can you at least knock?” CJ said.
“Did they knock on your prison cell?” Gloria responded.
“Yes, and they had to ask permission to enter, what do you think?”
“I know that’s not true.”
I stood up and shook, yawning anxiously. I didn’t like it when Gloria and CJ spoke to each other—the emotions were too strong and dark and confusing.
“So what’s the deal with the guy?” CJ asked. “He acts like he’s auditioning to be my stepfather.”
“He’s a very successful businessman. He knows a lot about managing people.”
“I knew he’d be successful or you wouldn’t be making out with him on the couch when I came in.”
“He has given me a lot of advice on how to handle out-of-control children. I’m worried about you, Clarity June.”
“I could tell how worried you were when I got home eight hours late from being released and saw you drinking wine in the living room.”
CJ sat on the bed and I jumped up next to her. I could barely smell her, with Gloria’s odors wafting through the room.
When I glanced at her, Gloria was staring at me, so I looked away. She made an exhaling noise. “So okay,” she said. “The first thing is, you’re grounded for the rest of the year. That means no dating, no boys over, no talking on the phone. You can’t leave the house for any reason.”
“So when the court calls to find out why I’m not doing community service, I’ll just tell them, ‘Gloria says I’m grounded.’ They’ll be okay with that. There’s one guy from death row they can’t execute because he’s still in trouble with his mom.”
Gloria stood there for a moment, frowning.
“Well, obviously,” she finally said, “you can do that.”
“And Christmas shopping? You aren’t going to ground me from that, are you?”
“No, I’d have to make an exception for that, of course.”
“And obviously Thanksgiving at Trent’s.”
“No. Absolutely not.”
“But you said you’re going to someone’s house—Rick’s, I suppose. You want me alone on Thanksgiving?”
CJ’s hand scratched absently at my ear and I leaned into it. I wanted Gloria to leave now.
“Well, I suppose you could come to Rick’s with me, though his children will be with their mother,” Gloria said slowly.
“No way. Are you serious?”
“Fine, then. You can go to Trent’s, since I already gave permission.”
“And what about Jana? You told me you wanted me to hang out with Jana because her father is on the board of the country club.”
“That’s not what I said at all. I said that Jana was the type of person I wanted to see you spending more time with. And yes, Jana could come over.”
“What if she wants to take me to the club for lunch?”
“I think we should handle these things as they come up. It’s too hard to figure them all out now. If you get a special invitation of some sort, we’ll talk about it. I am ready to make exceptions where they are called for.”
“I can see that Rick has been a real help to you with this parenting stuff.”
“That’s what I said. And … there’s something else.”
“More punishment besides getting grounded with exceptions? Come on, Mom, I’ve already been to Juvenile Hall, isn’t that enough?”
CJ’s hand had stopped stroking me. I nuzzled it to remind her there was a deserving dog here who needed more petting.
“I don’t think you understand just how humiliating it was for me to have you hauled out of here in handcuffs,” Gloria said. “Rick says it’s a wonder I don’t have post … Post something.”
“Postpartum depression? Little late for that.”
“That’s not it. That doesn’t sound like it.”
“I’m sorry this whole ordeal was such a nightmare for you, Gloria. That’s all I was thinking about, as I was sitting in the back of the cop car with you standing there in the front yard, was how much worse you had it than me.”
Gloria stiffened and she turned and looked at me. I edged my eyes away quickly.
“Rick says it’s your lack of respect for me that is causing all this. And it all started when you brought home that dog.”
It worried me to hear the word “dog” coming out of Gloria’s mouth.
“I think it started when I realized you were my mother.”
“So you’re going to have to get rid of it,” she continued.
“What?”
I looked anxiously at CJ, feeling her shock.
“Rick says your bluff won’t work. Nobody is going to believe you if you say you were left here by yourself when I took an occasional break, not if I say I had a babysitter, which by the way I always offered to provide one and you said no. And I took you on a cruise, which is proof right there that sometimes you got to go with me. Do you know how much money that cruise cost me? You’ve got to learn who is in control of the house, and that’s me.”
“I’m not going to get rid of Molly.” I cocked my head at my name.
“Yes, you are.”
“No. Never.”
“Either you get rid of the dog or I’m taking away your car. And your credit cards. Rick says it’s ridiculous for you to have a card on my account.”
“So I’m getting my own account?”
“No, you have to earn it! When Rick was your age he had to get up early to do something with chickens every day, I forget what.”
“Okay, I’ll raise chickens.”
“Shut up!” Gloria shouted. “I am so tired of your smart mouth! You are not to speak to me again this way, not ever! You have to learn that this is my house and we live by my rules.”
Gloria jabbed a finger at me and I cringed. “I will not have that dog in my house. I don’t care where you take it and I don’t care what happens to it, but I will make your life a living hell, you and the dog both.”
CJ sat on her bed, breathing hard. She was distressed. I moved as quietly as possible over to the bed, nuzzling her hand and doing everything I could not to be seen by Gloria.
“You know what? Fine,” CJ said. “After tomorrow, you won’t see Molly again.”
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
TWELVE
The next morning we took a car ride and went to visit a dog named Zeke and a cat named Annabelle. Zeke was a small dog who loved to race around in his backyard at top speed with me chasing him. When I’d get tired of chasing him he’d bow and wait for me to decide to go at it again. Annabelle was all black and sniffed at me and then dismissed me in that way that cats sometimes do, walking languidly away. Also at the house was a girl named Trish and her parents. Trish and CJ were friends.
We only stayed for two days there and then we were on to another house with no dogs or cats, and then another house with two cats but no dogs, and then another with an old dog and a young dog and no cats. Also, at every house there was at least one girl CJ’s age plus other people. For the most part, the people were very nice to me. Sometimes CJ had her own room, but usually she stayed in a room with one of her friends.
It was glorious to meet all these new dogs! Nearly all of them were friendly and wanted to wrestle, except for when they were very old. I was also, for the most part, interested in the cats. Some cats are timid and some are bold, some are mean and some are nice, some rub up against me and purr and others ignore me completely, but all of them have delicious breath.
I loved our new life, though I sometimes missed Trent and Rocky.
At one house there was a boy who reminded me of Ethan. He had dark hair like Ethan and his hands smelled like the two rats he had in a cage in his room. He was the same size Ethan had been on the day I first met my boy so long ago, and he loved me instantly and we played tug-on-a-stick and fetch the ball in the front yard. The boy’s name was Del. He didn’t have a dog of his own. Rats are a poor substitute for a dog, even if you have two of them.
At one point I realized with a jolt that I’d been playing with Del all day long and hadn’t seen CJ since breakfast. I felt like a bad dog. As I went to the door and sat, hoping someone would open it for me so I could go inside and check on my girl, I found myself thinking about Ethan. I loved CJ as much and in the same way as I had loved Ethan. So had I been wrong that my purpose was to love Ethan? Or did I now have a new purpose, to love and protect CJ? Were these separate, distinct purposes, or was it all tied up in some even larger purpose?
I never would have pondered any of this if I hadn’t been playing with Del all day. His resemblance to Ethan just made me miss my boy.
Del’s sister was Emily. She and CJ liked to talk together in low whispers, but they always would pet me when I went over to see if they might be talking about what treats I should get.
At dinner I liked to sit under the table. A steady rain of delicious morsels would come down from where Del sat and I would eat them silently and wait for more. Sometimes CJ’s hand would reach down to touch my head and I gloried in the food and the love. Del and Emily had a mother and a father, but they never dropped any food.
When the doorbell rang, Del jumped up and ran to get it and I stayed with CJ. Del came skipping back a minute later.
“There’s a boy here to see CJ,” he said.
The front door was left open and I could smell who it was: Shane. I was not happy. The only time my girl ever shut me out of her life was when Shane came around. I didn’t understand why I couldn’t stay with her, like when Trent visited.
When CJ got up from the table I naturally accompanied her, but sure enough, she shut the door on me, so I went back to my station under Del’s legs. Del rewarded me with a tiny piece of chicken.
“Emily. How long is she planning to stay?” Emily’s mother asked.
“I don’t know. God, Mom, she was kicked out of her own house.”
“I’m not trying to say Gloria Mahoney’s a good mother,” Emily’s mom said.
“Mahoney? Is she the one who came to the Halloween party dressed as a stripper?” the father asked.
“Stripper?” Del chirped brightly.
“Las Vegas showgirl,” Emily’s mother corrected sternly. “I didn’t realize she was so effective at grabbing your attention.”
The father made an uncomfortable noise in his throat.
“She’s always embarrassing us,” Emily interjected. “One time she brought a date home and the two of them sat down to watch what we were watching on TV, and then right there in front of us—”
“Enough!” Emily’s mom said loudly.
There was a silence. I licked Del’s pants so he’d know I was still there.
“What I am trying to say,” the mom said in quieter tones, “is that I know that CJ has a difficult home situation, but…”
“She can’t live here,” the father said.
“She’s not. It’s just temporary! God, Dad!”
“I like her,” Del said.
“This isn’t about liking her, Son; it’s about what is right,” the father said.
“I like her, too,” the mother said. “But she’s a girl who makes bad choices. She’s suspended from school, she’s been to jail—”
“It was juvie and it wasn’t her fault,” Emily said. “I can’t stand this.”
“Yes, and the boy who is responsible is standing on our front porch,” the mother replied.
“What?” the dad said. I looked over at his legs, which had jerked under the table a bit.
“Plus … I heard her in the bathroom last night. She was throwing up,” the mother said.
“So?” Emily said.
“That boy is not coming in here,” the father said.
Del tossed me a piece of broccoli, which I didn’t want but ate just to keep the treats coming.
“She was throwing up on purpose,” the mother said.
“Oh, Mother,” Emily said.
“How do you do that?” Del asked.
“She sticks her finger down her throat. Don’t you ever try it,” the mother warned.
“I don’t see what’s the big deal,” Emily said.
The front door slammed.
“Del, not a word of what we’ve been talking about,” the father said.
CJ came around the corner and she was upset. “I’m sorry,” she apologized. I sprang out from under the table and ran to her side. She wiped tears from her face. “I need to be excused,” she said in a low voice.
I followed her back to the bedroom she was sharing with Emily. CJ threw herself on the bed and I jumped up with her and she held me and I felt some of her sadness going away. Helping CJ be less sad was one of my most important jobs.
I only wished I was better at it. Sometimes the dark feelings were buried so deep in CJ they felt as if they’d be there forever.
Later that night Emily and CJ sat on the floor and ate pizza and ice cream and fed me little bits of it.
“Shane says if he can’t have me no one will,” CJ said. “Like we’re on a soap opera or something.”
I saw Emily’s eyes grow larger. (I was mostly watching Emily because she didn’t eat her crusts and CJ did.)
“But you broke up!”
“I know; I told him that. But he said he loved me in a special way no one else can, and that he would wait forever no matter how long it took. That’s how intelligent he is—I told him forever is actually forever, so we didn’t have to guess how long it would take.”
“How did he even find you?”
“He’s been calling like everybody, asking where I was staying,” CJ said. “God! He can’t open a book, but he can work the phones to track me down. He’ll probably be in a call center someday, selling life insurance over the phone. Oh wait, that would be hard work. Forget it.” She took what I was sad to see was the last piece of pizza. “You want this?”
“God no, I was full like three pieces ago.”
“I didn’t eat much dinner.”
“I don’t blame you.” Emily tossed me a piece of crust and I snagged it out of the air and dispatched it with a single chew, ready to do the trick again.
“You want any ice cream?” CJ asked. I heard the question in her voice as she picked up the carton, and wondered if maybe she was thinking of giving me some ice cream. The thought made my mouth water and I licked my lips.
“No, get it out of my sight.”
“I’ll probably gain like ten pounds,” CJ said.
“What? I wish I had your legs; mine are thunder thighs.”
“No, you look great. I’m the one with the big butt.”
“I’m seriously dieting after New Year’s.”
“Me, too.”
“Oh, stop, you look amazing right now,” Emily said. I was staring at her, willing her to pick up another piece of crust and toss it.
“I go to community service tomorrow,” CJ said. “It’s training service dogs.”
“It sounds like fun.”
“I know, right? The list was like, pick up trash along the highway, or pick up trash in the park, or pick up trash at the library—and then at the end of the list, work for this service dog place. I thought, which one will look better on my résumé? I mean, who knows, maybe I’ll want to go into waste management; then all the trash experience would help me with my career.”
Emily laughed.
“God, I can’t believe I ate all that,” CJ said, falling back with a groan.
The next morning CJ woke up before anyone else, showered, and took me for a car ride (front seat!). We arrived at a big building and I smelled dogs as soon as my paws touched the parking lot. I heard them, too, several dogs barking.
A woman greeted us. She said, “Hi, I’m Andi,” and then she dropped to her knees and reached for me, her long black hair draping my face. “Who is this?” she asked.
She was older than CJ but younger than Gloria and she smelled like dogs.
“This is Molly. I’m CJ,” CJ said.
“Molly! I had a Molly once. She was a good dog.” The affection pouring off of Andi was intoxicating. I licked her and she kissed me right back. Most people don’t like to kiss a dog’s lips. “Molly Molly Molly,” she crooned. “You are so beautiful; yes, you are. What a great dog.”
I liked Andi.
“What is she, a spaniel-poodle mix?” Andi asked, still kissing me and petting me.
“Maybe. Mother was a poodle, but the father nobody knows. Are you a spoodle, Molly?”
I wagged at my name. Andi finally stood up, but she kept her hand down within reach and I licked it.
“It’s a godsend you’re here; I really need the help,” Andi said as we walked inside the building. There was a big open space with kennels on either side and lots of dogs in the kennels. They all barked at me and each other, but I ignored them because I was a special-status dog, allowed to be out free while the rest of them were in cages.
“I don’t really know anything about training dogs, but I’m willing to learn,” CJ said.
Andi laughed. “Well, okay, but what you’re really going to do is free me up so I can do the training. The dogs need to be watered and fed and their kennels cleaned, and they need to be walked outside.”
CJ came to a halt. “So, wait, what is this place?”
“Technically we’re a dog rescue, that’s our main function, but my grant is letting me use the facility to research cancer detection. Dogs have a sense of smell that’s as much as a hundred thousand times more intense than ours, and some studies show that they can detect cancer on people’s breath before any other diagnosis has been made. Since early detection is the fastest way to a cure, this could be really important. So I’m taking the methodologies from the studies and trying to put them into practice.”
“You’re training dogs to smell cancer.”
“Exactly. I’m not the only one doing this, of course, but most trainers are working with dogs to detect specimens in the lab. They let the dog sniff a test tube. I’m thinking, what if it could work in the field, like at a health fair, or a community center?”
“So you’re training the dogs to go from person to person and see if they detect cancer.”
“Right! But my part-time employee got a full-time job and my full-timer is out on maternity. I’ve got some volunteers, of course, but they’re mainly interested in walking the dogs and not so much cleaning the kennels. That’s where you come in.”
“Why do I get the feeling you’re trying to tell me my job is going to be picking up dog poo,” CJ said.
Andi laughed. “I’m trying not to tell you that, but there it is. My aunt is a clerk for the judge, which is how I got approved for community service. At first I posted a very detailed description of the position and nobody picked me, small wonder. Then I changed it to be just working with dogs. I figure, though, you have to do community service and it’s sort of a punishment for your crimes, right? In the end, it’s not supposed to be all fun. So, what did you do?”
CJ let a few moments go by with no sound but dogs barking. “I let a guy talk me into doing something stupid.”
“You mean you can get arrested for that? Wow, I’m in big trouble, then,” Andi said. They both laughed and I wagged my tail. “Okay, you ready to get started?”
It was a strange day. CJ would put me in the outdoor pen with a dog to play with and be gone for several minutes. Then she’d come out and walk the other dog and me on leashes around the block. Her shoes got wetter and wetter throughout the day, as did her pants, and both were fragrant with dog urine. It was so much fun!
At the end of the day, CJ was rubbing her back and sighing. We stood and watched Andi play with a big brown male dog. There were several metal buckets and Andi would lead the dog to each one and the dog would sniff the inside of the bucket. At one of them, Andi would say, “Smell that? Now drop!” and the dog would lie down and Andi would give him a treat. Andi came over to us when she saw us watching, the dog by her side.
I edged up to the dog and we sniffed each other’s rear ends. “This is Luke. Luke, you like Molly?”
We both looked up at our names. Luke was a serious dog, I could tell. He was focused on the game he had been playing with Andi. He wasn’t like Rocky, who was interested only in fun and in loving Trent.
“That’s six hours total with the lunch break, right?” Andi said.
“Yeah. Six blissful hours. One hundred ninety-four to go.”
Andi laughed. “I’ll sign the form at the end of the week. Thanks, you did a good job.”
“Maybe I have a future in dog poop,” CJ said.
We took a car ride with me in the front seat! We went to Emily’s house. When we pulled in the driveway, Gloria was standing there talking to Emily’s mother. CJ stiffened when she saw her mother. Gloria fluttered a hand to her own throat.
“Oh great,” CJ muttered. “Just great.”
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
THIRTEEN
“I’ll let you two talk,” Emily’s mother said when we approached. She went inside the house. I stayed by CJ’s side, and CJ didn’t move at all, just stood there. Gloria’s powerful arsenal of scents wafted over me, obliterating everything else.
“Well,” Gloria said, “don’t you have anything to say to me?” Gloria was, as usual, very unhappy.
“I see you got a new Cadillac,” CJ said. “Nice car.”
“Not that. I’ve been worried sick about you. You never once called to tell me where you were. I could barely sleep.”
“What do you want, Gloria?”
There was a motion at the big front window. It was Del, who had pulled aside the drapes and was looking out. As I watched, his mother’s hand appeared, grabbing him and pulling him away.
“I have just one thing to say to you, and then that’s it, no discussion,” Gloria said.
“Sounds like a fair debate,” CJ said.
“I have, at great expense, consulted an attorney who practices family law. She says that I can file a motion of judgment with the court and force you to move home. She also says that I do not have to be held prisoner in my own house to a dog. So I am going to file for that, too. You have no choice and the judge could even give you a curfew. So that’s it. It will cost a lot of money to go to court and you’d lose, so I came to tell you that. There’s no sense spending the expenses for court when we could take a nice trip or something for the same money.”
It looked like nothing interesting was going to happen for a while, so I lay down with a yawn.
“Well?” Gloria said.
“I thought I wasn’t allowed to talk.”
“You can speak about what I just told you; I’m just not going to stand here and argue with you. You’re a minor and the law is on my side.”
“Okay,” CJ said.
Gloria sniffed. “Okay what?”
“Okay, let’s do what you said.”
“All right. That’s better. You’ve been very disrespectful and I have no idea what these people think that you’ve been living here with them. I am your mother and I have rights under the Constitution.”
“No, I meant let’s do what you said and go to court.”
“What?”
“I think you’re right,” CJ said. “Let’s let a judge decide. I’ll hire a lawyer. You said there were provisions for withdrawing money from Dad’s trust for my welfare. So I’ll get a lawyer, and we’ll go to court. You’ll fight for custody and I’ll fight to have you declared unfit to be a mother.”
“Oh, I see. Now I’m the horrible mother. You went to jail, and you got suspended, and you lie and you disobey, and I have devoted my life to you, but I’m the bad one.”
They were both angry, but Gloria was shouting. I sat up and anxiously put a paw up on CJ’s leg because I wanted to leave. She petted me but didn’t look at me.
“I hope someday you have a child as awful as you,” Gloria said.
“Trent said you didn’t feed Molly at all.”
“You’re changing the subject.”
“That’s true; we were talking about what a bad child I was. So what do you think? Should I call a lawyer? Or do you recognize that Molly is my dog and that I’m keeping her? I mean, I can keep living here.” CJ gestured toward the house and, as she did so, a shadow backed away from the front window. It looked too tall to be Del.
“I don’t want you living with other people. It looks terrible,” Gloria said.
“So what do you want to do?”
That evening we moved back into our room at CJ’s house. Trent came over with Rocky and I was overjoyed to see my brother, who sniffed me up and down, suspicious of all the new smells. When we went outside, snow was falling and Rocky ran around in it, kicking up his heels and rolling in it until he was all wet. Trent came out and rubbed Rocky all over with a towel and Rocky groaned with pleasure. I wished I had rolled in the snow, too.
After that, things were back to normal, except that CJ didn’t leave to do school—instead, I got to take a car ride with her most mornings to play with Andi and her dogs!
The first morning we returned to Andi’s place, she greeted me by throwing her arms wide and kissing me and hugging me. I loved her affections and her wonderful dog smells. Then she stood.
“I thought maybe you’d given up,” Andi said to CJ.
“No, I just had … There were family issues I needed to deal with. You didn’t call the court or anything, did you?” CJ replied.
“No, but I wished you’d called me.”
“Yeah, I’m … I should have. For some reason I never think to call people.”
“Well, okay, let’s get to work.”
The dogs at Andi’s building weren’t allowed to go out into the snow except for walks on leashes, so while CJ cleaned out their kennels my job was to play with the dogs in a fenced area inside the big room in the building. A lot of the dogs didn’t want to play, though. A couple of them were too old to do anything but sniff me and then lie down, and a couple just didn’t know how to play, snarling and snapping at me while I danced out of the way. Those dogs seemed sad and frightened and were put in another inside pen, one at a time, while CJ cleaned their kennels.
This left me with a lot of time to watch Andi play with Luke, her big brown male, and two females, one yellow and one black. The game was this: Some old people sat in metal chairs sitting far away from each other, and Andi would lead the dogs one at a time up to sniff them. The people didn’t play with the dogs, though—sometimes humans like to just sit, even if there’s a dog right there. Then Andi would put the dogs in their kennels and the people would all stand up and change position, sitting in new seats.
She told all the dogs they were good dogs, but she really got excited with Luke. Every time Luke was led to a man with no hair, Luke would carefully sniff, then lie down and cross his paws and put his head on his paws. Andi would give him a treat right there on the spot. “Good dog, Luke!” she would praise.
I wanted a treat, too, but when I dropped down and crossed my front paws Andi didn’t even notice and CJ was unimpressed. That’s how life is—some dogs get treats for doing almost nothing and some dogs are good dogs and get no treats at all.
At one point CJ came to get me and we went out to the outdoor pen. Several inches of snow were on the ground and I crunched through it to find a good place to squat. CJ put the burning stick in her mouth and exhaled smoke.
I heard the back door open and ran over to see who it was. A flash of alarm coursed through CJ, so the fur went up on my neck.
“I thought. You. Might be out here.” It was the bald man in front of whom Luke was always lying down. He made a gasping sound while he talked to CJ. I nosed her hand because she still felt scared to me. “Could. I have. A cigarette?”
“Sure,” CJ said. She fumbled in her jacket.
“Would you. Light it. For me? I cannot. Get. Enough. Suction,” the man said. He stroked his bald head.
CJ lit fire and handed the stick to the man. He lifted it to his throat, not to his mouth like CJ did. There was a weak sucking sound and then smoke came out of a hole in his throat.
“Ah,” the man said. “So good. I only. Allow. Myself one. A week.”
“What happened? I mean…”
“My hole?” The man smiled. “Throat. Cancer.”
“God, I’m really sorry.”
“No. My fault. I didn’t. Have to. Smoke.”
They stood together for a moment. CJ was still upset, but her fear was slowly draining from her and dissipating like the smoke coming from her mouth.
“Your age,” the man said.
“Sorry?”
“Your age. When I. Started. Smoking.” He smiled at her. I decided I didn’t need to stand guard over CJ anymore and went over to sniff his hand and see if maybe he had any treats. He leaned over. “Nice dog,” he said. His breath smelled like smoke, but it also had an odd metallic tang to it that I instantly recognized from when I was Buddy and had a bad taste in my mouth that I couldn’t get rid of. The bald man probably had the same taste in his mouth, because it was on his breath.
The man went inside and CJ stood in the cold air and stared off into space for a long time. The stick in her hand was still smoldering. She leaned over and poked it into the snow and then threw it in the trash can and we went inside together.
Andi was playing with the yellow dog. I was off leash and CJ was distracted, so I trotted over to where the bald man from outside was sitting in a chair. I went to him and bowed down, crossing my front paws as I’d seen Luke do.
“Look at that,” Andi said. She came up to me. “Hey, Molly, did you learn to do that from Luke?”
I wagged. However, I did not get a treat. Instead, Andi led me back over to be with CJ.
I really liked Andi. I loved the way she greeted me with all the hugs and kisses a dog could ever want. But I thought it was unfair of her to give Luke a treat but not me.
When we got home, Gloria was glad to see CJ but ignored me as usual. I had learned to stay away from Gloria, who never spoke to me or fed me or even looked at me, most of the time.
“I think we should have a Christmas party this year,” Gloria said. She had a pad of paper in her hand and waved it at CJ. “Something really fancy. Catered. With champagne.”
“I’m seventeen, Gloria. I’m not supposed to drink champagne.”
“Oh, well, Christmas. You can invite whoever you want,” Gloria continued. “Are you seeing someone special?”
“You know I’m not.”
“What about that nice young man, Shane?”
“And that’s why you’re not my go-to source for deciding who is a nice young man.”
“I’ll invite Giuseppe,” Gloria said.
“Who? What happened to Rick?”
“Oh, Rick? He turned out to be not what I thought.”
“So now you’re dating Pinocchio’s father?”
“What? No, Giuseppe. He’s Italian. He’s from St. Louis.”
“That’s where Italy is? No wonder I do so badly in geography.”
“What? No, I mean real Italy.”
‘“Are you helping him buy a house or something?”
“Well, well, yes. Of course.”
I went into the kitchen to check to see if anything edible had fallen on the floor, and that’s when I saw a man standing outside, peering in through the glass doors. I barked the alarm.
The man immediately turned and ran away. CJ came into the kitchen. “What is it, Molly?” she asked. She went to the door and slid it open and I raced out into the yard. The man’s scent was on the air and I followed it quickly to the closed back gate. I knew that smell, knew who it belonged to.
Shane.
CJ called me back into the house. “Come on, Molly; it’s too cold,” she said to me.
The next time we went to Andi’s, she came over to us as CJ was stomping the snow off her feet. “Hey. I want to try something today.”
“Sure,” CJ said.
It was the same game Andi played every day. It did not seem like much fun to me when there were ropes to tug on and balls to chase, but people are like that—their idea of play is usually less fun than a dog’s. People were sitting in chairs spaced wide apart from one end of the big room to the other. Andi had CJ hold my leash and we went to the person at the far end, a woman who had on fur boots that smelled like cats. “Hi, what’s your name?” she said, holding her hand down for me to lick. Her fingers had a tangy taste to them.
“This is Molly,” Andi said. I wagged at hearing my name.
We went together to the next person, and the next, at each occasion taking the time for them to pet me and talk to me but not to give me any treats even though I could smell that one man had something with cheese on it in one of his pockets.
Then we came to a woman whose hands smelled like fish. She leaned over to pet me and I picked up that same scent, the one that was similar to what I couldn’t get off my tongue when I was Buddy, the same scent the bald man who talked to CJ had on his breath.
“Hello, Molly,” the woman said.
I felt the slightest bit of tension in Andi as we started to move on, and that’s when I got it: the game, it had to do with this smell. I turned back to the woman and lay down, crossing my paws.
“That’s it!” Andi said, clapping her hands. “Good dog, Molly, good dog!”
Andi gave me treats. I decided I loved this game and wagged, ready to play again.
“So Molly just figured it out?” CJ asked.
“Well, there’s more to it than that. I think that all dogs can detect the odor, but that doesn’t mean they necessarily connect it to signaling us that they’ve done so. But Molly has been watching Luke—did you see how she crossed her paws, just like he does? I’ve never heard of a dog learning this from watching another one, but there it is; there can’t be any other explanation.” Andi knelt down and kissed me on the nose. I licked her face. “Molly, you are a genius, a true genius dog.”
“You’re a goodle, Molly,” CJ said. “Part genius, part poodle. A goodle dog.” I wagged, loving the attention.
“If you don’t mind, I’d like to involve Molly in the program. You, too, if you’re interested,” Andi said. “It would count toward your community service.”
“What, and give up shoveling dog poo? I’ll have to think about it.”
From that day forward, whenever we were with Andi, Molly would lead me to meet people and I would signal whenever I picked up that odd, bad odor. It didn’t happen very often, though. Most of the time, people just smell like people.
But sometimes, they smell like food! For Happy Thanksgiving CJ and I went to Trent’s house and the air and people’s hands were so redolent with meat and cheese and bread and other wonderful smells that Rocky and I were nearly delirious. People ate all day, tossing us morsels to snatch out of the air.
Trent had a father and a mother. For the first time, I wondered why CJ didn’t have a father as well. Maybe if Gloria had a mate she wouldn’t be unhappy all the time.
There was nothing I could do about that, though. I had to content myself with eating Happy Thanksgiving food.
And I was very content.
CJ was happy, too. At one point in the day we all gathered against a wall that smelled strongly of smoke and the people all put their arms around each other, full of love. Rocky and I were told to sit and there was a lot of laughter and bright flashes.
When we were leaving, CJ hugged and kissed Trent’s mother. “This was the most wonderful Thanksgiving I’ve ever had,” CJ said.
“Please come every year. You’re one of the family,” Trent’s mother said.
I smelled tears on CJ’s face, but she was happy and as we drove away she held my head in her lap, stroking me. As I drifted off to sleep, I was thinking about how much the people in Trent’s house hugged each other. I hoped we’d go back there often, because the hugging seemed good for my girl.
At Merry Christmas time, CJ and Gloria put a tree in the living room and hung cat toys from it. I could smell that tree from anywhere in the house. And one evening people came over and hung lights and cooked food. CJ put on clothes that swished loudly when she moved, and so did Gloria.
“What do you think?” Gloria asked, standing in CJ’s doorway. She twirled noisily. It didn’t seem possible, but Gloria was even more fragrant than usual. My nose crinkled involuntarily at the flood of odors drenching the air.
“Very nice,” CJ said.
Gloria laughed happily. “Now let me see you.”
CJ stopped brushing her hair and spun. Then she stopped and stared at Gloria. “What?” she said.
“Nothing, it’s just … Have you put on some weight? It fits different than when we bought it.”
“I quit smoking.”
“Well…”
“Well what?”
“I just don’t know why you couldn’t control yourself with the party coming up.”
“You’re right, I should have kept sucking poison because it would help me fit in my new dress for a party.”
“I never said that. I don’t know why I bother to try to talk to you,” Gloria said. She was angry and walked away.
Then friends arrived. Trent came but did not bring Rocky, for some reason. Mostly they were people Gloria’s age. I wandered around, smelling warm delicious things, and after a while people started feeding me treats—not for doing any tricks but just for being a dog. They were the best sort of people, in my opinion.
One woman leaned over and fed me a piece of meat with melted cheese on it. “Oh, you are such a pretty dog!” she said to me.
I did what I was supposed to do: I lay down on the floor, crossing my front paws.
“How cute! She’s doing a curtsey!” the woman said.
CJ came around the couch to see me and I wagged. “Oh my God,” CJ said.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
FOURTEEN
CJ was anxious and scared. “Sheryl, can I talk to you for a minute? Privately?”
The woman was still petting me, but I was watching CJ to see what was wrong. “Sure,” the woman said.
I started to follow them down the hallway, but then CJ turned and said, “Stay, Molly.”
I knew “Stay,” but it was my least favorite thing to do. I sat for a minute, then got up and went down to sniff under the door where they had gone. They were in there for about ten minutes, and then the door popped open and the woman came out with a hand to her mouth. She was crying. CJ was upset, too, and felt sad.
The woman got her coat and Gloria came up holding a glass. “What happened?” She looked between CJ and the crying woman. “What did you say to her?”
CJ shook her head. The woman said, “I’m sorry. I’ll call you,” to Gloria and then was out the door. Gloria was very angry. Trent came up from behind her, looking from Gloria to CJ and then moving past Gloria to stand by CJ. I lifted my nose to touch his hand as he passed.
“What happened?” Gloria said.
“Molly signaled the way she’s been trained. For cancer. She signaled Sheryl had cancer.”
“Oh God,” Trent said.
Some people had come down the hallway and I heard one of them say, “Cancer? Who has cancer?”
“And you had to tell her now?” Gloria hissed. She then turned, jerking her head when she saw the people behind her. “It’s nothing,” she said.
“What happened?” a man asked.
CJ shook her head. “Just a personal conversation. I’m sorry.”
The people stood for a moment and then turned away.
“You only care about yourself,” Gloria said.
“How does that make sense?” Trent responded, his voice loud.
“Trent,” CJ said. She put a hand on Trent’s sleeve.
“Do you know how much money this party cost?” Gloria said.
“The party?” Trent said.
“Trent. Don’t,” CJ said. “Just … you know what, Gloria? Give my excuses to your friends. Tell them I’ve got a headache and I’m going to my room.”
Gloria made a loud noise and then turned and stared at me hatefully. I glanced away from her eyes. She spun and strode off down the hallway, where the people had silently withdrawn. When she got to the end of the hallway she stopped, straightened her back, and tossed her hair. “Giuseppe?” she called into the living room. “Where did you get to?”
“I’ll get your coat,” CJ said to Trent.
His shoulders slumped a little. “You sure? I mean, I could stay with you for a while. Talk.”
“No, it’s okay.”
CJ went into Gloria’s bedroom and came out with Trent’s coat. He put it on. He was sad. CJ smiled at him. “Hey, in case I don’t see you, Merry Christmas.”
“Yeah, same to you.”
“CJ, you do get that your mom’s wrong, don’t you? That you might have upset Sheryl, but you gave her really important information. And if you had waited because you didn’t want to disturb the party, you’d have a hard time ever telling Sheryl at all because, well, it would look crazy that you had waited.”
“I know.”
“So don’t let her get to you, okay? Don’t let Gloria into your head.”
They stood and looked at each other for a minute. “Okay, Trent,” CJ finally said.
Trent turned and went to the door and we followed. Then he paused and looked up. “Hey, mistletoe.”
CJ nodded.
“Well, come on then,” Trent said. CJ laughed as he held out his arms. Trent pressed forward and kissed her and I jumped up and put my front feet on her back so I would be part of whatever was going on.
“Whoa,” CJ said.
“Okay, well, good-bye. Merry Christmas,” Trent said.
I tried to slip out the door with him, but CJ held me back. Then she shut the door and looked at it for a minute, while I looked at her, wondering what we were doing.
I would have been happy to circulate under the feet of all the loud people in the living room and eat treats, but CJ went up to her room, snapping her fingers for me to follow. She took off her loud clothes and put on what she usually wore: a soft shirt that went to her knees. She got into bed with the lights on, holding a book.
Books are okay to chew on, though they are fairly tasteless and it always makes people unhappy when a dog does so. They are one of those toys that dogs aren’t supposed to play with.
I curled up on the floor next to her bed and fell asleep, though I was conscious of the hum of people talking below me and, later, the front door opening and shutting a few times. Then there was a knocking sound and I woke up. The bedroom door pushed open.
“Hello, CJ,” said a man. I recognized his scent from downstairs. When he had reached down to feed me a piece of fish, his watch slid down his wrist with a heavy sound.
“Oh, hi, Giuseppe.”
The man laughed and came into the room. “Call me Gus. The only person who calls me Giuseppe is your mother. I think because she believes I’m from Italian royalty.” He laughed again.
“Huh,” CJ said. She smoothed the blankets down over her legs.
The man shut the bedroom door behind him. “So what are you reading?” he asked.
“You’re drunk, Gus.”
“Hey, it’s a party.” The man sat down heavily on the bed, his feet on the floor right by me. I sat up.
“What are you doing? Get out of my room,” CJ said. She felt angry.
The man put his hand on the blanket. “I loved that dress you were wearing. You have great stems. You know what stems are? Legs.”
The man pulled on the blanket. CJ pulled back. “Stop,” she said.
“Come on,” the man said. He stood back up, reaching for CJ with both hands. I felt the fear coming off of her and I leaped up and put my paws on the bed and thrust my face at the man and snarled the way I’d gone after Troy the horse when he’d been about to stamp on the baby.
The man threw himself back and stumbled against the shelf on the wall, books and photographs falling to the floor. He twisted and with a crash fell on the carpet, lying on his side. I barked and lunged forward, my teeth still bared.
“Molly! It’s okay. Good girl.” I felt CJ’s hand on my fur, which was stiff along the ridge of my back.
“Hey,” the man said.
CJ found my collar and pulled me back. “You need to leave, Gus.”
He rolled and got on his knees. The door flew open and Gloria was standing there. “What happened?” she demanded. She looked at Gus, who was crawling on the floor. He put his hands on the bedpost and hauled himself to his feet. “Giuseppe? What happened?”
He pushed past her out into the hallway, his footsteps heavy. Gloria turned to face her daughter. “I heard the dog; did it bite him?”
“No! Of course not.”
“Well, what is going on?”
“You don’t want to know, Gloria.”
“Tell me!”
“He came in here and started touching me, okay?” CJ shouted. “Molly was protecting me.”
I turned my head at my name. Gloria turned rigid and her eyes grew large, then narrow and small. “You are such a liar,” she hissed. She turned and ran away just as the front door slammed. “Giuseppe!” she called.
For the next several days Gloria and CJ never seemed to be in the same room. When they sat down for the part of Merry Christmas where they tore papers and had boxes, they didn’t talk to each other very much. CJ started eating her meals in her bedroom and sometimes it would just be a tiny amount of vegetable and sometimes it would be wonderful plates full of noodles and sauces and cheeses, or pizza and chips, and ice cream. Then she would go into the bathroom and stand on that small box and make a sad noise. Every few hours, every single day, CJ would go stand on that small box. I started thinking of it as the sad box, because that’s how CJ always felt when she was on it.
Trent came over with Rocky and we all played in the snow. It was the only time CJ seemed truly happy.
I did not feel like a bad dog for snarling at the man. CJ had been afraid and I did it without even thinking. I was worried that I’d be punished for it, but I never was.
Soon CJ started doing school again. She and Gloria were talking to each other more often, but I could still feel a tension in the room between them. When CJ was in school, I would go down to my old place under the stairs and wait for her to come home, leaving only to go out though the dog door and play or bark at dogs I could hear yapping off in the distance.
We no longer went to see Andi every day, but sometimes we’d go for a visit and it was always wonderful to see her. People do that—just when the routine is established, they’ll change it. On these occasions, after the usual greeting of hugs and kisses, we played the game with people sitting in chairs and also a new game with people sitting or sometimes standing in a long line.
“This is what my grant is for, to see if a dog could signal positive on people in a group,” Andi said. “Only Luke has been able to figure it out.”
Luke looked up at his name.
We went up and down the line of people and the first couple of times we did so I could tell that Andi and CJ wanted something from me, but I wasn’t sure what I was supposed to do. And then I caught an odor coming off of a woman with no hair and with hands that smelled like harsh soap—there it was, the unmistakable metallic smell on her breath. I signaled and was given a biscuit.
That seemed to be the game, though I couldn’t be sure because Andi kept leading me to other people who didn’t have the same scent, as if I was supposed to signal for them as well. When I did so, though, Andi would stand with her arms crossed and not give me a biscuit. It was very puzzling.
One day I was out in the backyard in heavy new snow, bounding through it, having to leap up with every step because of how deep it was. I heard the sliding door open and saw Gloria standing there. “Want a piece of roast beef?” she called.
I hesitantly took a step toward her, then stopped. I could hear the question in her voice but didn’t know if it meant I was in trouble or not.
“Here,” she said. She tossed something into the snow a few feet in front of me and I went over to it, having to locate it by smell because it had sunk so far. It was a delicious piece of meat! I raised my head and looked back at Gloria, giving my tail an experimental wag.
“Want another one?” She pitched a piece of meat near me and I jumped on it, snorting, until I found it and ate it in a quick gulp.
When I looked up, Gloria had gone back inside. What, I wondered, had that been all about?
Then I heard Gloria calling from the front yard, “Yoo-hoo, Molly! Dog, want another treat?”
Treat! I bounded over to the gate and found it open. The walk had been shoveled by the man who came by on winter mornings with a truck to clear away the snow. I trotted around the side of the house. Gloria was standing in the driveway.
“Treat,” she said. She tossed another piece of meat and I snagged it out of the air. She opened her rear car door. “Okay, want to get in? Treat?”
Her meaning was clear. I hesitantly made my way over to the open door. She pitched some meat onto the rear floor and I jumped in and she shut the door while I gulped down the treat. Then she got in the car, started it, and we drove off down the driveway.
I didn’t mind that I wasn’t a front-seat dog. I didn’t think I would like it with Gloria driving. I stared out the window at the snowy trees and yards for a while, then circled around and lay down on the seat for a nap.
I woke up and shook when the car stopped and Gloria turned it off. She twisted around in her seat. “Careful now. Remember, I fed you a treat? You be nice, Molly.”
I wagged at my name. I sniffed at Gloria’s hands as they came around my throat, but there was no meat in them. With a sudden click, my collar dropped off and landed on the seat. I lowered my nose to it.
Gloria got out of the car and opened my door. “Come along. Heel. Be a good dog. Don’t run off.”
We were approaching a building that reeked of dogs. Gloria pushed open the front door and slapped her leg and I followed her inside. Inside was a small room with an open door through which I could hear what had to be more than a dozen dogs barking.
“Hello? Hello?” Gloria called.
A woman came out through the open door and smiled. “Yes, can I help you?”
“I found this poor dog abandoned in the streets,” Gloria said. “There’s no telling how long he’s been living like that, alone and far, far away from his family. Is this where you drop off lost dogs?”
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
FIFTEEN
I had been in places like this before. In fact, it was a little like where CJ and I went to play with Andi and Luke, except there were far more dogs and the ceiling was low and there was no big area for people to sit in chairs—just cramped aisles filled with dog cages.
I was put in a cage with a cement floor and only a few feet between the gate and the door to a doghouse. The doghouse had a piece of carpet in it that smelled of many dogs, just as the air around me smelled of dogs and was filled with the constant sound of barking.
When the woman came with water or food I rushed to the gate, wagging, hoping she would let me out. I wanted to run, to play, to have people pet me. The woman was nice, but she would not let me out.
Most of the other dogs also rushed to their gates when the woman was nearby. A lot of them barked, and some of them sat quietly, being as good as they knew how. The woman did not let them out.
I did not understand what was happening or why I was in this place of barking dogs. I missed CJ so much I found myself pacing, whimpering a little, and then I’d go into the doghouse and lie on the small piece of carpet, but I wouldn’t sleep.
The barking that assaulted my ears was full of fear, with some anger, some pain, some sadness. When I barked, my voice carried with it my heartbreak and my plea to be let out of this place.
At night most of the dogs quieted down, but then one of them would start barking, often a brown and black dog in the kennel next to mine, tall and thin with no tail, and that would stir up the other dogs and pretty soon we’d all be barking again. It was very difficult to sleep under such circumstances.
I pictured myself lying at the foot of CJ’s bed. Sometimes in the night I would get too hot and jump down on the floor, but now, missing her so much, I wanted to be lying on that bed no matter how hot it was. I yearned for the touch of her hands on my fur and the familiar and wonderful scent of her skin.
The next morning I was let out of the cage and taken down the hallway and put up on a table, just like at the Vet’s. A man and a woman petted me, and the man looked in my ears. The woman took a stick and held it near my head, but the man had his hands on both sides of my face so I couldn’t get a good look at it to see if it was a toy.
“Got a hit,” the woman said.
“I knew she’d be chipped,” the man said.
I was returned to my cage. I was so disappointed I could barely summon the energy to go back and lie down on the carpet. I chewed a little on the doghouse, but even that didn’t make me feel better. I sighed, lying down with a groan.
A few hours later the man came back. “Hello, Molly,” he said to me. I sat up and wagged, loving to hear my name. He slipped a rope around my neck. “Come on, girl; someone’s here to see you.”
I smelled CJ the second the man opened the door at the end of the hall. “Molly!” she called. I dashed up to her and she fell to her knees and put her arms around me. I kissed her face and her ear and ran around and around her, the rope trailing behind me and getting all tangled. I gave voice to my relief, crying and crying. She laughed. “Good dog, Molly, you sit, now.”
It was hard to sit, but I knew I needed to be a good dog. I sat, wagging my tail, while my girl stood and talked to the man.
“I’ve been so worried,” she said. “I think she got out of the gate when the man came over to shovel the walk after that big snow we had.”
Back down the hall, the tall black and brown dog started barking and everyone joined in. I hoped their people would come to take them home soon, too.
“The woman who dropped her off said she was running down the street.”
“That’s so not like Molly. How much is it total?”
“Sixty dollars.”
I wagged at hearing my name. CJ reached down to pet me. “Wait, the woman?”
“Some rich lady,” the man said.
“Rich?”
“Well, you know. She had a new Cadillac, dressed expensively, nice hair. Lots of perfume.”
“Blond hair?”
“Yeah.”
CJ drew in a deep breath. She was looking for something in her purse. I watched attentively because she often kept cookies in there. “Look, was this her?” CJ leaned over the counter.
“I don’t think I should say.”
“The woman in the picture is my mother.”
“What?”
“Yeah.”
“Your mother dropped off your dog? Without telling you?”
“Yeah.”
There was a silence. CJ was both angry and sad.
“I’m sorry,” the man said.
“Yeah.”
I was put in the front seat for the car ride. “I missed you so much, Molly. I was so scared something was going to happen to you!” CJ said. She held me to her and I licked her face. “Oh, Molly, Molly,” she whispered. “You silly schnoodle not a poodle.” She felt sad even though we were back together. “I’m so, so sorry. I didn’t know she’d do something like this.”
Though there were many interesting things to see out the window, I looked at CJ and licked her hand and put my head in her lap, just like I used to do when I was a little puppy. It felt so good to be near her I slipped into a quick and exhausted sleep.
I sat up when the car slowed and turned sharply, filling with familiar scents. We were back home. The car became quiet and CJ reached for me, holding my head in both hands. “It’s not safe for you here, Molly. I don’t know what I am going to do. I can’t trust Gloria not to hurt you. I’d die if anything happened to you, Molly.”
I wagged a little. CJ let me out of the car and I stepped through the melting snow to the front door—it felt so good to be home. CJ opened the door and walked in and then gasped, the fear rising up in her in a flash.
“Shane!”
CJ’s friend Shane was sitting in the living room. He stood, but I didn’t go over to him and I didn’t wag my tail. There was something wrong about him being here, alone in our house.
“Hi, CJ.”
“How did you get in?”
Shane went down on one knee and clapped his hands. “Hiya, Molly.” He smelled like smoke. I remained by CJ’s side.
“Shane? I said how did you get in?”
“I stuck a rake up through the dog door and turned the dead bolt,” he said, laughing.
“What are you doing here?”
“How come you never call me back?”
“You have to get out of here right now. You can’t come in my house!”
CJ was angry. I watched her carefully, wondering what was going on.
“You left me no choice. You’ve been completely ignoring me.”
“Yes, that’s what people do when they break up, Shane. They stop talking to each other. You can look it up.”
“Okay if I smoke in here?”
“No! I need you to leave.”
“Well, I’m not leaving until we talk this thing out.”
“What thing? Shane, you…” CJ took a deep breath. “You called me like thirty times in a row at two in the morning.”
“I did?” Shane laughed.
I heard a car pulling into the driveway and went to the window to see who it was. The car door opened and it was Rocky! Trent got out, too. Rocky ran over to lift his leg on a tree.
“Somebody’s here,” CJ said.
“Should I wait upstairs?”
“What? Are you crazy? I want you to leave.”
There was a light knock on the door. I ran over to it and put my nose to the crack, sniffing. Rocky was on the other side doing exactly the same thing. CJ crossed over and opened the door.
“You found her!” Trent said. Then he stopped.
“Hey, Trent,” Shane said.
Rocky and I were sniffing each other. I jumped up and joyously grabbed a fold of skin on the back of his neck and yanked on it.
“Sorry, maybe I should come back at a different time,” Trent said.
“No!” CJ said.
“Yeah, we’re in the middle of something kind of personal,” Shane said.
“No, you were in the middle of leaving,” CJ said.
“CJ, we need to talk,” Shane said.
“It sounds like she wants you to leave,” Trent said.
Rocky stopped moving. I bit at his face, but he was watching Trent, his muscles rock hard and still.
“Maybe I don’t want to leave!” Shane said loudly.
I could feel the anger in Trent then. CJ reached out and put a hand on his wrist. Rocky’s ears were up and the fur was rising on the back of his neck.
It occurred to me at that moment that Rocky’s purpose was to love and protect Trent, just as mine was to love and take care of CJ.
“Shane,” CJ said. “Go. I will see you tomorrow.”
Shane was staring at Trent.
“Shane!” CJ said more loudly.
Shane blinked and then looked at her. “What?”
“I’ll see you tomorrow, out where you skateboard. Okay? After school.”
Shane stood there for a moment, then nodded. He picked up his coat and slung it over his shoulder. As he left he pushed past Trent, who continued to stare at him until he was out the door.
“You’re going to see him tomorrow?” Trent asked. He absently petted Rocky on the head. I licked Rocky’s mouth.
“No! I’m not going to be here tomorrow.”
“What do you mean?”
“Molly and I are leaving. Today, this afternoon. We’re going to California.”
CJ went to the stairs and headed up to her room and Trent, Rocky, and I all followed.
“What are you talking about?” Trent asked.
CJ went to a closet and pulled out a suitcase. I knew that suitcase; when CJ left me at Trent’s house for days and days she had pulled it out of the closet. Rocky was ready to play again, but seeing that suitcase made me anxious and I stuck close to CJ’s feet as she began opening things and pulling out her clothes and putting them inside it. “Molly didn’t run off. Gloria dumped her off at Animal Control.”
“What?”
“I showed the guy at the shelter her picture. Can you believe it?”
“Yeah, well, I’d believe just about anything about your mother.”
“So that’s it. We’re going to California. We’ll live on the beach until I get a job. And then when I’m twenty-one I’ll get my dad’s trust and I’ll go to college.”
“You’re not thinking this through, CJ. College? You haven’t finished high school.”
“I’ll get a GED. Or I’ll go to school out there, I don’t know.”
“I’ll go with you,” Trent said.
“Oh sure, that’ll work.”
“You can’t go live on a beach; what are you thinking?”
CJ didn’t answer, but I could feel her getting angry. Trent watched her for a few minutes. “What about the other thing?” he finally asked quietly.
CJ stopped and looked at him. “What do you mean?”
“The … eating.”
CJ stared at him, taking a deep breath. “God, Trent, every single day of my life I wake up with this little voice in my head asking what I’m going to eat that day. I can’t have your voice in my head, too. I just can’t.”
Trent looked down at the floor. He seemed sad. Rocky went over to nuzzle him. “Sorry,” he said.
CJ pulled out another suitcase and put it on the bed. “I need to get out of here before Gloria sees I got Molly back.”
“Hey, let me give you what money I have on me.”
“You don’t have to do that, Trent.”
“I know that. Here.”
I yawned anxiously. I loved being with Rocky and Trent but not if CJ was going to take the suitcases and go somewhere without me.
“You’re my best friend in the world, Trent,” CJ said softly. They hugged each other. “I don’t know what I’d do without you and Molly.”
There was a loud bang that I recognized as the sound of the front door being shut. “Clarity?” Gloria’s voice sang out. “Is that Trent’s car?”
CJ and Trent stared at each other. “Yes,” CJ called. Her voice sank to a whisper. “Can you keep Molly quiet?”
I wagged.
“Yes,” Trent said. He knelt in front of me, stroking my ears. “Molly, shhh,” he said very softly. I wagged. Rocky, jealous, shoved his face in front of mine.
CJ went out to the hallway and leaned over the railing. I started to follow, but Trent gently held me back. I strained, feeling a whimper building inside me. I didn’t want to let CJ get even two feet away from me, not with those suitcases out. “No,” Trent said to me, his voice very muted. “Stay still, Molly.”
“Honey, Giuseppe is taking me to the movies and then out to a late dinner, so don’t wait up for me.”
“Giuseppe,” CJ said. Her voice sounded flat with anger.
“No, don’t start with me, Clarity June. I’ve put all that unpleasantness behind me and I expect you to do the same.”
“Good-bye, Gloria.”
“What’s that supposed to mean? Why do you say it like that?”
I couldn’t help it, I whined a little, shuffling my feet.
“What was that?” Gloria asked.
CJ turned to look at me. I whimpered again, straining to get to her. “That’s Rocky. Trent brought him over to see me. He knows I’m just heartbroken about Molly.”
“Do we have to be overrun with dogs all the time?”
“No, Gloria, it won’t happen again.”
“Thank you. Good night, CJ.”
“Good-bye.”
CJ came back into the room and shut her door. I bounded to her, licking her face. “Molly, I was four feet away from you, you crazy dog. Hey, you know what you’d be if you’re a cocker spaniel poodle? You’d be a cocker doodle doo dog. Yes, you would.” CJ kissed me on the face.
Trent carried the suitcases down the stairs and put them in the back of the car while I staked claim to the front seat. Rocky came over to sniff me but didn’t try to get in with me, which I wouldn’t have allowed anyway.
Trent seemed sad when he gave me a hug. I licked his face. I knew I’d see him and Rocky in a day or two.
Trent leaned in the front window, which CJ lowered after she got in the car. She put my window down, too, so I could breathe in the cold air.
“You know where you’re going?” he asked.
“I put it into my phone,” CJ said. “We’ll be fine, Trent.”
“Call me.”
“Well, I mean, won’t she be able to trace my cell phone calls?”
“Right, she’ll just ring up her contacts at the FBI.”
CJ laughed. Trent hugged her through the window. “You be a good dog, Molly,” he said to me.
I wagged at being a good dog.
“Here we go, Molly,” CJ said.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
SIXTEEN
We took a long car ride. I elected to curl up on the front seat with my head within easy reach of CJ’s hand, and she’d touch me every so often. The love flowed through that hand and eased me into untroubled slumber. It was so much better than being in the place of the barking dogs. I hoped I would never have to go there again. I just wanted to be right where I was, a front-seat dog with my girl, CJ.
We stopped at a place with outdoor tables and wonderful food smells. “It’s not too bad out here if I keep my coat on,” CJ said as she tied my leash to a table leg. “You’ll be okay, right, Molly? I’m just going in there for a second. Don’t look at me like that; I’m not leaving you. You’re a good dog.”
I understood that I was a good dog. I made to follow her as she turned, but the leash stopped me. I strained against it as CJ went through some glass doors and into the building. I didn’t understand, and whimpered. If I was a good dog, I should be going with CJ!
“Hello, Molly.”
I looked around and there was Shane. I did not wag.
“Good dog.” Shane crouched next to me and petted my head. He smelled like smoke and oils and meat. I wasn’t sure what to do.
I wagged when I saw CJ. She was holding a bag and standing on the other side of the glass doors, looking at us. Shane waved his hand. CJ came out slowly.
“Hi, babe,” Shane said, standing up.
“I guess it would be stupid to ask if you’ve been following me,” CJ said. She set the bag down. I could smell food in it and really, really wanted to poke my head in for a sniff.
“I saw Trent putting suitcases in your car. So you’re not going to meet me at the park tomorrow.”
“A cousin of mine is sick. I’ve got to go visit her. I’ll be back in a couple of days.”
“The point is, you made a commitment to me. Now you’re breaking your promise.”
“You’re right, I’m in breach of contract.”
“This isn’t funny. This is what you do all the time,” Shane said.
“I would have called you.”
“That’s not the point. I told you I need to talk to you and you’ve been blowing me off. And now this, leaving town without even telling me—you gave me no choice but to follow you.”
I nuzzled CJ’s hand to remind her I was here and that I could put the contents of the bag to good use if she wasn’t going to.
“What do you want to talk about, Shane?” CJ said quietly.
“Well, us.” Shane stood up. “I’m having, like, insomnia. I even feel a little sick to my stomach, sometimes. And you don’t respond to my messages, how is that supposed to make me feel? Pretty angry, is what. You can’t do this to me, babe. I want it to be back the way it was. I miss you.”
“Wow,” CJ said. She sat at the table and finally, finally, started taking food out of the bag. I sat, being quiet and good.
“Wow what? Hey, can I have some of your fries?” Shane reached out and grabbed some delicious-smelling food and put it in his mouth. I tracked his hand, but he didn’t drop anything.
“Help yourself,” CJ said.
“You get any ketchup?”
CJ pushed the bag to him and Shane started rooting around in it. “Wow what?” he repeated.
“I just realized something about myself. About how talented I am,” CJ said.
“Yeah?”
“I have this ability to find friends who think only about themselves.”
Shane halted his food halfway to his mouth. I gave him all of my attention.
“Is that all we are? Friends?” he asked quietly.
CJ exhaled and looked away.
“You know that’s not true, babe,” Shane said, tantalizing odors swirling out on his words. “It’s like you’re perfect for me. Everyone says we’re great together. Hey, get more ketchup, okay? You only got one packet. That’s not enough.”
CJ sat for a moment looking at him, then wordlessly got up and went into the building. As soon as she was inside, Shane reached over and looked in her purse, pulling something out that wasn’t edible—CJ’s phone. He didn’t talk to it, though. He stared at it. “Santa Monica?” he said out loud. “Holy…” He tossed the phone in the purse and sat back.
CJ came outside and handed him something. Her hand reached down and stroked me. “I’ll give you some dinner in a minute, Molly,” she said. Having “dinner” and “Molly” in the same sentence made me happy.
“So this cousin, where did you say she lives?” Shane said.
“What?”
“I said where are you going.”
“Oh. St. Louis.”
“Right. We both know that’s a lie.”
“Sorry?”
“You don’t have a sick cousin. You’re taking off so you don’t have to deal with me like an honest person.”
“And your special talent is being accidentally hilarious.”
Shane’s anger flashed hot, popping off his skin. He brought his hand down on the table in a hard slap. I jumped up, startled and uncertain what he was doing. I felt some fear in CJ. What was going on? The fur on my back involuntarily rose—I could feel the prickling of my skin as it did so.
“This ends here,” Shane snapped.
“What does?”
“The lying. The manipulating. The selfishness.”
“What do you mean?”
“We’re getting in our cars and driving back to Wexford. I’ll follow you and Molly will ride with me so I know you won’t try anything stupid.”
I looked up at him. CJ sat for a long time without saying anything or eating. “Okay,” she finally said. Her fear had left.
“Good.” Shane’s anger was receding as well. Whatever had happened between the two of them appeared over.
CJ pushed the sack away from her.
“You’re not going to eat that?” Shane asked.
“Knock yourself out.”
Shane began eating CJ’s meal. I watched mournfully. “Give me your keys; I’ll put Molly in your car,” CJ said.
“I’ll do it,” Shane said.
“No, I have to be the one.”
“I don’t trust you.”
“If you do it she won’t understand. I have to do it. She won’t want to go with you—dogs are good at judging character. I want her to sit in there for a minute and get used to the idea before we go.”
“Judge of good character.” Shane snorted.
“Are you going to give me the keys or not?”
Shane, chewing, reached into his pocket and tossed something at her that jangled with the distinctive sound of keys. CJ started to pick them up and dropped them in front of me. I leaned forward for a sniff, smelling smoke and some long-dead animal.
“You have a rabbit’s foot on your keys now?” CJ said.
“Yeah. It reminds me how lucky I am to have you.”
CJ made a noise and scooped up the dead-animal thing with the keys. She untied me. “Come on, Molly.”
“I’ll be there in a sec,” Shane said.
“No rush.” CJ led me over to a car and opened the door. I could smell Shane inside, plus other odors, but no dogs. “Okay, Molly, get in!”
This didn’t make a lot of sense to me, but I jumped in as instructed, glad it was the front seat. CJ leaned over and the window on my side of the car slid all the way down. “Okay, Molly, you’re a good girl,” CJ said. “This is all going to work out okay.”
CJ shut the car door. I watched, mystified, as she went back to sit with Shane. What were we doing? I stuck my head out the open window, whining softly.
CJ stood and went back into the building. Shane continued to eat without looking up or indicating he was saving any dinner for me.
Then I jerked my head, startled. The back door of the building had opened and now CJ was there, moving quietly away. What was going on? I lost sight of her around the building and whimpered.
I heard the distinctive sound that was her car starting up and whimpered even more loudly. Shane stood up, taking the bag and putting it in the trash. He yawned, looked at his wrist, and then stared at the doors to the building. He cocked his head, rubbing his jaw.
CJ’s car came around the corner, speeding right past Shane, who stared at it, frozen. It drove a few dozen yards down the road and the front door opened.
“Molly!” CJ yelled.
Shane turned to look at me. I barked out the window.
“Molly!” CJ yelled again.
Shane lowered his head and ran right at me. I pulled my head out of the window and circled around in the front seat. It seemed very probable that Shane was going to open the door and let me out to be with my girl.
“Molly!” CJ screamed. “Come here! Now! Molly!”
I turned and scampered across the car seat and flew straight out the open window just as Shane arrived at his car. “Got you!” he said, grabbing me. I felt his hand on my back and I ducked my head and twisted and then broke free. “Stop! Bad dog!” he yelled.
Shane started chasing me. I streaked across the parking lot and bounded through CJ’s open door, across her lap, and into the seat next to her, panting. CJ shut the door and drove off.
She was looking up at the top of the front window. “You’re just not very bright, are you, Shane,” she said. She was driving slowly and after just a few moments pulled over and stopped. She was still looking at the top of the window.
I turned and looked out the back window and there was Shane, running after us. I could tell by his face that he was angry. CJ rolled down her window and very, very slowly began driving again.
Shane stopped running, putting his hands on his knees. CJ stopped her car. He looked up, then started walking toward us. He got closer, then closer still, so close that with the wind at his back I could easily smell the food he’d just been eating. I would have liked to lick somebody’s fingers at some point.
The car started rolling again. CJ reached into her purse and picked up the dead-animal keys. She held them out the window, waving them, then tossed them over the top of the car and into the tall grass on the side of the road. Then she drove away. I watched through the back window as Shane walked up to where we’d been and stared into the field, his hands on his hips.
I could have found the keys easily, but people aren’t especially good at locating lost things. That’s one of the reasons why they have dogs. In this case, though, something told me that CJ had thrown the keys for reasons that had nothing to do with a game of find-and-bring-back.
CJ soon stopped the car and poured food into a bowl for me. I knew she wouldn’t forget to feed me, but frankly, what Shane had been pulling from the bag had smelled a lot more interesting.
It was the longest car ride I can ever remember taking. In the night CJ parked the car under a light and slept on the front seat and I slept with my head resting on her legs. We drove through a very snowy place and then a windy and dry place.
Most of the time when CJ ate, someone would hand her a bag of food from a building. Sometimes we ate at an outside table. The meals were exotic and delicious. This was one of the best car rides I’d ever taken!
I was in a deep sleep when the car stopped and shut off. I shook myself, blearily looking around. We were with a lot of other cars. The sun was not yet very high in the sky. “We’re here, Molly!” CJ said.
We got out of the car and the smell hit me and, just like that, I knew exactly where we were.
When I was a dog who Worked doing Find and Show, I would often come with my people, Jakob or Maya, to this very place. It was the ocean. CJ led me down to the water and let me off the leash and laughed and I leaped into the water, a couple of days’ worth of pent-up energy inciting me to run though the waves in lunges.
We played there for a while and then walked up to some outdoor tables. CJ gave me water and food and sat with me in the sun as it got warmer.
“Nice day,” a man said. “Pretty dog.”
He reached down to pet me. His hands smelled like mint.
“Thanks,” CJ said.
“Where’re you from? I’m going to guess Ohio.”
“What? No, I’m from here.”
The man laughed. “Not with that coat you’re not. My name’s Bart.”
“Hi,” CJ said. She looked away.
“Okay, I get it, you don’t want company. It’s just such a nice day, I wanted to say hello to you and your dog. Be careful the cops don’t catch your pooch on the beach; they’ll ticket you if they do.” The man smiled again and then went over to a table and sat by himself.
For the next couple of days we would sleep in the car and then CJ would go to stand under some flowing water and take me with her into a small building where she would change her clothes. Then we would drive around, mostly to restaurants, by the smell of them. CJ would tie me up in the shade and go inside and sometimes come right out and sometimes stay in for a while. By the end of the day her hair and clothing was rich with wonderful cooking odors.
CJ always took me to the ocean to run and play, but she didn’t ever swim herself.
“Oh, you are such a good dog, Molly,” CJ said. “It’s a lot harder to get a job than I thought it would be, even for minimum wage.”
I wagged at being a good dog. We were, as far as I was concerned, having one of the most wonderful times ever. We were either in the car or outside every day!
Several nights later, as we were settling in to go to sleep, it began to rain. CJ usually left the windows cracked open, but when the rain started to come in she rolled them up, which was why I didn’t smell the man. I saw him only when he emerged from the rain under the tall street lamp. It was as if the night and the rain came together and suddenly made a wet, dark man. I sat perfectly still, watching him. He had long hair on his head and face and was carrying a big bag over his shoulder. He was looking right at us.
I felt the fear rise in CJ and knew she saw him, too. A low growl came from my throat.
“It’s okay, Molly,” CJ said. I wagged. The man looked around slowly—he seemed to be examining the other few cars in the parking lot. Then he turned to look at us again.
CJ inhaled sharply as the man strode deliberately toward us.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
SEVENTEEN
The man came right up to the car and when his hand reached out to touch the door I hit the window in full snarl, barking and snapping. I was letting him know if he tried to get in the car he would be met with teeth. And I would bite him; I could feel it in my mouth.
Rain was pouring off of the man’s long hair, flowing down his face as he bent over to see us. He was ignoring me and was instead watching CJ. CJ was so afraid a small cry came from her lips. I could hear her heart beating.
I was enraged that anyone would frighten my girl. Incensed, I scratched at the glass, hurling myself at it again and again, wanting to get through it. My bark had the same savage quality to it that I’d brought to the barn to protect Clarity from Troy.
The man smiled and knocked at the window. I bit at the glass where his knuckle was rapping. Then he straightened and looked around.
“Go away!” CJ yelled.
The man didn’t react. After a minute, he walked off, disappearing into the gloom.
“Oh my God. Oh, Molly, you are such a good dog,” CJ said, throwing her arms around me. I licked her face. “I was so scared. He looked like, like a zombie or something! But you protected me, didn’t you? You’re a guard dog, a guard dog and a poodle—a goodle! I love you so much.”
There was a huge bang and CJ screamed. The man was back and he had a stick and he had hit the window with it. He was smiling—all I could see in the rain and the dark were his crooked, yellow teeth, his eyes hidden by the brim of his hat. He hit the window again and I put my face to the glass and now I could see his eyes and I stared at them, my mouth in a snarl, drool flying. He was frightening my girl and I let the rage flow into me and I desired nothing more but to bite that man.
He laughed, looking in the window. He pointed his finger at me and then shook it, the way Gloria did when she talked to me. And then he straightened and vanished into the wet darkness.
I’d always thought of sticks as being something to play with, but now I understood a stick could also be a bad thing, if you were in a scary place and the person holding it wasn’t trying to play with you.
The rain made a loud roar on the car all night. CJ didn’t sleep at first, but gradually the fear left her and she put her head down. I pressed up against her as I dozed to let her know she was being protected by her dog.
The next morning it was very bright outside. The wet ground smelled really interesting, but CJ wanted to go to the place where we could sit at outdoor tables. When we got there the nice man we’d met a few days before greeted us and leaned down to pet me. He was taller than most men I’d ever met. His hands smelled like mint again. “Let me buy you breakfast,” he said.
“No thank you,” CJ said. “I just want coffee.”
“Come on. What do you want, an omelet?”
“I’m good.”
“She’ll have a veggie omelet,” the nice man said to the woman who brought food.
“I said I was fine,” CJ said as the woman left.
“Hey, sorry, but you look like you’re hungry. You an actress? Model, you’re probably a model. You’re pretty enough. I’m Bart. My parents named me Bartholomew, I’m like, thanks for that. So I pick ‘Bart,’ but are you ready for it? My last name is Simpson. So yeah, I’m Bart Simpson. Doh! What’s your name?”
“Wanda,” CJ said.
“Hi, Wanda.”
We all sat comfortably together for a few minutes, enjoying the smell of bacon coming from the kitchen.
“So was I right? Modeling, that’s why you’re so thin,” the man said.
“Actually, I’m thinking of becoming an actress.”
“Well, good for you. I represent actresses; that’s what I do. I’m a talent agent. You have an agent?”
I sat up because the woman brought out food and set it in front of CJ, who started to eat it but then stopped and gave me toast!
“No, I’m good when it comes to representation, actually,” CJ said. “But thanks.”
“What did I tell you? You were hungry. Look, I know what’s going on.”
CJ stopped eating and looked at the man.
“I go for a walk on the beach in the morning. I’ve seen you get out of your car, like you’re just pulling up, except I came down here the other night and I saw it parked there. You think you’re the first actor to sleep in a car? There’s no shame in it.”
CJ started eating again, but more slowly. “I’m not ashamed,” she said softly. She tossed a piece of cheesy food at me and I expertly snagged it out of the air.
“What you should do is come home with me, now.”
“Oh. Like, as a reward for the omelet?” CJ said.
The man laughed. “No, course not. I have more than one bedroom. Just until you’re on your feet.”
“Actually, we’re on vacation and I have to leave tomorrow.”
The man laughed again. “You really are an actress. What are you worried about, that you won’t be able to get what you need? Whatever it is, I can get it for you.”
“What?”
“I’m trying to protect you here, help you out. What’s with the hostility?”
“Drugs? Is that what you’re talking about? I’m not on drugs.” I could feel CJ getting angry, but I didn’t know why.
“Okay, my mistake. Most of the girls are, to tell you the truth; I mean, this is LA.”
“Most of the girls. So you’ve got what, a harem? A stable?”
“I said I represent—”
CJ stood up. “I know what you represent. Bart. Come on, Molly.” She gathered my leash.
“Hey, Wanda,” the man called after us. CJ did not stop walking. “You know you’re going to see me again, right? Right?”
We spent that day sitting on a blanket on the sidewalk. There was a box on the blanket and every so often someone would stop and drop something in the box and nearly always they would talk to me. “Nice doggy,” they usually said. CJ would say, “Thank you.” I loved seeing all the people.
We stayed on that blanket until the sun went down, and then CJ fed me. “I’ve got enough to get you some more food tomorrow, Molly,” she said. I wagged to show her that I’d heard my name and was happy I was eating.
As we got back to the car, CJ slowed. “Oh no,” she said.
The ground around the car was covered with small pebbles. Curious, I went to sniff them. They glinted in the light from the street lamps.
“No, Molly, you’ll cut your feet!” CJ pulled the leash and I understood that I had done something wrong. I looked at her. “Sit,” she said. She tied the leash to a post so that I couldn’t follow her to the car. The windows were open, and she stuck her head in. I whined because if we were getting in the car I didn’t want to be forgotten.
A car slowly approached us. A beam of light came from the side of it and landed on CJ, who whirled around to look at it.
“Is that your car?” a woman said out of her window. CJ nodded. The woman got out of her side and a man got out of the other and I saw they were both police officers.
“They take anything?” the policewoman asked.
“I had clothes, stuff like that,” CJ answered.
The policeman came over to pet my head. “Nice doggy,” he said. I wagged. His fingers smelled spicy.
“We’ll take a report,” the policewoman said. “Insurance will pay for the glass and maybe the contents, too. Depends on your deductible, and the like.”
“Oh. Well, I’m not sure it’s worth it.”
“No problem,” the policewoman said. “See some ID?”
CJ handed something to the policewoman. The policeman stood up and took whatever it was and went back to sit in his car. CJ came over to me. “Good dog, Molly,” she said. She seemed a little afraid, for some reason.
The policewoman was walking around the car. CJ unclipped my leash. The policeman stood up. “She’s in the system,” he said.
The policewoman looked at CJ, and CJ turned and ran! I didn’t know what we were doing, but I was more than happy to gallop along beside her.
We hadn’t gone very far before I heard footsteps behind us. It was the policeman. He caught up to us. “How long you want to do this?” he asked as he ran next to us.
CJ faltered, then stopped. She put her hands on her knees and I licked her face, ready to take off again.
“I’m doing a 10K this weekend, so I appreciated the opportunity to do a quick wind sprint,” the policeman told her. He reached down to pet me and I wagged. “Want to tell me why you took off like that?” he asked.
“I don’t want to go to jail,” CJ said.
“You’re not going to jail; we don’t put people in jail for running away from home. But you’re a minor and you’re in our system, so you’re going to have to come with us.”
“I can’t.”
“I know it looks that way now, but believe me, you don’t want to be a street person. What do they call you?”
“CJ.”
“Well, CJ, I am going to have to cuff you because you took off on us like that.”
“What about Molly?”
“We’ll call Animal Control.”
“No!”
“Don’t worry; nothing’s going to happen to her. They’ll hold her until you can pick her up. Okay?”
We went back to the car and the people stood around and talked. Eventually a truck came with a cage on the back. I didn’t want to go for a car ride in that cage, and shrank to the ground when a man got out of the truck with a pole that had a loop on the end.
“No, wait, it’s okay. Molly, come here,” my girl said. I dutifully went to her. She knelt down and took my head in her hands. “Molly, you’re going to have to go to the shelter for a few days, but I will come get you. I promise, Molly. Okay? Good dog.”
CJ seemed sad. She led me over to the truck, and the man with the pole opened the cage door. I looked up at her. Really?
“Come on, Molly. Up!” CJ said. I jumped up into the cage, then turned around. CJ put her face next to mine and I licked the salty tears on her face. “You’ll be okay, Molly. I promise.”
The car ride in the cage was not fun. When the truck stopped, the man opened the cage and slipped the loop at the end of his pole over my neck and we went into a building.
I smelled them and heard them before he even opened the door: dogs. Inside the building the floor was slick and I couldn’t get a good purchase on it and the barking was so loud I couldn’t hear my nails as they scrabbled for traction. The din was amazing, an absolute riot of dogs. He took me back into a room and had me walk up a ramp until I was on a metal table. Two other men were there and they held me.
“She’s friendly,” said the man with the pole.
I felt a hand grab the fur behind my head and then there was a small, sharp pain. I wagged, my ears low, to let them know that though they had hurt me, it was okay.
“So that’s the first thing we do, is inoculate them. Won’t hurt them if it’s redundant, and that way we avoid a distemper epidemic,” one of the men said. Because it was so loud, he had to shout. “So that’ll be your job as part of the induction process.”
“Got it,” said the third man.
“The owner’s over at the women’s shelter. She’s a minor,” said the man with the pole.
“Yeah, well, she’s got four days.”
I was led down a narrow corridor. The floor here was just as slippery—it was very unnerving. The hall was lined with cages and every one of them had a dog in it. Some of them were barking and some of them were crying. Some of them were at the gate and some of them were cowering in the back. The place stank with fear.
I had been in places full of barking dogs before but never as loud as this.
A strong chemical smell wafted on the air. It smelled like the machine in the basement where CJ liked to put her clothes to get them wet. And I could smell cats, too, though I couldn’t hear any because of all the noise from the dogs.
I was put in a small cage. There was no doghouse, but there was a small towel on the slick floor. The man shut the cage door. There was a drain in the floor and I sniffed it. Many dogs had marked it with their scent. I chose not to do so at that time.
Across the hall from me, a large black dog was throwing himself at his cage door and growling. When he saw me he met my eyes and snarled. He was a bad dog.
I curled up around the towel. I missed CJ. The heartbroken barking and crying and howling went on and on.
After a while, my voice joined theirs. I couldn’t help it.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
EIGHTEEN
I was scared and, despite the constant din from all the dogs, I had never felt so alone. I curled up on the towel on the floor in as tight a ball as I could manage. I was given food and water, served in paper bowls. The dog in the cage across from me ripped up his bowl, but I did not.
After a long time had passed, a man came to get me. He led me out of the cage and put straps on my face so that I could only open my jaws a small amount. He took me into a cold room with the same slippery floor. It was quieter in there, but I could still hear barking.
I could smell many dogs in the room, and their scent carried with it fear and pain and death. This was a place where dogs had died. The man led me over to a hole that was covered with a metal grate. I stood, my legs trembling. I tried to press into the man for comfort, but he backed away from me.
I recognized the scent of the other man—he had been in the room the day before. I wagged my tail at him a little, but he did not say my name.
“Okay, this the first time you’ve been in here?” the man who had led me in said.
“No, I loaded out the bodies of the ones we euthanized yesterday,” the man I knew said.
“Okay, well, this is the aggression test. They fail this, they’re short-tracked. That means they only get the four days before we put them down. Otherwise, we give them longer if we’re not crowded.”
“Are you ever not crowded?”
“Ha, yeah, you’re catching on. Sometimes we’re not completely packed, but usually it’s like this.” The other man went to a counter and grabbed a bowl full of food. “What I’m going to do, here, is let her smell this and get used to the idea that it’s her food. Then I start to pull it away using this plastic hand. Okay? If she turns to snap at the hand, that’s aggression. If she growls, that’s aggression.”
“How does the dog know it is a hand?”
“It’s shaped like a hand and it’s kinda flesh colored. It’s a hand.”
“Well, all right. Looks more like just a wedge of white plastic to me.”
“So growl at it.”
Both men laughed.
I did not know what was happening, but I had never felt so miserable. The man in front set the food down in front of me. I started to salivate—were they planning to feed me? I was hungry. I put my nose down and the man came at me with a big stick.
I’d learned from being with CJ in the car that when times were scary sticks could be bad, so as the man poked the stick at my nose I growled, too frightened to do anything else.
“Okay, that’s it,” the man with the food said. “Aggressive. Short track.”
“But the owner said she was coming back,” the other man objected.
“They all say that. Helps them to feel better when they’re dropping off Fido. But you know what? They never do.”
“Still…”
“Hey, I know you’re new, but you’re going to have to get used to it real fast or you’re not going to last. It’s an aggressive dog. So, that’s it.”
“Yeah, all right.”
I was led back to my cage. I curled up, my eyes closed. After a time I was able to fall asleep, despite the physical assault of the barking.
A day went by, and then another. I felt anxious and sick. I was becoming accustomed to the noise and the smells but never to being without my girl. When I barked, it was with the pain of separation.
Another day went by and this one was the worst one because it really did seem as though my girl had forgotten all about me. I needed CJ to come get me now.
The din was so loud that I sensed the presence of a woman outside my cage door without hearing her. She opened the door and patted her knees. Slowly, unsure, I approached her, my ears down, wagging. She hooked a leash onto my collar and led me past the other cages, the dogs howling and barking and snarling and whimpering at me.
The woman took me to a door and when it opened CJ was there. Sobbing, I jumped up, trying to lick her face.
“Molly!” she said. “Oh, Molly, Molly, are you okay? I am so sorry; Molly, are you okay?”
For several minutes we hugged and kissed each other. My girl. She hadn’t forgotten about me after all. I felt the love pouring out of her and it made my heart soar.
CJ led me over to a car and I joyously followed. She opened the back door, but I was so happy to be leaving I sailed inside and then I got to see why I wasn’t going to get to be a front-seat dog—Gloria was there, sitting in my usual spot. She looked at me and I wagged because I was even glad to see her, so elated was I to be leaving the place of barking dogs.
“Good dog, good dog,” CJ said as she slipped behind the wheel and started the car.
We drove to a place that was every bit as loud as the place with all the dogs, but these were all people noises. I heard cars and busses and shouting and other sounds and every so often a giant thundering noise that would seem to shake the very air.
CJ got a box out of the trunk and opened a metal mesh door at one end of it. “Go into the crate, Molly.” I looked at her questioningly. “Crate,” she repeated. I lowered my head and went inside. “Good dog, Molly. This is your crate.”
When I was inside I could see out through the metal grate, but the rest of the crate was solid. “You’re going to go for a plane ride, Molly. It will be okay.” CJ poked her fingers through the grate.
It was one of the strangest days of my life. Several times the crate was tilted one way or another, and eventually I was put in a room and there was another dog in it I could smell but not see. The dog started barking, but I was all barked out and just wanted to sleep, though a teeth-rattling roar soon filled the room, vibrating my crate and making my body feel heavy, as if I were on a car ride. The dog barked and barked and barked, but I had heard worse recently and wasn’t annoyed. The vibrations seemed to drive fatigue into my bones and I was soon asleep.
After some more tilting and moving, I was in a place with a lot of people and the same loud noises. CJ appeared and opened the crate and I bounded out, shaking myself off and ready to have fun. She led me outside to a patch of grass to do my business, and the combination of scents floating on the cold air told me we were now close to home. I wagged with happiness.
A man gave us a car ride. Gloria sat up next to him and CJ sat with me. I wanted to sit in CJ’s lap, I was so glad to be with her again, but when I tried she laughed and pushed me away.
When we got home, Trent was there and so was Rocky! I bounded out of the car and ran to my brother and he sniffed me up and down, no doubt smelling all the dogs and people I’d met since I’d seen him last. Then we wrestled and played in the snow, but I was still feeling insecure and didn’t let Rocky pull me more than a few feet away from CJ’s feet as she sat on the steps with Trent.
“It was … an adventure, that’s for sure,” CJ said. “I have to say, next time I go to California I want to stay in a place with a shower. The Ford didn’t have one.”
“What happened to the Ford?”
“God, Gloria made me sell it. Supposedly, I had too much independence—that’s the new theory, that I ran off because of independence. Also, she wants me to see a shrink. She’s convinced that anyone who wouldn’t want to live with her has to be crazy.”
“How was it? Having her show up, I mean.”
“You want to know what? It was pure, unadulterated Gloria. She comes to this women’s shelter and she’s saying, ‘Thank God, thank God,’ and she tells the staff thank you for taking care of her ‘little girl.’ I think maybe she thought they were going to give her an award or something. Mother of the Year. And then when we get in the car she asks me if I want to go on a tour with her to see celebrities’ houses.”
Rocky had tried several times to get me to chase him around the yard and now gave up, rolling on his back and baring his throat for me to chew. CJ reached out and petted me. It felt so good to be home.
“So then she gives me this lecture and tells me she’s already arranged for a broker to sell the car, which is in Impound, I guess. And then we go out to eat at the Ivy, which is this restaurant where you’re supposed to be able to see all these movie stars. She tells me she’s disappointed in me and that she loved her mother, which is this thing she always says, that her mother was worse and yet Gloria still loved her, so that makes me, I don’t know, weak or something. So I’m trying to talk to her about it, about why I ran away, I mean, and she interrupts me to ask if I want to try her wine because in California the wine is as good as in France. In a restaurant, she wants to give a minor wine. And then we pick up Molly and fly first class and she flirts with the flight attendant the whole way—she thinks that because he kept asking if she wanted more wine he must have had a crush on her, though he was like twenty-five years old and obviously not into women, if you know what I mean.”
“What about Molly? I mean, what happens now?”
“Well, that’s the question, isn’t it. I told her if anything ever happens to Molly again I’m going to write a book about how I was forced to run away because my mother was a dog abuser and I’m going to self-publish it and go on a national book tour. That gave her something to think about.”
Rocky and I had both stopped wrestling when we heard my name. Now he jumped up and tried to climb on my back.
“Rocky, stop that,” Trent said. Rocky dropped off of me and went over to Trent for reassurance.
“Let’s walk,” CJ said, standing up. She and Trent snapped leashes onto our collars and then we went to the side gate and down the street. It felt so great to be going for a walk!
“Oh, and then she tells me how helpful Shane was, that he was the one who said I was in LA. This is after I told her what a creep he is! She takes his calls and chats with him and probably does her laugh and everything.”
“I tried to find you, you know. I mean, on the Internet, I was looking at postings, anything with your name on it.”
“I should have called. I’m sorry. I just … It wasn’t the best time for me, and when things are bad, I can’t make myself communicate.”
“I found something, though, while I was looking,” Trent said.
“What?”
“Actually, it’s more like what I didn’t find. I just noticed that on the real estate office site where your mom has an office? Her picture is there, but there are no property listings for her.”
“Is it her glamour shot? I hate that.”
“Yeah, I think so. It’s really fuzzy, out of focus.”
“She’s pretty sure that someone’s going to see that picture and sign her to a record deal.”
“You can go back three years on that site and find sales. Your mom’s name isn’t on any of them.”
“What does that mean?”
“I guess it means that in the past three years your mother hasn’t sold or listed a house.”
“You’re kidding.”
“No. Check it yourself.”
“I had no idea. She’s never said anything about it.”
Rocky went rigid and saw it the same time I did: a squirrel had bounded into the street and was now frozen, staring at us, probably paralyzed with fear. Our paws digging into the snow, the two of us strained at our leashes, the squirrel darting over to a tree and scrambling up it. CJ and Trent led us over to the tree. Rocky put his paws on the tree and barked, a joyous noise that let the squirrel know we could have caught him if we’d really tried.
“Hi!” a woman called from behind us. I lifted my nose and could smell that I had met her before, though I wasn’t sure where.
“Sheryl, hi,” CJ said. “This is my friend Trent.”
The woman bent and held out her hand for Rocky and me to sniff. She had a glove on that smelled delicious, but I knew better than to try to take it in my mouth. “Hi, Trent. Hi, Molly.”
“We met at the Christmas party,” Trent said.
“Yes, of course,” Sheryl said.
They stood talking for a little bit. Rocky and I kept glancing around for squirrels, but then some uneasiness came over my girl and I snapped my attention back to her. “Um,” CJ said. She and Trent looked at each other. “Sheryl, at the party, when Molly signaled … We never heard. I mean…”
The woman nodded. “Of course. Well, there was … a lump. But it was so small, and I was so busy, I would have kept putting it off if it hadn’t been for Molly.”
I wagged.
“We caught it in plenty of time, my doctor says. So…” The woman gave a light laugh. “I called and told your mother about it all; didn’t she say anything?”
“No, she didn’t mention it. But I’ve been … traveling.”
The woman leaned over and kissed me. I wagged and Rocky stuck his head in the way. “Thank you, Molly,” the woman said. “You saved my life.”
When we got back to the house, Trent and Rocky left and CJ and I went inside. There was a room I never went into because it was where Gloria liked to sit and look at papers, and this was where we went now. There was no food and no toys, so I had no idea why we’d bother with the place. CJ pulled open drawers and looked at papers, while I curled up in a ball and contemplated a nap.
“Oh no,” CJ said quietly. I heard the word “no,” but it didn’t seem that I was a bad dog.
CJ suddenly stood up and went down the hallway. She felt angry and she was stomping her feet. “Gloria!” she shouted.
“I’m back here!”
We went to Gloria’s room. She was sitting in a chair in front of a television.
“What are these?” CJ asked loudly, rattling the papers. Gloria stared, her eyes narrowed, and then sighed.
“Oh. Those.”
“Is our house in foreclosure?”
“I don’t know. It’s too confusing.”
“But … It says we’re six months behind. Six months! Is that true?”
“That can’t be right. Has it been that long?”
“Gloria. It says we’re in foreclosure proceedings. If we don’t do something, we’re going to lose the house!”
“Ted said he could loan me some money,” Gloria said.
“Who’s Ted?”
“Ted Petersen. You’d like him. He looks like a male model.”
“Gloria! There are all kind of bills in your desk that aren’t even open.”
“You’ve been snooping in my desk?”
“We’re behind in our house payments and you don’t think I have a right to know about it?”
“That office is my private place, Clarity.”
The anger was slowly leaving my girl. She dropped into a chair, the papers falling to the floor. I sniffed at them.
“Well, okay,” CJ said. “I think we’re going to have to tap into Dad’s trust.”
Gloria didn’t say anything. She was looking at the television.
“Gloria, are you listening? You always said there’s a provision in there that if we really need the money for something, like if I needed surgery or whatever, we can withdraw funds. I’d say losing the house counts.”
“Why do you think we’re behind in the first place?”
“Sorry?”
“There wasn’t enough in there.”
CJ was very still, and I could hear her heartbeat. I nuzzled her hand in concern, but she ignored me. “What are you saying? Are you saying you took the money? Dad’s money? My money? You took my money?”
“It never was your money, Clarity. It was the trust your father set up so that you could live. All the money I spent was for you. How do you think I paid for your food, for the house? How about our trips, the cruise?”
“The cruise? You invaded the trust so we could go on a cruise ship?”
“Someday you’ll be a mother yourself. Then you’ll understand.”
“What about your stuff, Gloria? What about your cars, your clothes?”
“Well, obviously I had to have clothes.”
CJ jumped to her feet. The rage in her made her whole body rigid, and I cowered from it. “I hate you! I hate you! You are the most evil person in the world!” she screamed.
Sobbing, she fled down the hallway, and I was right on her heels. She scooped up some things from the kitchen counter as we went out the door and she went to Gloria’s car and opened the door. I jumped in—front seat!
CJ was still sobbing as we drove down her street. I looked out the window but did not see the squirrel Rocky and I had chased earlier. CJ’s hand was to her ear, holding her phone.
“Trent? Oh my God, Gloria spent all my money. My money, Dad’s trust, it’s gone! She said she took it out for me, but that’s a lie, it’s a lie, she went on vacations and she bought herself stuff, and it was all my money. Oh, Trent, that was my college fund; that was my … Oh God.” The grief in CJ was overwhelming. I whimpered, putting my head in her lap.
“No, what?… No, I left. I’m driving.… What? No, I didn’t steal her car. It’s not hers; she bought it with my money!” CJ shouted.
She was quiet for a moment. She wiped her eyes. “I know. Can I come over? I’ve got Molly.”
I thumped my tail.
“Wait,” CJ said. She was quiet, her body still, and then a new emotion boiled up in her: fear. “Trent, it’s Shane. He’s right behind me.”
CJ twisted in her seat, then faced the front. I felt a heaviness that I knew meant the car was changing speed. “No, I’m sure. He’s following me! I’ll call you back!”
CJ tossed her phone onto my seat and it bounced and fell to the floor in front of me. I looked at it but elected not to climb down to sniff it. “Hang on, Molly,” CJ said. I had trouble holding myself steady. I heard a car honk. The car turned and I fell against the door. We stopped suddenly and then were driving again. Another turn came.
CJ took a deep breath. “Okay. Okay, I think he’s gone, Molly,” she said. She leaned over to pick up her phone, grunting, and then something slammed me so hard I lost track of everything. I heard CJ scream and a shock of pain went through my body and I couldn’t see. I felt us falling.
It took me a long moment to understand what was happening. I was no longer in the front seat. I was lying on the inside roof of the car and CJ was above me in her seat. “Oh God, Molly, are you okay?”
I could taste blood in my mouth and was not able to wag my tail or move my legs. CJ unbuckled herself and slid out of her seat. “Molly!” she screamed. “Oh God, Molly, please, I can’t live without you, please, Molly, please!”
I felt her terror and her sadness and wanted to comfort her, but all I could do was look at her. She cradled my head in her hands. Her hands felt so good on my fur. “I love you, Molly. Oh, Molly, I’m so sorry, oh, Molly, oh, Molly,” she said.
I couldn’t see her anymore, and her voice sounded distant. “Molly!” she called again.
I knew what was happening. I could feel the darkness rising all around me, and, as I did so, I remembered being with Hannah, on the last day I was alive as Buddy. How, when I slipped away, I found myself thinking of baby Clarity and hoping she would find a dog to take care of her.
With a jolt, I realized something.
I had been that dog.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
NINETEEN
Always before, when the warm, gentle waves swept over me and washed away my pain, I let myself drift with the current, floating without direction. Each time I had been reborn before it had been something of a surprise: I always felt as if I had completed my mission, fulfilled my purpose.
Not this time. My girl was in trouble and I needed to get back to her. When the waves came and the sensation of her hands on my fur faded from me, I actively pushed, fighting to make my limbs respond. I wanted to be reborn.
When awareness came and I knew I had returned, it was a relief. I had the sense that I had been asleep for less time than in the past, which was good. Now I just needed to grow large and strong enough to find my way back to CJ and be her dog.
My mother was a light brown color, as were my two siblings—both sisters, both aggressively seeking to feed. When sounds began to emerge from the liquidy fuzz as distinct and identifiable, I could hear barking dogs. Lots of them.
I was back in a place of barking dogs. After a time, the din became so much a part of the background that I stopped hearing it.
While the light was still muddled and my limbs were weak, I could do nothing more than sleep and feed, but I remembered what to do, how to push forward to my mother, and bit back my impatience with how helpless I was.
There were a couple of different women whose voices I could hear occasionally and whose presence I could feel from time to time. My mother’s body would tremble as she wagged her tail as these people came; I would feel it as I nursed.
The first time my vision had cleared and I saw one of these people, though, I was shocked. She was a giant, looming far over us. “Such cuties,” she said. “Good dog, Zoey.”
My mother wagged, but I was staring up at the enormous woman, blinking, trying to focus. When her hand came down to pet my mother, I cringed—the hand was huge, larger than me, larger than my mother’s head.
As we got older, I watched my sisters skittering over to say hi to the giant women when they came to the cage. Fearful, I hung back, not even trailing after my mother when she went to be petted. Why weren’t my siblings afraid?
When the woman picked me up, her hands enveloping me like a blanket, I growled at her, though her strong fingers held me trapped. “Hello, Max. You a fierce dog? You going to be a watchdog?”
Another giant woman came up to peer at me. I growled at her, too. “I’m thinking the father is a Yorkie, maybe?” she said.
“Sure looks like Chihuahua-Yorkie mix,” the woman holding me said. Her name, I would soon learn, was Gail, and of all the people in that loud place, she spent the most time with me.
They called me Max, and my sisters were called Abby and Annie. When I played with my sisters it was always with a sense that what I should really be doing was finding CJ, though always before, when I’d been in a place of barking dogs, she’d found me. What I needed to do, probably, was wait, and she’d come. My girl had always come.
One day Abby, Annie, and I were let out into a small pen with some other dogs. They were all puppies and ran to meet us, too young to know you’re not supposed to directly touch noses and jump up on another dog without pause. I disdainfully slid to the side of the one who assaulted me, ignoring his tongue and moving to show him that we should be politely sniffing each other’s genitalia first.
There were other dogs in other pens and when I gazed through the chain fence at them I received a shock: they, too, were enormous! Where was this place, where the dogs and people were gigantic monsters? I went to the fence to sniff a white dog and he lowered his head and it was ten times the size of my mother’s. We sniffed through the fence and then I backed up, barking, letting him know I wasn’t afraid (though of course I was).
“It’s okay, Max. Go play,” Gail the giantess said to me.
Other than when we were in pens, we were allowed no time to be off leash. I was being led down a hallway full of cages and dogs back to my cage when I spotted a dog who looked a little like Rocky: same eager set to the head, same thin-boned legs. I knew it wasn’t Rocky, but the resemblance was so strong it made me pause—though this dog, like so many others in this place, was gigantic.
That’s when it occurred to me: it wasn’t that the people and the dogs were huge; it was that I was little. I was a tiny little dog!
I had met tiny dogs in my life, of course. But I had never before considered that I might be one—I had always been large, because people sometimes need the protection a large dog affords them. CJ certainly did! I remembered being in the car with her, when the man tried to get inside and he hit the window with a stick and I made him go away by snarling at him. Would a tiny little dog be able to accomplish that?
Yes, I decided. When it happened again, I could still snarl, still let the man know that if he opened the door I would bite him. Wrestling with little dogs had taught me they have very sharp teeth. I would just have to convince bad men that I would be willing to sink mine into their hands. That would stop them from trying to get into the car.
Back in my pen, I watched Abby and Annie play and they watched me watch them. Naturally, they were looking to me for leadership, as I was obviously the more experienced dog. Or at least, they should, though when I went to join their frolicking they ganged up on me instead of submitting to my dominance. That was something else: little dogs usually wound up on their backs, pinned down. I would have to work hard to prove that just because I was small I wasn’t a dog that others could oppress.
I put my new resolution into action the next time we were penned with other puppies, letting them know that no matter what their size, I was the dog to pay attention to. A goofy black and brown canine, all feet and ears, obviously destined to be as big as Rocky someday, thought he’d put me down with his superior weight, but I slipped out from his forelimbs and went after him with snapping teeth and he fell over on his back in docile surrender.
“Be nice, Max,” Gail said to me. Yes, my name was Max, and I was a dog to be reckoned with.
Once my sisters and I were no longer nursing, we were taken for a car ride, in cages, to some outdoor pens. Our mother was kept in a separate kennel, which upset Abby and Annie but didn’t bother me: I knew what was coming. It was the time when people came and puppies went home with them.
The open pens had no bottom; they sat right on the ground. I wanted to roll in the green grass, luxuriate in the sun, but I was momentarily stunned by the smells and sounds. The roar of noise was constant, not with barking but with the same sort of mechanical rumbles and shrieks that greeted me the day I was tilted left and right inside a plastic crate, the day CJ picked me up from the place of barking dogs by the ocean. And the smells: cars, dogs, people, water, leaves, grass, and, on top of all of it, food—great gusts of food smells swirling around me. Abby and Annie seemed as dazzled as I was by the sheer volume of sensual stimulus—we just stood there, noses to the wind, drinking it in.
Many people came by, peering into the pens and sometimes spending a little time playing with the dogs within. “Look at the puppies!” people would say when they gazed in on my sisters and me. Abby and Annie would race over in loving enthusiasm, but I always shied away. I was waiting for CJ.
Two men were soon kneeling by our cage, poking their fingers through the fencing, and Gail came over to talk to them.
“We think they have Yorkie in them. Their mother is the Chihuahua over there,” she said.
Gail opened the gate and Abby and Annie bounded out, the two men laughing in delight. I slunk along the back of the cage, keeping my head low.
That was the last I saw of my sisters. I was glad that the two men, who were obviously good friends, took them as a pair so that Abby and Annie could see each other the way Rocky and I stayed together.
“Don’t worry, Max. You’ll find a home,” Gail said to me.
A few days later we were back in the same place, and on that occasion my mother, plus a few other dogs, went home with people. Three times the door to my pen was opened, and all three times I slunk down to the ground and growled when people tried to pick me up.
“What happened? Was he abused?” a man asked Gail.
“No, he was born in the shelter. I don’t know, Max is just … anti-social. He doesn’t play well with other dogs, either. I think he’d do well with someone who stays at home and doesn’t receive a lot of visitors.”
“Well, that’s not me,” the man said with a laugh. He eventually left with a little white dog.
A while later a man joined Gail at the side of the pen. “Anyone interested in Max today?” he asked. I looked up at him beseechingly, but he made no move to open the cage door so that I could get out and find CJ.
“’Fraid not,” Gail replied.
“We have to put him on the list after today.”
“I know.”
They stood looking at me. With a sigh, I lay down in the grass. Apparently I would have to wait a while longer before I was let out.
“Well, maybe we’ll get lucky. Hope so,” the man said.
“Me, too,” Gail said. She sounded sad and I glanced up at her before resting my nose between my paws.
And then, on that cloudless, warm afternoon, the thunder of cars and machines vibrating the air and the scents of countless dogs and people and foods filling my nostrils, I caught sight of a woman walking down the street, and I leaped to my feet to see her more clearly. There was something about her bearing, the way she walked, her hair and her skin.…
The woman was striding briskly next to an enormous dog, not just compared to me but to every other dog I had ever seen. I was reminded of the donkey who lived on the Farm years and years ago—the dog was that big, with a lean body and an enormous head. As the woman drew abreast of me, the wind caught her scent and brought it to me.
It was, of course, CJ.
I yipped, and my bark, frustratingly quiet compared to all the background noise, earned me a quick glance from the giant dog, but CJ didn’t even look my way. I watched her in frustration as she went down the street and disappeared.
Why hadn’t she stopped to see me?
A few days later I was back out in the pens in the same grassy area and at precisely the same time of day CJ came by again, walking the same dog. I barked and barked, but CJ didn’t see me.
“Why are you barking, Max? What do you see?” Gail asked me. I wagged my tail. Yes, let me out; I needed to run after CJ!
The same man came over to see Gail, but I was focused on CJ’s retreating back.
“How’s our Max doing?” he asked.
“Not so well, I’m afraid. He nipped at a little girl this morning.”
“You know, even if we were able to adopt him out, I don’t think anyone would be able to handle him,” the man said.
“We don’t know that. With better socialization than we can give him, he might be fine.”
“Still, Gail, you know my position.”
“Right.”
“If we didn’t euthanize, we’d wind up being populated with nothing but unadoptable dogs, and then we couldn’t save any more of them.”
“He hasn’t bitten anyone!”
“You said that he nipped.”
“I know, but … he really is sweet; I mean, deep down I think he’s a really great animal.”
I wondered what it meant that CJ had a dog with her. Was he her dog? Every person needed a dog, especially my girl, but why would she need a dog so big? Though it was true there were a lot more people here than any other place we’d ever lived, so perhaps a big dog like that would be more protection, in case several people tried to get in the car at night in the rain. But surely he wouldn’t be able to protect my girl the way I would. Only I had known CJ since she was a baby.
“Tell you what,” the man said to Gail. “We’ll give Max one more adoption fair—when is it, Tuesday? Okay, one more. Maybe we’ll get lucky. But he’s already past the established time.”
“Oh my,” Gail said. “Poor Max.”
That night I reflected on CJ. She was older than when I’d been Molly and her hair was shorter, but I would still have recognized her. You don’t spend hours and hours gazing at a person to forget what they look like, even if they change a little. And though there was a riot of scents wafting all around me in this place, I could still find her smell on the wind.
The sky was cloudy the next time I was taken to the open-air pen. Gail stood on the other side of the fence and leaned in to talk to me. “This is it, Max. Your last day. I’m so sorry, little guy. I have no idea what happened to you that you’re so aggressive. I still think you’re the greatest, but I can’t have dogs in my apartment, not even a small puppy like you. So, so sorry.”
I wasn’t expecting to see CJ until late in the day, but after only about half an hour I spotted her, carrying two bags and walking alone, without the big dog. I yipped at her and she turned and saw me. She looked me right in the eyes! She seemed to slow for a second, glancing at the cages and people out on the grass, and then, astoundingly, she kept right on walking.
She’d looked me in the eyes! I yelped and then sobbed, scratching at the fence. Gail came over. “Max, what is the matter?”
I kept my focus on CJ, crying as loud as I could, my heartbreak and frustration pouring out of me. I heard the cage door rattle, and then Gail was bent over, snapping a leash onto my collar.
“Here, Max,” she said.
I lunged, snapping, my teeth clicking so close to her fingers I could almost taste the skin. With a gasp Gail jerked back, dropping the leash. I bolted out of the open gate and ran after CJ, the leash trailing on the cement behind me.
What joy to finally be running in the open, chasing my girl! What a great day!
I saw her crossing the street, so I dashed out in front of the cars. There was a loud screech and a big truck, high off the ground, came to a halt right over the top of me. I was able to squirt out from underneath the thing without even having to duck. I dodged another car and then I was on the opposite side. CJ was several yards ahead of me, turning up a walk.
I pursued at a dead run. A man opened the door to a tall building and CJ went into it. The drag from the leash was slowing me a little, but I turned the corner and managed to get through the glass door just as it was easing shut.
“Hey!” the man yelled.
I was in a big room with a slick floor. I skittered, looking for CJ, and then saw her. She was standing in what looked like a closet, a light on over her head. Joyously I ran across the floor, my nails ticking.
CJ looked up and saw me. The doors on either side of her started to come together. I leaped, and then I was inside with her. I put my feet up on her legs, sobbing.
I had found her; I had found my girl.
“Oh my God!” CJ said.
Suddenly the leash snapped taut.
“You’re caught! Oh God!” CJ shouted. She dropped her bags and they hit the floor with an explosion of sound and food smells. CJ reached for me, but I couldn’t go to her. The leash was pulling me backward.
“Oh no!” CJ screamed.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
TWENTY
CJ threw herself on the floor, her hands reaching for me and fumbling desperately at my neck as I slid helplessly back, my collar so tight it choked off my breathing. She was full of fear and was screaming, “No! No!”
The leash pulled me relentlessly backward and I banged up against the wall behind me and then with a snap my collar came off. It fell to the ground and there was a loud grinding noise and, with a shudder, the black lips of the doors opened slightly and the collar disappeared.
“Oh, puppy,” CJ cried. She pulled me to her and I licked her face. It felt so wonderful to be held in her arms again, to taste her skin and smell her familiar scent. “You could have been killed right in front of me!”
I also smelled dogs and a cat and, of course, the pungent smell of the liquids leaking from the bags she had dropped.
“Okay, good dog, good puppy. Hang on.” She laughed. She scooped up her wet bags. “Oh boy,” she said sadly.
When the doors opened I followed her down a short carpeted hallway, the smell of a dog getting stronger as CJ stopped in front of a door. She fumbled with it and pushed it open.
“Duke!” she called, nudging the door shut with a hip.
I heard the dog before I saw him: He was the enormous canine I’d seen walking on a leash with CJ. He was a white and gray dog, with blotches of black fur on his chest that were larger in total area than my mother. He stopped still when he saw me, his tail coming straight up in the air.
I marched right up to him, because I was here to take care of CJ. He lowered his head and I growled at him, not giving an inch.
“Play nice,” CJ said.
I couldn’t even reach up to sniff him properly, though when he tried to sniff at me I clicked my teeth at him in warning.
CJ spent a few minutes in the kitchen while the giant dog and I circled each other uneasily. I could smell a cat and knew one lived here, but didn’t see it anywhere. CJ came out, wiping her hands on a towel, and scooped me up. “Okay, puppy, let’s see if we can figure out where you belong.”
I stared down with contempt at the big dog, who was watching forlornly. He might get to go for walks with CJ, but she would never pick him up for a cuddle.
We went back out and got into the same little room where we’d met, and then she carried me down a hall to some glass doors that opened to the outside. The man who had yelled at me was there.
“Hello, Miss Mahoney, is that your dog?” he asked.
“No! But he nearly got hung in the elevator. Um, David? I’m afraid I dropped a bottle of wine saving this little guy and some of it seeped onto the elevator floor.”
“I’ll see to it immediately.”
The man reached a gloved hand toward me and I gave him a warning growl because I couldn’t tell if he was trying to touch me or CJ—and nobody was going to touch CJ while I was around. He pulled his fingers back with a jerk. “Spunky,” he said.
My name was Max, not Spunky. I ignored him.
CJ carried me down the street and it was with alarm that I registered the smells of the outdoor dog pens. I squirmed in her arms, turning away. “Hi, I think this might be one of your dogs,” my girl said as I put my head on her shoulder and licked her ear.
“It’s Max!” Gail said from behind me.
“Max,” CJ said. “He’s such a sweetie. He ran right into the elevator in my building as if he lived there. The leash got caught in the doors and I was afraid he was going to be strangled.”
CJ was stroking me and I burrowed my head in the crook of her neck. I did not want to go back to the place of the barking dogs. I wanted to be right here.
“What a love dog,” CJ said.
“No one has ever called Max a love dog,” Gail said.
I kissed CJ’s face and snuck a look at Gail, wagging my tail a little to let her know I was happy now and she could go back to taking care of other dogs.
“What kind of dog is he?”
“The mother is a Chihuahua. The father, we’re thinking Yorkie.”
“Max, you’re a Chorkie!” CJ smiled down at me. “So, anyway. Where do you want me to put him?”
Gail was watching me; then she looked up at CJ. “Truthfully? I don’t want you to put him anywhere.”
“Sorry?”
“Do you have a dog?”
“What? No, I can’t. I mean, I’m dog-sitting at the moment.”
“So you like dogs.”
CJ laughed. “Well, I mean sure. Who doesn’t like dogs?”
“You’d be surprised.”
“Actually, now that you mention it, I have met someone who didn’t like dogs.” CJ was gently pushing me away from the tight snuggle I had going against her shoulder.
“Max obviously likes you,” Gail observed.
“He’s really sweet.”
“He’s scheduled to be euthanized tomorrow morning.”
“What?” I felt the shock flash through CJ, the way her hands tightened on me and she took a small step back.
“Sorry, I know it’s … I know it sounds brutal. We’re not a no-kill shelter.”
“That’s horrible!”
“Well, sure it is, but we do our best and when we can we foster them out to no-kills. But they’re full, we’re full, and we have new dogs coming in every day. We normally can place puppies, but Max has never warmed up to anybody and he’s overdue. We need the space.”
CJ pulled me away and looked at me. Her eyes were moist. “But…,” she said.
“There are other dogs who need help. Rescue is like a river; it has to keep flowing. Otherwise even more dogs would die.”
“I didn’t know that.”
“Max has never warmed up to anybody except you. He snapped at me this morning, and I’m the person who’s been feeding him. It’s as if he picked you, out of all the people in New York. Can you take him? Please? We’ll waive the fee.”
“I just got a cat two weeks ago.”
“Dogs and cats that grow up together usually do fine. You’ll be saving his life.”
“I can’t; I just … I’m a dog walker, I mean, I’m an actress, but I’ve been walking dogs, and they’re all big.”
“Max can handle himself around big dogs.”
“I’m sorry.”
“You sure? All he needs is a chance. You, you’re his chance.”
“I’m so sorry.”
“So tomorrow he dies.”
“Oh God.”
“Look at him,” Gail said.
CJ looked at me and I squirmed in pleasure at the attention. She brought me within range and I licked her chin.
“Okay,” CJ said. “I can’t believe I’m doing this.”
After we left the dog cages we went to a place full of the sound of squawking birds and rich with animal smells I’d never scented before and CJ put a collar on me and snapped a leash onto it. My head held high, I walked at her ankles, glad to be back in charge of protecting her.
Soon we were back in the small closet where I’d finally been able to get back to CJ. The wet spill from her bag was gone, but I could still smell the residual scent from the sweet liquid. I strode confidently next to her in the hall, but she scooped me up as she opened the door. “Duke?” she called.
There was a noise like a horse running and the huge dog came dashing up to us. I showed him my teeth. “Duke, Max is going to live with us now,” CJ said. She held me out and as the dog, Duke, raised his nose I gave him a warning growl. His ears dropped a little, and he wagged his stiff tail. CJ didn’t put me down.
“Sneakers?” she called. She carried me into a bedroom, Duke following us, and there was a young cat lying on the bed. Her eyes widened when she saw me. “Sneakers, this is Max. He’s a Chorkie.”
CJ dropped me on the bed. I figured I knew how to handle cats—you just have to let them know you won’t hurt them as long as they stay in line. I trotted right up to this Sneakers, but before I had a chance to lay a paw on her the cat spat at me and raked me in the face with her tiny sharp claws. They hurt! I scrambled back, too shocked to do anything but yelp, and fell off the bed. Duke lowered his massive head and licked me, his tongue the size of my face.
That was my introduction to these creatures, neither of whom seemed to recognize the significance of my arrival or my importance to CJ.
That night CJ cooked some wonderful things, the smell of meat filling the apartment. Duke followed her around, sticking his head on the counter to see what she was doing. “No, Duke,” CJ said, shoving him away. I was reduced to standing on my hind legs and scrabbling at CJ’s calves for attention. “Okay, Max, you’re a good dog,” she said to me.
I was a good dog, and Duke was “no, Duke.” That’s what I got out of the exchange. Unfortunately, Sneakers was in the bedroom and missed this indication that I was the favored pet.
While she was cooking, CJ also played with her hair and her clothes, though not in a game in which a dog could participate. She put on shoes that smelled like they’d taste good, and after that her footsteps rang with sharp percussion in the kitchen.
Soon there was a noise at the door and CJ picked me up and opened it. “Hi, honey,” she said to the man standing there. He was stocky and had no hair on his head and he smelled like something burned and peanuts and a pungent spice of some kind.
“Whoa, what’s this?” he said. He stuck his fingers right in my face and I growled at him, showing my teeth.
“Max!” CJ said. “Come in. It’s Max; he’s sort of my new dog.”
“Wait, sort of?” He edged inside and CJ shut the door.
“He was on death row for tomorrow. I couldn’t let them put the little guy down. He’s so cuddly.”
The man was leaning in too close to CJ. I showed him my teeth again.
“Yeah, cuddly. What’s Barry going to say when he gets back and you’ve got a new dog in his apartment?”
“He’s already letting me keep Sneakers. Max isn’t really any bigger.”
Duke was trying to shove his big stupid head under the man’s hand, and the man pushed him away. CJ set me down and I glared at the man—I didn’t yet know if he posed any sort of threat and at my size I couldn’t afford to let down my guard until I was sure.
“I’m cooking broccoli beef,” CJ said. “Want to open the wine, Gregg?”
“Hey, come here,” the man said.
CJ and the man held each other very close and then went down the hall. I followed but was too short to get on the bed with them. Duke might have jumped up with ease, but Sneakers streaked out the door when CJ and the man went in and Duke was more interested in following the cat. Sneakers went under the couch. I could have crawled under there after her pretty easily but elected to forgo the opportunity to let the cat slash at me again. Duke, on the other hand, was apparently dumb enough to think he could get under there if he just worked hard enough. Snorting and groaning, he shoved his head under the couch until he actually moved the thing on the rug. I wondered how long Sneakers would tolerate this before she demonstrated to Duke why she had claws.
After a while, CJ and the man came back out. “Well!” CJ said with a laugh. “Good thing I turned off the burners. Hi, Max, did you have fun with Duke?” Duke and I both looked at her, hearing our names and a question. “You want to open that wine?”
The man was standing by the table, his hands in his pockets. CJ came back out of the kitchen, which was still alive with tantalizing smells. “What is it?”
“I can’t stay, baby.”
“What? You said—”
“I know, but something’s come up.”
“Something’s come up. And what exactly is that, Gregg?”
“Hey. I’ve never lied to you about my situation.”
“Your situation that you said was ending, is that the situation you mean?”
“It’s complicated,” he said.
“Well, yeah, I guess it is. Why don’t you give me an update on the ‘situation’ as it currently stands? Because I thought that in the process of ‘never lying to me’ you were pretty clear that the situation was all but over.”
CJ was angry. Duke lowered his head, frightened, but I was rigid and alert. The man’s name was Gregg and he was making my girl angry.
“I gotta go.”
“So this was what, a pit stop? Bootie call?”
“Baby.”
“Stop! I’m not a baby!”
Now Gregg was getting angry, too. The situation was spinning out of control. I darted over and snapped at Gregg’s pant leg. “Hey!” he shouted. He swung his foot, narrowly missing me.
“No!” CJ yelled. She reached down and picked me up. “Don’t you ever try to kick my dog.”
“Dog tried to bite me,” Gregg said.
“He’s just protective. He was raised in a shelter.”
“Well, you need to train him or something.”
“Okay, let’s completely change the subject, then, and talk about the dog.”
“I don’t know what you want!” Gregg shouted. “I’m late to a thing.” He strode rapidly to the door and yanked it open, turning on the threshold. “This isn’t easy for me, either. You could at least show some appreciation for that fact.”
“It certainly is one of the more appreciable facts, I’ll give you that.”
“I don’t need this,” the man said. He shut the door forcefully.
CJ sat down on the couch and buried her head in her hands. I couldn’t get up on the couch to comfort her. Duke came over and rested his gigantic head in her lap, as if that were any help.
She sobbed as she took her shoes off and threw them on the floor. They were, I decided, bad shoes.
After a few minutes, CJ went into the kitchen and brought out two pans and set them on the table and ate right out of the pans. She ate and ate and ate, while Duke watched attentively.
I felt pretty sure I knew what was going to happen next. And it did—within half an hour, she was in the bathroom, vomiting. She shut the door on me, so I sat on the floor, whimpering, wishing I could help her with her pain. It was my purpose to take care of CJ, and at that moment I felt that I was not doing a good job.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
TWENTY-ONE
The next day we all went for a walk except Sneakers. I’ve seen cats outside and they don’t walk with people; they mostly just walk with themselves. Nearly always when a dog walks he walks next to a person. This is just one of many ways that dogs are better pets than cats.
Duke and I were on leashes. I was feeling more kindly disposed toward him than when we first regarded each other, because he had never been anything but submissive—when we played, he would fall to his back and let me climb on his neck and chew on his face. But walking with him was constantly irritating. He pulled left and right at the end of his leash, distracted by one smell or another, yanking CJ off balance and getting in my way. “Duke … Duke…,” CJ would say. She never once had to say, “Max … Max…,” because I trotted by her feet like a good dog. Occasionally I barked, though, because otherwise I wasn’t sure people could see me—they tended to stare at Duke, probably astounded that he was so bad at walking.
I was glad that my girl had found herself another dog after I, as Molly, left her, but clearly now that we were reunited I was going to be in charge, because Duke just didn’t know what he was doing.
Everywhere there were food smells and garbage cans and papers to sniff, but I had to work my little legs so hard to keep up that these delights passed by too quickly for me to enjoy them. We mounted some brick stairs and CJ knocked on the door. It opened and the smell of people and a dog and food came wafting out. A woman was on the other side of the door. “Oh,” she said, “is it that time already?”
I could sense an uneasiness in CJ. “Um, yeah, I’m right on time,” CJ said.
I could smell a strange dog’s scent on the flowerpot next to me and I squatted to mark over it. “My plants!” the woman cried.
“Oh!” CJ reached down and picked me up. “I’m sorry; he’s just a puppy.”
CJ was upset and it was the woman’s fault. When the woman leaned forward to peer at me, I growled at her and she jerked back. “He’s all bark and no bite,” CJ said.
“I’ll get Pepper,” the woman said. She left us standing on the doorstep for a few moments and then returned with a rust-colored female dog, much bigger than me but still way smaller than Duke, on a leash that the woman handed to CJ. The dog sniffed me and I growled at her to let her know I was there to protect CJ.
The rust-colored dog was named Pepper, I soon gathered, and as we walked we stopped at more places and soon had a brown female dog named Sally and a hairy, stocky male dog named Beevis, all on leashes in a most unnatural dog family.
This wasn’t like being with Rocky or being with Annie and Abby; this was a mix of dogs who were very tense with each other, held too closely together by the leashes that kept us from straying. For the most part we all tried to ignore each other, though Duke tried to play with Sally a little even though we were going for a walk.
More strange than the unnatural nature of the dog pack was CJ’s obsession with collecting our poops. On the Farm I’d taken to doing my business in the surrounding woods, and as Molly I generally used a corner of the backyard—a man came on a regular basis to run machines and clean up after me. Occasionally, CJ had picked up after me, usually when we were on someone else’s property, but never had it been like her behavior now. CJ methodically scooped up after all the dogs in our pack and even kept Duke’s deposits, which were huge. She would carry them with her for a time in little bags and then would leave them in containers on the street, which was even more baffling—why go through all the work of picking them up and carrying them if she wasn’t going to keep them?
There are some things people do that dogs just will never understand. Most of the time I assumed that humans, with their complex lives, were serving some greater purpose, but in this instance I wasn’t so sure.
Though I was the dog in charge, I tried to be civil to all the other canines, but Beevis did not like me and I did not like Beevis. When he sniffed me his fur went up and he thrust his chest at me. He was bigger than I, but not by a lot—if it weren’t for me he would have been the smallest dog there. CJ pulled on his leash so that his face was brought aggressively toward mine, so I snapped at him and he bit the air next to my ear.
“Stop it! Max! Beevis!”
CJ was angry. I wagged my tail at her, hoping she understood none of it was my fault.
CJ took us to a dog park. What a great place! It felt so good to be off leash that I headed off at a flat run, and Duke and Sally followed, though I could turn more quickly than they could and soon was running alone. Other dogs were in the park with their owners, some chasing balls, others wrestling, and a white dog with floppy ears joyfully joined the chase with Duke and Sally—it was so fun to race around with the dogs in pursuit!
I saw Beevis slinking down low and then he launched himself at me. I dodged and he ran after me, growling. I turned a tight circle, but he cut me off. It looked as if I would have no choice but to snap at him, except that Duke galloped up and sort of crashed into the both of us. With Duke towering over him, Beevis was less hostile. I dashed over to CJ, who was sitting on a bench, tried to jump up next to her, but fell short. Laughing, she picked me up, and I proudly sat in her lap, watching the dogs, smelling the exotic smells, feeling her hands, loving all of it.
When we left the dog park, we retraced our route, dropping off the dogs we’d picked up along the way until it was just Duke and myself, back at CJ’s place. I was exhausted, so after a quick snack I fell asleep at CJ’s feet.
Over the course of that summer, Beevis and I learned to ignore each other, though he still growled at me when I ran. He couldn’t keep up with me, but he was pretty good at cutting me off, so I’d be in the middle of a joyous gallop with a whole pack and then he’d charge into the middle of us to challenge me and the whole procession of running dogs would pull up into a halt and mill around. I couldn’t tell if everyone found it as irritating as I did.
At home, I took on the responsibility of guiding Duke toward more polite behavior. He didn’t understand that my food bowl was off-limits, so I was forced to nip at him a few times before realization dawned in his eyes. He never really ate my dinner or even all of his own meal most of the time, but I didn’t like that huge nose descending from its height and sniffing where I ate. He was also lazy: when someone knocked, Duke didn’t think to bark until I did, even though we were the only protection CJ had in the world. I therefore had to be extravigilant and would bark at the slightest sound coming from the direction of the hallway.
I knew we were supposed to bark because CJ was always angry when someone knocked. “Hey! Stop! Quiet! Enough!” she would yell. I didn’t understand the words, but the meaning was clear: she was upset with the knocking and we should keep barking.
When Duke barked, Sneakers usually darted across the floor and scampered under the bed. Otherwise, the cat was much less fearful as the days wore on and, after several incidents of close sniffing, even began to play with me. We’d wrestle and it wasn’t exactly the same as wrestling with a dog, because Sneakers would wrap her legs around me, but it was easier than trying to play with Duke, who was ridiculously large and had to crawl on the floor so I could pin him.
The only time there was peace between Sneakers and Duke was when CJ would run a machine on the floor that made a loud noise. It terrified Duke and Sneakers cowered from it as well, though I wasn’t worried because I’d encountered similar machines in my time. After CJ put the machine away she would cuddle with us—Duke, Sneakers, and me pressed up against her on the couch, recovering from the trauma of it all.
I knew I was the favorite pet, though, and CJ proved it one evening by snapping a leash onto my collar and walking with me and only me outside in the warm, humid air. Duke followed us to the door, but CJ told him he was a good dog and to stay and then it was just the two of us.
I was now so accustomed to the roar of noise outside that I scarcely noticed it, though I still found the tantalizing odors compelling. The leaves were starting to drop off of some of the trees and swish along the sidewalk, propelled by cooling breezes. We walked several blocks as the night fell, and there were a lot of people out, plus many dogs, so I kept my guard up.
Finally we went up to some doors. CJ fiddled with something on the wall and said, “It’s CJ!” and then there was a buzzing noise and we went into the building and my girl carried me up a few flights of stairs. A door opened at the end of a hall and a man stepped out.
“Hi!” he called.
When we got closer, I smelled who it was: Trent!
I was astounded, because I had never thought we’d ever see him again. But humans can arrange for whatever they want to happen, which was how, for example, CJ always managed to find me when she needed me.
Trent and CJ hugged while I stood on my hind legs and reached up to him. Then he laughed and reached down and picked me up.
“Careful…,” CJ warned.
“Who is this?” he asked, laughing delightedly as I licked his face. I was so happy to see him! I squirmed in his arms, wanting to press in more closely.
“That’s Max. I can’t believe how he’s acting. He’s never like this. He doesn’t like most people.”
“He’s such a sweetie. Kind of dog is he?”
“A Chorkie, half Chihuahua, half Yorkie. That’s the best guess, anyway. Wow, I love what you’ve done with the place!”
Trent laughed and set me down. He lived in the best house ever: there was not a single piece of furniture anywhere. I could race around and around unimpeded.
“I’ve got stuff on order,” Trent said. “Open some wine? God, it is so great to see you!”
I explored the house while he and CJ sat and talked. There were two other rooms, equally empty. I found myself sniffing for Rocky, but there was no sign of him. My brother must no longer be alive. I wondered why Trent didn’t have a new dog; didn’t people need dogs?
“So how’s the new job?” CJ asked.
“It’s a great firm. I already was doing some work co-financing with them when I was in San Francisco, so it’s a natural fit. How about you? How’s the acting?”
“I’ve been in a couple of workshops. I love it. There’s something about being onstage, having everyone listen to me, laugh at my lines, applauding … it’s the greatest.”
“How odd that Gloria’s child would want to perform so that people would pay attention to her,” Trent said. “Who could have predicted something like that?”
“And how interesting that an investment banker wants to give me free psychotherapy.”
Trent laughed. The sound was exactly the same as I remembered. “You’re right. I’m sorry. I’ve been in therapy myself—if you live in California, it’s mandatory. It helped, though, with some stuff.”
“I’m sorry about Rocky.”
At the sound of my brother’s name, I paused, looking at them for a moment before I resumed exploring.
“Yeah. Rocky. Such a good dog. Stomach torsion—vet says it happens a lot with bigger dogs.”
I caught sadness coming off of Trent and raced across the floor and sailed into his lap. Trent caught me and kissed my head. “So how did you come to get Max?”
“My place is right down from where they had this dog adoption in Central Park.”
“Wait, you live by the park? Your acting must be going very well.”
“Well, no. I mean yes, I live in a fabulous place, but I’m house- and pet-sitting for this guy Barry. He manages some boxer dude who is training for a fight in Africa.”
“This puppy is the cutest little guy in the world,” Trent said.
“I know, isn’t he? He sure likes you.”
“Hey, let’s order food. Just looking at you is making me hungry.”
“What’s that supposed to mean?” CJ said sharply. I jumped out of Trent’s lap and went over to her.
“You’re so thin, CJ.”
“I’m an actress, hello.”
“Yeah, but…”
“Leave this alone, Trent.”
He sighed. “We used to confide in each other,” he said after a moment.
“I’ve got things under control. That’s all you need to know.”
“You only let me get so close, and no closer, CJ.”
“More therapy talk?”
“Come on. I miss you. I miss our conversations.”
“Me, too,” CJ said softly. “But there are some things I don’t want to talk about with anybody.”
They were quiet for a minute. I put my feet on CJ’s knees, and she lifted me up and kissed my nose. I wagged.
After more talking, a man came and brought bags of food. I loved the generous people who sometimes arrived with warm, delicious-smelling meals and handed them over and then left so that people could eat and feed their dogs! We all sat on the floor together and CJ and Trent ate from the bags and gave me a tiny piece of chicken that I ate and a vegetable that I spat out.
“What’s her name?” CJ asked at one point.
“Liesl.”
“Wait, Liesl? You’re dating one of the Von Trapps?” CJ laughed.
“She’s German. I mean, she lives in Tribeca, but she came over from Europe when she was nine.”
“Tribeca. Huh. So you’ve been coming to New York and not calling me?”
“A little,” Trent admitted.
“That’s it. Max, attack. Go for the throat.”
I heard my name but didn’t understand what I was supposed to do. CJ was gesturing toward Trent, so I padded over to him and he bent down and I licked his face, and they both laughed.
When we left, Trent and CJ stood at the door and hugged for a long time, and the love flowed between them. I realized right then that what would be best for CJ was if we left Sneakers and Duke behind and came to live here in the fun place with no furniture, where she and Trent could love each other. CJ needed a mate, the way Ethan had needed Hannah, and Trent needed a dog.
If the other two pets had to come, though, we’d need to at least get a couch so Sneakers had something to hide under.
“I’m so, so glad to see you,” Trent said.
“Me, too.”
“Okay, we’ll do this all the time, now that I’m moving here. I promise.”
“Really? Sit on the floor and have dinner?”
“Maybe the four of us can get together. Liesl and Gregg, I mean.”
“Sure,” CJ said.
Trent pulled back, looking at her. “What?”
“It’s nothing. It’s … Gregg’s not … His family situation isn’t fully resolved yet.”
“Are you kidding me?” Trent said loudly.
“Stop it.”
“You can’t seriously be saying—”
CJ put a hand on his mouth. “Don’t. This was so nice. Please. Please? I know you care about me, Trent. But I can’t stand your judgment.”
“I have never judged you, CJ.”
“Well, that’s what it feels like.”
“Okay,” Trent said. “Okay.”
CJ was a little sad, then. The two of us walked out of the place and back home.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
TWENTY-TWO
We were all in the dog park as usual. Duke and Sally were over sniffing a big white dog whose name was Bring Me the Ball Tony. Bring Me the Ball Tony was more interested in trying to climb on Sally’s back than in paying attention to his owner. I was trying to engage a male dog my size who looked very much like my mother, with the same face and coloring, and I finally managed to persuade him to give chase, so naturally Beevis came running up, growling, his lips back and his ears stiff. My playmate was instantly cowed and shrank away from the aggression, but I turned and snapped at Beevis to let him know he was pushing me too far. Instead of backing away, Beevis came straight at me.
I heard CJ yelling, “No!” but Beevis went up on his rear legs and I followed and his teeth slashed at me, trying to wound me. I bit back and caught a fold of skin in my mouth and then my girl was there, using her legs to push us apart. “No!” she yelled again. She scooped me up and I kept snarling and snapping as Beevis tried to reach me. CJ turned, using her body to block him. “Stop it, Beevis! No, Max, no!”
Then Duke came charging up, reacting to the distress in CJ’s voice. He clearly didn’t understand what was going on, but his appearance made Beevis back off.
“Oh, Max, your ear,” CJ said. I could feel her anxious despair and kept my focus on Beevis, who was circling around uneasily. When I smelled the blood it wasn’t immediately clear it was mine, but I felt the sting when CJ put her hand on my ear. She pulled some paper out of her bag and pressed it against the side of my head.
CJ carried me as we walked all of the dogs home. At Sally’s house we had to wait a little bit before her person arrived. “I’m so sorry, there was a dog fight. Is it okay to drop Sally back off a little early?” CJ asked.
At Beevis’s house, CJ told the man who answered the door, “I’m sorry, but I won’t be able to walk Beevis anymore. He fights with the other dogs.”
“He does not,” the man said. “Not unless the other dog starts it.”
I felt CJ getting angry, and even though my ear was sore, I gave the man a growl. Beevis, for his part, was happy to be home and wagged, going inside without a backward glance.
When we got home CJ let Duke in but then left with me in her arms, still pressing her hand to my ear. We went to a Vet—I knew that’s what he was because he put me on a metal table and petted me and I could smell a lot of dogs on his clothes. There was a sting in my ear and then he tugged on it a little bit. CJ watched the whole time.
“It’s not bad at all. You did the right thing by keeping pressure on it, though. They can bleed a lot,” the Vet said.
“Oh, Max. Why do you have to growl at everybody?” CJ asked.
“You want us to go ahead and neuter him, long as you’re here?”
“Um, yeah, I guess. Does that mean that Max will have to spend the night?”
“Sure, but you can pick him up in the morning.”
“Okay. All right, Max, you’re going to stay here for the night.”
I heard my name and heard the slight sadness and thumped my tail.
CJ left, which I did not like at all, but the Vet petted me and I fell into a sleep so deep I lost all track of time. When I awoke, it was morning and I was in a cage, wearing a stupid, stiff collar that surrounded my face and funneled all noises and smells directly into my senses. Again, was all I thought to myself. I had long given up trying to understand why people liked to put their dogs in such ridiculous situations.
CJ arrived and the Vet let me out of the cage and handed me to her. I was tired and just wanted to fall asleep in my girl’s arms. As we left we stopped by the front door to talk to a lady, who smelled like lemons. She said something to CJ.
“What? I … I don’t have that much,” CJ said. She was upset, so I growled at the lemon lady.
“We take credit cards.”
“I don’t have that much room on my card. Can I give you forty now, and the rest when I get paid?”
“We expect payment at the time of service.”
There was a sadness inside CJ, fighting to get out. I licked her face. “It’s all I have on me right now,” CJ whispered.
Whatever was making her unhappy was obviously Beevis’s fault.
She handed over some papers and the lemon lady handed some papers back and then we left the sad Vet’s office. I wanted to get down and squirmed, but CJ held me tight.
Both Duke and Sneakers wanted to smell my stupid collar and to put their noses on my ear, which I could feel had something stuck to it. I growled a little at Duke, but Sneakers purred at me, so I let her sniff. It was very strange having her cat face inside the small space formed by the stupid collar.
For a few days, I wasn’t allowed to go for a walk with Duke, which made me unhappy. Sneakers, though, was delighted, and would come out from under the bed to play with me and when I lay in the sun would curl up next to me, purring. I liked sleeping with Sneakers but felt like a bad dog who had to wear a stupid collar and Stay instead of going for a walk.
One morning CJ took off my collar, washed my ear, and then, when she put Duke on the leash, she snapped one on me, too. I was going for a walk! We went and picked up all the usual dogs, except neither Sally nor Beevis was there anymore. I didn’t miss Beevis, but Duke seemed sad without Sally.
Some days CJ wouldn’t get out of bed to walk dogs, so Duke and I would wake her up. Then she still wouldn’t walk all the dogs, though she would take both Duke and myself out. Those were my favorite days and I wished they could all be like that. On one such day, CJ used sharp-smelling chemicals on the floors and furniture and ran the machine on the floor that made Duke bark and Sneakers hide. When CJ was finished and put the machine away, Duke tore around the living room as if he’d just been let out of his crate.
I had no choice but to give chase. Excited, Duke bowed down to me, enticing me to wrestle. I climbed on top of him and we played for a while, and then the front door opened. I barked, so Duke barked, too. A man came inside, shouting “Duke!” followed by two other men who put suitcases on the floor and then left. I ran up to the stranger, snarling, while Duke wagged his tail and sniffed at the man’s hands.
“Max!” CJ called. She picked me up just as I was thinking about grabbing the man’s pants in my teeth, since he was ignoring me and just petting Duke, who was welcoming him even though the man had walked into CJ’s place without permission. Duke just didn’t understand the whole concept of protection—it was a good thing I was there.
“Welcome home, Barry.”
“Hi, CJ. Hey, Duke, you miss me? Miss me, boy?” He knelt down and hugged Duke, who wagged but then came over to smell CJ, perpetually jealous that she would pick me up to cuddle but never him.
“He doesn’t seem like he missed me at all,” the man said. He smelled like oils and fruits. When he looked me in the eye, I growled.
“You’ve been gone a long time,” CJ said. “Six months seems like forever to a dog.”
“Okay, but I could have put him in a kennel. I paid for a person to stay with him in this house.”
“He doesn’t know that, Barry.”
“Who’s this? I thought you said a kitten.”
“Right, this is Max. It’s a long story. Max, be nice.”
Though I was suspicious of the man, CJ seemed okay with him, so when she dropped me to the floor I went back to wrestling with Duke.
“So, did your guy win?” CJ asked.
“What?”
“Your guy. The boxing thing.”
Duke rolled onto his back and I seized a wad of throat and shook it gently.
“You really are an airhead, aren’t you,” the man said.
“What?”
“No, he didn’t win.”
“Oh. I’m really sorry, Barry. Is that why you’re back two months early?”
“Yeah, well, when your fighter loses you don’t go on a worldwide press tour, do you? What the … What’s Duke doing?”
“Duke?” CJ repeated. Duke froze at his name, his legs splayed up in the air, his tongue lolling out, my teeth gently pulling on his skin. “They’re just playing.”
“Duke! Cut it out!” the man shouted angrily. Duke scrambled to his feet, knocking me aside, and went to CJ with his ears down. I lay on the floor where I’d fallen, panting.
“What’s wrong, Barry?”
“You’ve turned my dog into a wimp.”
“What? No, they play really well together.”
“I don’t want him ‘playing’ like that with some little rat dog.”
“Max is not a rat dog, Barry.”
Barry, I decided, was the man’s name.
“Okay, well … I don’t remember giving you permission to have a dog and I sure don’t appreciate Duke’s behavior. I hired you because you said you had lots of experience. So, fine. I’m back. If you could just go back to your place, let me unwind and get to know my dog again.”
CJ was quiet for a moment. I stared at her, feeling her sadness and hurt. “But … I don’t have a place, Barry.”
“What?”
“You said eight to ten months. There was no sense me keeping an apartment if I was going to be here eight months.”
“So, what, you’re going to stay with me?” Barry asked.
“No! I mean, I’ll sleep on the couch and look for a place tomorrow.”
“Wait, no. Forget it. I’m … I’m stressed. I worked a year on this and he was knocked out in the second round. You can stay here; I’m just dumping my African stuff and heading over to Samantha’s anyway. We’re going to go to Hawaii. So you can take two weeks to find a place. That okay? I’ll get someone else to take care of Duke for when I’m back in town.”
“So I’m fired?”
“It’s for the best.”
“Well, sure, I can see that.”
“Okay, no need for sarcasm. I paid you pretty well and you got a free place out of it and if I’m not happy I’m the customer.”
“All of that is true,” CJ said.
A little later Barry left. “Bye, Duke,” Barry said over his shoulder. Duke thumped his tail at his name, but I could tell he was relieved as I was to have Barry gone so that CJ wasn’t tense anymore. My girl seemed a little sad, though.
The next day, after we went walking with the usual dogs, CJ left Duke and me alone in the house and was gone for a long time. I wrestled with him for a while but became irritated with him because his head was so large and strong it kept knocking me over.
I was asleep when I heard a low, loud moan coming from the bedroom. I went to investigate and found Duke in a high state of agitation, his stiff tail whipping the air, his head under the bed. He was panting with excitement, and the moaning was coming from Sneakers, who was plainly terrified. Duke was so powerful he was managing to lift the entire bed as he drove to jam himself under there to get at Sneakers.
I went right up to Duke and barked at him sternly. He was quivering, too thrilled at how close he was getting to poor Sneakers, who was pressed back against the wall, her ears flat against her head. Duke ignored my barking, so I lunged at him, clicking my teeth.
That got his attention. He retreated, the bed coming down with a thump. I snapped and snarled at him until he was all the way out of the room, then trotted back to check on Sneakers.
I was small enough to crawl under there if I wanted, but I decided to leave Sneakers alone. She was still frightened, and from what I had seen of cat behavior, when they were scared they tended to use their claws.
CJ left us by ourselves every day, and every day Duke treated her departure as a signal that it was time to start harassing poor Sneakers. It got so that the second the door shut Sneakers would dart from wherever she was napping to her hiding place under the bed—if Duke saw her shoot past, he would gallop after her in dumb pursuit, crashing into walls as he tried to take the corner too fast. I’d be running, too, and when I got to the bed I would dive under it and then turn and face Duke’s quivering, wet nose, my teeth exposed and a growl in my throat. Duke would moan in frustration and sometimes would even bark, the noise deafening in the small space, but I knew I couldn’t back down, and eventually he’d lose interest and go back to the living room to take a nap.
Then one day the pattern changed. We went for our usual walk, but when we returned CJ brought over a crate and opened the door in it and carefully placed Sneakers inside. The crate reminded me of the one I had sat in as Molly, the one that tipped back and forth before winding up in the loud place with all the cars. Sneakers wasn’t happy and didn’t come over when I pushed my nose up to sniff at her. Then Duke came over, snorting loudly, and Sneakers backed away into the far recesses of the crate.
“Duke,” CJ said warningly, and Duke went over to her to see if she was going to give him a treat.
CJ picked up the crate with Sneakers in it and left us alone. This was absolutely baffling: where was she taking Sneakers that we weren’t going along as well? We didn’t know what to do, so we lay on the floor and gnawed chew toys.
When my girl came back, Sneakers was no longer with her.
Where was Sneakers?
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
TWENTY-THREE
For two days, CJ would take us on a dog walk and then would leave us alone with no Sneakers. Duke and I made the best of it—in fact, without a cat in the home, some of the tension left our relationship and we were able to wrestle more freely and for so long that sometimes we’d wind up falling asleep on top of each other. Well, I was on top, anyway. If Duke had been on top, I sincerely doubt I would have been doing any sleeping.
On the third day, when we returned from our walk, a woman was waiting for us outside the door. Duke, of course, wagged and thrust his big head at her, while I retreated to CJ’s feet and waited rigidly to see if there was any threat.
CJ called the woman Marcia. After we’d been inside for half an hour, Marcia carefully extended her hand to me and I sniffed it after CJ said, “Gentle, Max,” to me in very soothing tones. The hand smelled like chocolate and dogs and some sweet things I couldn’t identify.
Duke and I chewed lazily on each other while CJ and Marcia talked. “Okay, I think that’s everything,” CJ finally said, standing up. Duke and I bounded to our respective feet. Walk?
“So Duke, I guess this is good-bye. Marcia will be taking care of you now,” CJ said. A sudden sadness broke inside her and I went to her and put my paws on her leg as she bent over on the couch, taking Duke’s head in her hands. I could tell that he knew she was sad by the way his ears dropped and his tail wagged and then drooped. I wondered if he knew what was going on, because I didn’t.
“I’m going to miss you, big guy,” CJ whispered. I tried to climb up into her lap but couldn’t quite make it.
“Oh God, I feel awful,” Marcia said.
“Don’t. Barry has the right; it’s his dog.”
“Yeah, but, I mean, Duke thinks he’s your dog. You can tell. It’s not fair to cut off all contact between the two of you.”
“Oh, Duke, I’m so sorry,” CJ said. Her voice carried a lot of grief.
“Maybe I could call you and we could meet somewhere,” Marcia offered.
CJ shook her head. “I don’t want to get you in trouble. Barry will fire you in a second. Believe me, I have firsthand experience.”
Duke mournfully put his head in CJ’s lap, sharing her mysterious sadness. I envied him his height: all I could do was scrabble fruitlessly at her legs, hoping to be noticed.
“Okay.” CJ sighed. “Nice meeting you, Marcia. Come on, Max.” CJ reached down and scooped me up, and now I was above Duke, looking down at him. CJ snapped a leash onto my collar but not onto Duke’s, and all of us went to the door.
“Bye,” CJ said quietly. She opened the door and Duke lunged to follow her outside, dragging Marcia with him as he struggled with her grip on his collar. CJ, still holding me, blocked Duke. “No, Duke. You stay. I’m sorry.”
They managed to get the door shut. CJ dropped me to the floor and I shook myself, ready for whatever we were doing. Inside our home, Duke gave the door a workout, his paws making it rattle loudly in the frame.
As we went down the hall, I heard Duke’s sad, heartbroken barking and wondered again what was going on. Why wasn’t Duke coming with us? He wanted to go!
My girl was crying and I kept looking up at her in concern, but she didn’t say anything more to me. We took a very long walk, first on the loud, smelly streets and then up a whole lot of stairs. CJ rattled a doorknob and then it swung open, and I instantly smelled Sneakers.
“Welcome home, Max,” CJ said.
We were in a small kitchen, with a bowl of Sneakers’ food on the floor that I went over to sniff. The kitchen also had a bed in it, which was where I found Sneakers. She was lying on a pillow and stood, arching her back, when she saw me.
Sneakers had her own house! I didn’t understand it but thought maybe it had something to do with the way Duke was always harassing her when CJ would leave the three of us alone. Perhaps to protect Sneakers CJ found this new house at the top of all the stairs, a place where the cat would be safe. Now I was being shown that this was where Sneakers lived, and soon we’d be going back home to Duke, who would smell Sneakers on me—I wondered what he would conclude from that! Would he figure out that CJ and I had been to Sneakers’ house?
People do whatever they want, but as far as I was concerned, cats already ate better food than dogs, so to give one a house seemed unfairly indulgent.
Sneakers purred and circled around me, rubbing against me, and we played a little. She seemed awfully glad to see me there without Duke. I could smell another person’s hands on her, a strong, flowery scent that reminded me a little of Gloria.
We didn’t go home that night—CJ slept in the small bed and I did, too, curled up at her feet. Sneakers prowled around a little in the house and then leaped nimbly up to try to snuggle with me, but it was too uncomfortable for both of us and when CJ mumbled and moved her legs Sneakers jumped back to the floor and didn’t try to come up again that night.
What she did do, though, was sit at the front door and meow a little the next morning, and CJ said, “Okay, you want to go see Mrs. Minnick? Let’s see if she’s home,” and then we went out into the hallway and knocked on the door next to us. The woman who opened the door carried the strong scents I’d smelled on Sneakers, so I knew she and Sneakers had been spending time together. In fact, Sneakers walked right in as if she lived there.
“Oh, hello, Sneakers,” Mrs. Minnick said, smacking her lips in an odd way as she spoke. I held myself stiffly but didn’t growl, because the woman was clearly feeble and not a threat.
From that point on, Sneakers seemed to regard every opening of the door as an opportunity to dash over and wait to be let in to see Mrs. Minnick. I didn’t know what the attraction was, but clearly Sneakers liked it there. I didn’t have any opinion about Mrs. Minnick at all, other than the fact that her mouth made strange clicking noises when she talked.
CJ and I still took dog walks, but now we had to go a long way to pick up the first one, who was named Katie, and missing from the usual pack were Sally and Duke and Beevis.
I didn’t miss Beevis at all.
One day it rained on the way to get Katie and I was so cold I was shivering. “Oh, Max, I’m so sorry,” CJ told me. She held me in her arms until I was warm, and the next time the wind was cool she slipped a blanket on me that I could wear. “You like your sweater, Max? You look so handsome in your sweater!” I loved the feel of the tight sweater on all sides of me and it had the added benefit of keeping me warm. I was proud to wear it because I felt it showed that CJ loved me more than she loved Sneakers, who didn’t even rate a collar. “You look so cute in your sweater, Max! You’re my sweater better dog,” CJ crooned to me. I wagged, loving to be in the center of her world.
When CJ removed the sweater it made a ripping sound, every single time. I came to associate that sound with the end of a walk and the start of a nap.
I didn’t know why we never went back home, and I didn’t know why Duke didn’t walk with us anymore. I knew Sneakers probably didn’t miss Duke, but I found that I did. As irritating as he could be sometimes, he was big and goofy and fun to play with. He let me be in charge and followed my lead, and I could feel people’s wariness when CJ was protected by both of us. He had been part of our family.
This was, I reflected, how people ran the world. One day they would decide to live somewhere else and to stop playing with certain dogs.
Sometimes CJ would sit on the only piece of furniture she had besides the bed, a lone stool, and toss a small ball around in the kitchen and it would bounce and I would chase it, my nails scrabbling on the slick floor. “Oh, Max, I am so sorry this place is so tiny,” she said to me. I loved the game and, now that I was used to it, I loved the new home better than the old place, because it meant that I could be closer to CJ.
We were playing with the ball when it sailed up onto the bed and I leaped right up after it! I was a little surprised, because I’d never managed to get up there before, and I know Sneakers was startled because she jumped to her feet, her eyes large and her tail puffy.
“Max!” CJ said, laughing in delight.
When CJ put on the nice-smelling shoes and spent a lot of time playing with her hair I knew that Gregg was coming over, and sure enough, there was soon a knock on the door and I ran to it, barking, while Sneakers fled. I could smell Gregg on the other side, so I kept barking. CJ picked me up.
“Max, be nice,” she said, opening the door. Gregg came in and touched his face to CJ’s while she held me away from him. I growled.
“Friendly as ever, I see,” he said.
“Max, you be gentle. Gentle, Max.” I had figured out that “gentle” meant “don’t bite,” but I kept my cold glare on Gregg to let him know not to try anything.
“Nice place,” Gregg said, looking around. CJ put me down and I went over to sniff his pant legs, which smelled like wet leaves.
“Yes, let me take you on the grand tour. Stay close to me so you don’t get lost,” CJ said with a laugh. “This is the kitchen dining room great room.”
“So I have a surprise.”
“Really? What?”
“We’re going away. Upstate. Three days.”
“You’re kidding!” CJ clapped her hands together and I looked at her curiously. “When?”
“Now.”
“Sorry?”
“Now, let’s leave now. I don’t have to be anywhere for the next couple of days.”
“What about…”
Gregg waved his hand. “There’s some kind of deal with some property; she had to leave town.”
CJ stood very still, looking at him. “That’s actually not what I meant. What I meant is that I can’t exactly leave right now, Gregg. Not, like, this instant.”
“Why not?”
“I have clients. I’d have to find coverage. I can’t just take off.”
“Your clients are dogs,” Gregg said. I could hear some anger in his voice and I gave him a threatening stare, which he ignored.
“They rely on me. If I’m not there, I have to find someone else to cover for me.”
“Geez!” Gregg looked around. “There’s no place to even sit down to talk about this.”
“Well, sure, I mean, we could sit on the bed,” CJ said.
“Okay, that’s a good idea,” Gregg said.
Gregg and CJ went to the bed to hug. Sneakers jumped down and I jumped up, licking CJ in the face.
“Max!” she sputtered, laughing.
Gregg was not laughing. “Uh…,” he said.
“Come on, Max,” CJ said, picking me up. She carried me to the bathroom and Sneakers followed, snaking in and around CJ’s ankles. “Stay,” CJ said.
She shut the door and Sneakers and I regarded each other unhappily.
Stay?
Sneakers came over to me and sniffed me, seeking comfort, then went over to the door and sat there expectantly, as if I could open it for her. I scratched at the bathroom door a few times, whimpering, then gave up and curled myself into a ball on the floor, waiting.
Some time later, CJ opened the door. I raced around the kitchen, thrilled to be out. This was so much fun! CJ was barefoot, but she put the nice-smelling shoes back on, hopping on one foot as she did so. I put my feet on her legs and she smiled down at me. “Hi, Max. Good dog.”
I wagged at being a good dog.
“So, okay,” Gregg said. “If you can’t, you can’t. I get it.”
“I’m sorry, I just need more warning. Even just a day or two. There’s a guy I met at the park, he’s a dog walker, I bet you he could sub for me, but I don’t know how to get in touch with him.”
“This kind of thing, there is no warning.”
“Well … but sometime soon, that will no longer matter, right? I mean, you said just a few more months.”
Greg looked around. “Man, this place is tiny even for New York, you know?”
“Gregg? You did say just a few more months. Right? Right?”
Gregg ran his hand through his hair. “I gotta be honest, CJ. This just isn’t working for me.”
“What?”
“I mean…” Gregg looked around the kitchen. “This isn’t very convenient.”
“Oh. Right. Because most of all, I’m a convenience.” CJ sounded angry.
“You know what? There’s that abusive tone you always use with me,” Gregg said.
“Abusive? Seriously?”
“You know what I mean.”
“No, actually, I don’t. What are you trying to say?”
“See, it’s just that you’ve gone from being understanding to now you have all these demands. I had this great trip planned for us and you all of a sudden can’t go. And you’ve known all along what I have to deal with at home. I just … I’ve been thinking about it, and…”
“Oh my God, Gregg, you’re doing this now? Like you couldn’t have said something before? Or wouldn’t that have been ‘convenient’ for you.”
“You’re the one that brought it up. I was happy to go on a trip and everything, but you had to start pushing.”
“Pushing. Wow.”
“I think maybe we need a break for a while, see how we feel.”
“How I feel is that you’re the biggest mistake I’ve ever made in my life.”
“Okay, that’s it; I’m not taking any more abuse from you.”
“Get out of here, Gregg!”
“You know what? None of this is my fault!” Gregg shouted.
I now understood that Gregg was making CJ hurt and angry and I lunged at him, snarling, aiming for his ankles. He danced out of the way and then CJ scooped me up.
“Dog tries that again I’m kicking him into the next century,” Gregg said. He was angry, too. I struggled to get down to bite him, but CJ held me tight.
“Leave. Now. Don’t come back,” CJ snapped.
“Small chance of that,” Gregg spat.
Once Gregg left, CJ sat at her table and cried. I whimpered and she picked me up and I tried to lick her face, but she forced me to lie in her lap.
“I am so stupid, so stupid,” she said, over and over again. I didn’t understand anything she was saying, but the feeling flowing off of her was as if she felt like a bad dog. She took off her shoes and after a while got up and got some ice cream out of the freezer to eat.
After that I didn’t see those shoes again for a long time. We walked with dogs most days and often went to a park, where I would search everywhere for the scent of Duke. I never once smelled him, though there was plenty of evidence of many, many dogs. Sneakers divided her time between our house and Mrs. Minnick’s, which was fine because it meant that I got to spend more time with it being just CJ and myself. The days became cooler and I pretty much wore the tight sweater every time we went outside.
When the shoes finally came out I prepared myself for another encounter with Gregg, but I was pleasantly surprised when, upon charging the door after I heard a knock, I smelled the person on the other side. Trent!
“Hi, stranger!” CJ called as she opened the door. A blast of flower smell hit me—Trent held blooms in his arms. They hugged each other. Over the scent of flowers, Trent’s hands smelled faintly of soap and something buttery when he bent down to see me. I wagged, wriggling under his friendly hands.
“I just can’t believe how Max behaves around you,” CJ said as she ushered him in. She set the flowers down—the whole house instantly filled with the odors.
“You know, I like this place a lot better than the last one,” he said.
“Oh stop. Can you believe that they told me it had a stove? I said to the lady, hello, a stove has more than one burner, that’s a hot plate.”
Trent sat on the counter, which I didn’t like because it meant I couldn’t reach him. “Rent’s got to be a little less here than the penthouse, I imagine.”
“Well, yeah, but you know New York. It’s still not cheap. And the dog walking’s not been going very well—turns out when you lose a famous client you lose a couple unfamous ones, too.”
“Are you doing all right, though?”
“Yes, fine.”
Trent looked at her.
“What is it?” CJ asked.
“You look really thin, CJ.”
“Come on, Trent. Please.”
They were silent for a long moment.
“Well, hey, I have news,” Trent finally said.
“They put you in charge of the world’s financial system?”
“Well, sure, but that was last week. No, it’s, um, Liesl.”
“What?”
“I’m going to propose to her this weekend.”
I felt a shock run through CJ. She sat down on the stool. I went over to her, concerned. “Wow,” she finally said. “That’s…”
“Yeah, I know. Things were a little rough between us there, I think I told you about that, but lately, I don’t know. It just seems right, you know? We’ve been together for a year and a half. It’s like a conversation we’ve never had, right there in front of us, so I thought, time to talk about it. Want to see the ring?”
“Sure,” CJ said softly.
Trent reached into his pocket and pulled out a toy and handed it to CJ. She didn’t hold it down to me to sniff, so I figured it couldn’t be much fun.
“What is it, CJ?”
“This just seems, I don’t know. Fast, or something. Like, we’re so young. Married.”
“Fast?”
“No, forget it. The ring’s beautiful.”
Shortly after that, CJ and Trent left. When she came back she smelled deliciously of meat, but she was alone. I was disappointed because I was hoping Trent would stay to play, just as he had always done when he had Rocky. I wondered if the lack of a dog was what was keeping Trent from coming over as often as he once did. Not for the first time, I thought that Trent really needed a dog.
CJ seemed sad. She lay on her bed and dropped her shoes on the floor, and then I could hear her crying up there. Sneakers jumped on the bed, but I couldn’t imagine a cat being as much comfort as a person’s dog. When you were sad, you needed your dog. I backed up, then ran at the bed and leaped up. CJ reached for me and held me tightly.
“My life is nothing,” she said. There was real grief in her words, though I didn’t know what she was saying or even if she was talking to me or Sneakers.
After a time, my girl fell asleep, even though she was still dressed in the same clothes she’d worn when she’d left with Trent. I jumped down and paced the bedroom, distressed at how sad she was.
Probably because I was upset and trying to figure out what was going on, I made a connection that hadn’t occurred to me before: every time CJ put on the nice-smelling shoes, she was sad. They might have a delicious scent, but they were sad, sad shoes.
I knew what I needed to do.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
TWENTY-FOUR
I thought if I chewed the sad shoes my girl wouldn’t be sad anymore, but when she woke up and saw the pieces scattered across the floor she was not happy.
“Oh no!” she screamed. “Bad Max! Bad Max!”
I was a bad dog. I should not have chewed the shoes.
I went to her with my head down and my ears back, nervously licking my lips. CJ dropped to her knees and sobbed, burying her face in her hands. Sneakers came to the end of the bed to watch us. I anxiously put my paws on my girl’s legs, but that didn’t help at first, not until she gathered me up in her arms and clutched me to her. Then the sadness flowed from her as she cried.
“I am alone in the world, Max,” CJ said to me. I didn’t wag, because the way she said my name was so full of grief.
CJ eventually threw the shoe pieces away. From that morning forward, it seemed as if she moved more slowly, a vague sadness in her moods and motions. We still went for walks with a few other dogs nearly every day, but CJ didn’t light up with happiness when she saw them, and when the first snow fell she sat and watched Katie and me tearing around the dog park without laughing once.
I wished Trent would come over—CJ was always happy when Trent was around. But he didn’t and my girl never said Trent’s name into her phone.
Instead, I heard “Gloria.” CJ was sitting on her stool, talking. She had her phone by her face.
“How have you been, Gloria?” she said. I had been playing with Sneakers in the bedroom, but now I trotted into the kitchen, curious. Gloria wasn’t there, though—CJ was just talking, saying, “Uh-huh.… Uh-huh.… Huh.
“Hawaii? That sounds really nice,” CJ said, while I yawned and circled on my pillow, getting comfortable. Sneakers came padding over and leaped up on a counter and pretended not to care that I was there.
“Uh-huh. That’s nice,” CJ said. “Well, listen, Gloria, I have to ask you … I’m wondering if I could borrow some money. Just … I’m falling behind a little. I’m looking for a job, and also trying to find more dog-walking clients, but it’s not happening.… Uh-huh. Well, sure, I understand; that must have been expensive.… Right, I get it, you couldn’t very well go with old, stale luggage. No, I’m not, I’m just listening to what you are saying.… Okay, I was just asking, Gloria; I don’t want this to get into some big discussion.”
Sneakers finally lost patience and jumped down, coming over to me and purring at me. When I didn’t budge, she curled up against me on my pillow. I sighed.
With a loud bang CJ set her phone down. She was clearly angry at it, but I knew from the shoe episode that this didn’t imply she wanted me to do something about it. In my opinion, though, phones were not good toys. She went to the refrigerator and opened it and stood there looking inside for a long time, then looked at me. “Let’s go for a walk instead, Max,” she said.
It was bitterly cold outside, but I didn’t complain. Eventually CJ scooped me up, though, holding me as we walked, and with my feet no longer on the wet ground I became cozy and warm.
A light knock on the door many evenings later alerted me and I barked loudly. CJ had been in bed most of the day, just lying there, and much of the time I had been with her. She roused herself, though, while I stood with my nose at the crack in the door. I was wagging at the scent: Trent!
“Who is it, Max? Hello?” my girl called.
“CJ, it’s me.”
“Oh.” CJ looked around, running her hand through her hair, then opened the door.
“Hi, Trent.”
“My God, I’ve been worried about you. Why’s your phone shut off?”
“Oh. Um, just a … a thing. I need to talk to them.”
“Can I come in?”
“Sure.”
Trent stepped inside, stomping his feet to get the snow off of them. His coat was wet; he hung it on the hook where my leash was draped. I pranced at his feet, and finally he knelt down, accepting my kisses.
“Hi, Max, how have you been, boy?” Trent said, laughing. Then he stood, looking at CJ. “Hey,” he said softly. “You okay?”
“Sure.”
“You look … Have you been sick?”
“No,” CJ said. “I was just taking a nap.”
“You never responded to my messages. From before, I mean, when the phone was still working. Are you mad at me?”
“No. I’m sorry, Trent, I know it’s hard for you to believe, but I’ve been a little busy and maybe haven’t been able to get back to everyone on a timely basis.”
Trent was quiet for a minute. “I’m sorry.”
“No, it’s okay.”
“Look, want to go get something to eat?”
I could feel CJ getting a little angry. She folded her arms. “Because?” I went over to her and sat at her feet in case she needed me.
“Um, I don’t know, because it’s dinnertime?”
“So you came over here to feed me? Why don’t I just chirp and you can puke into my mouth?”
“No. CJ, what are you doing? I came over to see how you were.”
“To check up on me. See if I’m getting all my meals.”
“That’s not what I said.”
“Well, I can’t. I have a date.”
Trent blinked. “Oh.”
“I have to get ready.”
“Okay. Look, I’m sorry if—”
“You don’t have to apologize. I’m sorry that I got angry. But you should go.”
Trent nodded. He reached for his coat, taking it off the hook, the leash underneath swaying tantalizingly. I glanced at CJ, but it didn’t look as if she was planning to take a walk. Trent shrugged on the coat, then looked at CJ. “I miss you.”
“I’ve just been so busy.”
“Do you miss me, too?”
CJ looked away. “Of course.”
A sadness rose up within Trent then. “Well, how do I get in touch with you?”
“When I get my phone back up I’ll call you.”
“Let’s grab … coffee, or something.”
“Sure,” CJ said.
They hugged then. CJ was sad, too; it swirled around both of them. I didn’t understand why they were both feeling so bad, but sometimes there are things going on between people that dogs are not supposed to comprehend.
Trent left and Sneakers came out from under the bed. I wished she hadn’t hidden—there was no reason to hide from Trent; he was good.
A few days later CJ and I were coming back from walking with the dogs and there was a woman standing in front of our door with a piece of paper. CJ was panting a little from coming up the stairs. I barked at the stranger.
“Lydia!” CJ said. She stooped and picked me up, and I stopped barking.
“I was just posting notice,” the woman said.
“Notice,” CJ repeated.
The woman sighed. “You’re just so far behind, honey. Can you pay anything toward rent today?”
“Today? No, I’m … I get paid on Friday; I could maybe pay most of a payment then?”
My girl felt afraid. I growled at the woman, because I could only conclude that she was the source of CJ’s agitation. “Shush, Max,” CJ said, folding a hand over my nose. I growled through the hand.
“Friday you’ll be down another payment; that’s why I’m here. I’m sorry, CJ, but I’m going to have to ask you to either catch up or go. I have rent and bills myself.”
“No, I get it. Okay, I get it,” CJ said. She wiped her eyes.
“Do you have family? People you can turn to?”
CJ held me more tightly and I stopped baring my teeth at the woman. I could sense that CJ needed my comfort more than my protection.
“No. My dad died in a plane crash when I was little.”
“I’m so sorry to hear it.”
“I’ll move out. Thank you for your, for all of your patience. I promise I will pay you the money I owe you. I’m looking for a better job.”
“Just take care of yourself, dear. You look as if you haven’t eaten in a week.”
The woman left. CJ went into her apartment, carrying the piece of paper that the woman had handed her. CJ sat on her bed and when I whimpered she picked me up and set me down beside her and I climbed into her lap. She felt full of sadness and fear.
“I’ve become my mother,” she whispered.
A little while later, CJ stood up and started gathering her clothes and putting them into a suitcase. She fed me some cheese and gave me Sneakers’ food when Sneakers turned up her nose at it. Normally I would have been delighted with these wonderful treats, but there was something odd about the way CJ gave them to me, with a cold, detached gloom, that took some of the joy out of it.
CJ pulled out Sneakers’ crate and put all of Sneakers’ toys in it and also the cat’s bed. Sneakers watched all this without expression, while I paced around at CJ’s feet, feeling anxious. I felt better, though, when CJ clicked my leash onto my collar, picked up Sneakers and the crate, and went next door to Mrs. Minnick’s house. “Hi, Mrs. Minnick,” CJ said.
Mrs. Minnick held out her hands and took Sneakers, who was purring. “Hi, CJ,” she said.
“I have this huge favor to ask of you. I’m … I have to move. And where I’m going won’t take pets. So, I was wondering if you would watch Sneakers for a while? For maybe, always? She’s so happy here.”
Mrs. Minnick’s face broke into a huge smile. “Are you sure?” She held Sneakers out at arm’s length. “Sneakers?”
Sneakers stopped purring, because she did not like the way she was being held. I put a paw on CJ’s leg, because I was impatient to get going on our walk. Mrs. Minnick stepped back and CJ set the crate inside the door.
“All of her things are in there. Also a few cans of food, but she hasn’t been eating much lately.”
“Well, I’ve been feeding her over here.”
“I figured. Okay. Again, thanks so much.” CJ took a step forward, closer to Mrs. Minnick, who was holding and stroking the cat. “Sneakers. You are a good cat,” CJ said, pushing her face into the cat’s fur. Sneakers rubbed her head against CJ, purring. “Okay,” CJ whispered.
I whined anxiously at the grief pouring out of my girl.
Mrs. Minnick was watching CJ. “Are you sure you’re fine?”
“Oh yes. Sneakers, you are my favorite kitty; you be good.”
“You’ll come visit?” Mrs. Minnick asked uncertainly.
“Of course. Soon as I’m settled in the new place, I’ll come by. Okay? I have to go now. Bye-bye, Sneakers. I love you. Good-bye.”
The cat hopped out of Mrs. Minnick’s arms and trotted into the woman’s home. Sneakers was mostly a good cat, but she was making CJ sad and I didn’t like that.
After leaving Sneakers with Mrs. Minnick we went for a very strange walk. First I did my business in the snow, and then CJ picked me up and carried me and we walked and walked. I loved the way the warmth of her kept me snug and safe. CJ seemed really tired and sad, though, and I wondered where we could possibly be going.
Finally she stopped and let me down on the ground. I sniffed at the snow, not recognizing any of the scents. CJ knelt on both knees, leaning down to me. “Max.”
I licked her face and it brought the sadness back, which didn’t make much sense to me. Usually when I licked her it made her happy.
“You have been such a good, good dog. Okay? You have been the most wonderful dog a girl in the city could ever want. You protected me and took care of me. I love you, Max. Okay? No matter what happens, don’t ever forget how much I love you, because it’s true.” CJ was wiping her face, the tears flowing onto her hands. The sadness in her was so awful it made me afraid.
After a minute she stood, taking a breath. “Okay,” she said. She carried me a little farther and then some of the scents were familiar, and I knew we were going to see Trent. I felt a sense of relief—Trent would help CJ. Whatever was going on was beyond a dog’s understanding, but he would know what to do.
Trent opened his door. “God, what’s happened?” he asked. “Come in.”
“I can’t,” CJ said, standing in the hallway. “I’ve got to go. I need to go to the airport.” She set me down and I ran to Trent, leaping up and wagging. He reached down and patted my head, but he was looking at CJ.
“The airport?”
“It’s Gloria, she’s really sick, and I need to be there.”
“I’ll go with you,” Trent said.
“No, no, what I need, can you watch Max? Please? You’re the only other person in the whole world that he likes.”
“Sure,” Trent said slowly. “Max? You want to hang here for a few days?”
“I need to go,” my girl said. She did not seem any happier here with Trent.
“Want me to ride to the airport with you?”
“No, that’s okay.”
“You seem really upset, CJ.”
CJ took a deep, shuddering breath. “No, I’m okay. I guess I have some unreconciled … some stuff about Gloria. It doesn’t matter. I need to go.”
“What time’s your flight?”
“Trent, please, I can manage, okay? Just let me go.”
“Okay,” Trent said softly. “Say good-bye to CJ, Max.”
“We already…” CJ shook her head. “Okay, right. Bye, Max.” She dropped to one knee. “I love you. I’ll see you soon, okay? Bye, Max.” CJ stood. “Bye, Trent.”
They came together in a fierce hug. When they pulled apart, I could feel Trent being a little afraid. I looked around but didn’t see any threat. “CJ?” he asked her in a small voice.
She shook her head, not meeting his eyes. “I have to go,” CJ said. She turned and I made to follow, but my leash pulled me up short. I barked at her, but CJ didn’t look back. She went straight to the little room with the double doors, and when they opened she stepped inside and turned and then, in one frozen moment, she finally looked at me. She met my eyes, then looked and gave a smile and a little wave to Trent. Even from there, I could see her tears, reflected in the harsh overhead lights of the little room. I barked again. Then the doors shut.
Trent picked me up and looked at me. “What’s really going on, huh, Max?” he whispered. “I don’t like this. I don’t like it at all.”
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
TWENTY-FIVE
Now things were entirely different. I was staying in Trent’s house, which was bigger than where I lived with CJ. I still took dog walks, though—a woman named Annie came over every day with a happy fat yellow dog named Harvey and let herself into Trent’s house and took me with her. It was strange to me that her name was Annie, because my sisters at the place of the barking dogs had been Abby and Annie. I concluded that some people loved dogs so much they called themselves by dog names. Annie smelled like a lot of different cats and dogs, which seemed to confirm my theory. The first day she came over I rushed toward her, barking fiercely so that she’d know that I wasn’t intimidated by her Harvey, but Trent was there and snatched me up off the floor and then Annie reached for me and grabbed me out of Trent’s arms and I didn’t know what to do about that. Normally when I was snarling people didn’t hug me to their chests. She cooed to me and rocked me and I felt myself letting down my guard completely. CJ wasn’t there and didn’t need my protection, so maybe it was okay if I let Annie take certain liberties.
Annie and Harvey and I walked with other dogs, but Annie did it wrong—we didn’t stop to get Katie on the way, though we did stop for a dog named Zen, who was big but with very short legs and heavy ears that almost touched the ground. He looked very much like Barney, the dog who lived with Jennifer when Rocky and I were puppies. When I snarled at Zen he collapsed and rolled on his back and passively let me sniff him all over. I wouldn’t be getting any trouble from him. Less cooperative was a tall dog with curly hair named Jazzy. Jazzy didn’t want to play with me.
Trent only came home at night, usually carrying a bag of food that he would eat silently, standing in the kitchen. He seemed very tired and sad. He would hold his hands out to me and I smelled a lot of different things, but never once did I smell my girl.
“Oh, Max, you miss her, don’t you,” Trent said softly to me. I wagged to show that I had heard my name and that I liked it when he stroked the top of my head.
I was very fond of Trent and was sorry he didn’t have a dog, but I needed to be with CJ. I didn’t understand where she was and why she had left me here. Sometimes I would dream that she was there next to me, but when I opened my eyes I was always in Trent’s home, always alone.
Did CJ go back to live with Sneakers? Was that why she had been so sad? I had felt the same sort of sadness in Hannah when, as Buddy, I’d been taken to the Vet for the last time. It was a good-bye kind of sad. CJ, though, needed me in her life, which was why she kept coming for me every time I was a puppy. Nothing would ever change that, so whatever was keeping me apart from her, I knew it had to be temporary.
One afternoon when Annie and Harvey brought me back to Trent’s house, Trent was sitting in the living room. “Oh, hi!” Annie said. “Is this the day?”
“Yes,” Trent said.
Harvey sat on the threshold, waiting to be told it was okay to be let in. He was one of those dogs who were always looking to their people for permission for things. I could be that kind of dog, but CJ never asked it of me. “Okay, Harvey,” Annie said. Harvey came in and went over to see if I’d left any food for him in my bowl. I never did, but he checked every time, just in case.
Annie stooped and held her arms out to me, and I sheepishly went to her and let myself be cuddled, while Harvey stuck his big friendly nose in her face and got cuddled, too. “You have a good day today, Max.”
When Annie left, Harvey went with her without a backward glance.
“Look what I have for you here, Max,” Trent said. It was like a crate, only the sides were soft. Trent seemed really excited to show it to me. I sniffed it carefully. When I was Molly, the crate had been much bigger—but then again, so had I.
Thinking of being Molly and the disorienting trip I once took in a crate made me wonder if we were going to see CJ. When Trent told me to get into the soft crate, I went without complaint, though I could barely see out of a small mesh covering one end. It was a little disconcerting when he picked the whole thing up, so different from when people gathered me in their arms and lifted me off the ground.
We took a car ride, both Trent and I sitting in the backseat. I was frustrated that he didn’t let me out of the soft crate so I could look out the window and bark at any dogs I might see. The car was warm, though, which was nice compared to the windy, wet, cold air that flowed into the soft crate when Trent and I left his building.
We went into another building and I was disappointed because it wasn’t loud—it was quiet, hushed, even, though I could smell many people and chemicals. I couldn’t see much of what was happening, and the way Trent moved the soft crate while he walked with it made me a little dizzy.
Then we entered a small room and he set the crate down. “Hey,” he said softly. I heard a rustle.
“Hi,” someone said in a weak, cracking voice.
“Brought someone to see you,” Trent said. He fumbled with the soft material of the crate and I licked his fingers through the mesh, eager to be let out. Finally he reached in and grabbed me. He hoisted me up in the air and I saw a woman lying in a bed.
“Max!” the woman said, and that’s when I realized it was CJ. Her smell was odd—sour and covered with chemicals—but I recognized her. I struggled to get out of Trent’s arms, but he held me tight.
“You need to be gentle, Max. Gentle,” Trent said. He carefully handed me to CJ, who reached for me with her warm, wonderful hands. I burrowed into her, moaning and crying a little—I couldn’t help it, I was so glad to see my girl.
“Okay, easy, Max. Okay? Easy,” Trent said.
“He’s okay. You missed me, didn’t you, Max. Yes, baby,” she said. I wondered why her voice was so thin and raspy—it didn’t sound much like her at all. There was a plastic leash hanging on her arm, and the room echoed with a beeping noise that was very unpleasant.
“How are you feeling today?” Trent asked.
“Throat still hurts from the tube, but I’m getting a little better. Still nauseated,” CJ said.
I wanted to sniff her up and down to explore all the strange new scents clinging to her, but her hands had a tension in them as they held me, willing me to be still. I did what she wanted.
“I know you think you look like crap, but compared to when you were in ICU, it’s like you’re ready to run a marathon. Your color is back in your cheeks,” Trent said. “Your eyes are clear.”
“I’m sure I look fabulous,” CJ muttered.
A woman stepped into the room and I gave her a low growl to let her know CJ had her protection with her.
“No, Max!” CJ said.
“Max, no,” Trent said. He came over and put his hands on me as well, so that I was pretty effectively pinned as the woman gave CJ something odorless to eat and a small cup of water to drink. It was actually very nice to have both of them holding me, and I remained still.
“What’s his name?” the woman asked.
“Max,” Trent and CJ said together. I wagged.
“He’s not supposed to be in here. Dogs are never allowed.”
Trent took a step in her direction. “He’s such a small dog and he doesn’t bark or anything. Couldn’t he visit for just a minute?”
“I love dogs. I’m not going to tell anyone, but if you get caught, don’t you dare say I knew about it,” the woman replied.
When the woman left, Trent and CJ said, “Good dog,” at the same time, and I wagged.
I could feel a lot of dark emotions in my girl, sadness and hopelessness intermingled, and nuzzling her couldn’t seem to lift her mood. She also was tired—exhausted, even—and soon her hand was no longer holding me but just resting, held there by gravity.
I was confused. Why was CJ in this room? Even more perplexing and upsetting was the fact that Trent soon called me and pulled me away from CJ by my leash.
“We’ll come back in a few days, Max,” Trent said. I heard my name but didn’t understand.
“Good boy, Max. You go with Trent. No, don’t bring him back; I don’t want to get in trouble with the entire medical establishment,” CJ said. I wagged at being a good boy.
“I’ll be back tomorrow. Sleep tonight, okay? And call me anytime if you can’t sleep; I’m happy to talk,” Trent said.
“You don’t have to come here every day, Trent.”
“I know that.”
We went back to Trent’s house. Over the next several days Annie still came to take me for walks with Harvey and Jazzy and Zen, but now, when Trent returned home in the evening, I could faintly pick out CJ’s scent on his hands among all the other odd smells.
We went back to the little room a day or two later and CJ was still taking a nap in the same bed. She smelled a little better, though, and was sitting up when Trent let me out of the soft crate.
“Max!” she called happily. I bounded into her arms and she hugged me. There was no longer a leash on her arm and the beeping noise had stopped. “Close the door, Trent; I don’t want Max getting in trouble.”
While CJ and Trent talked, I curled up in a ball under her arm, staking claim to the spot on the bed so that if Trent left he wouldn’t try to take me with him. I was dozing off when I heard the door open and a woman say, “Oh my God!” from the doorway. I instantly recognized the voice.
Gloria.
She swept into the room, carrying flowers that she pushed at Trent as she went to CJ’s bedside. Gloria smelled of those flowers, plus so many other sweet scents it made my eyes water.
“You look awful,” Gloria said.
“Nice to see you, too, Gloria.”
“Are they feeding you? What is this place?”
“This is a hospital,” CJ said. “You remember Trent.”
“Hello, Miss Mahoney,” Trent said.
“Well, of course I know it’s a hospital; that’s not what I meant. Hello, Trent.” Gloria pushed her face at Trent and then turned back to CJ. “I have never been so worried in my life. The shock of it nearly killed me!”
“Sorry about that,” CJ said.
“Honey, you think I haven’t had bad times, myself? Yet I have always found the strength to go on. You’re only a failure if you see yourself as a failure; I’ve told you that. For this to happen … I nearly fainted. I came the second I heard.”
“Well, ten days,” Trent said.
Gloria looked at him. “Sorry?”
“I called you ten days ago. So it wasn’t exactly the second you heard.”
“Well … there was no point for me to come while she was in a coma,” Gloria said with a frown.
“Of course,” Trent said.
“She does have a point,” CJ said. She and Trent grinned at each other.
“I can’t stand hospitals. Absolutely hate them,” Gloria said.
“You are unique in that,” CJ said. “Most people love them.” This time Trent laughed.
“So, Trent. Do you suppose a mother could talk to her daughter?” Gloria asked coldly.
“Sure.” Trent pushed himself off the wall.
“Take your dog, too,” Gloria told him. I looked at CJ when I heard the word “dog.”
“It’s my dog. His name is Max,” CJ said.
“Call me if you need anything,” Trent said as he walked out the door.
Gloria went over and sat in the lone chair. “Well, this place is certainly depressing. So is Trent back in the picture?”
“No. Trent was never ‘in the picture,’ Gloria. He’s my best friend.”
“All right, call it whatever. His mother, who naturally couldn’t wait to phone me the second she heard my daughter had taken pills with anti-freeze, says that he’s a vice president of his bank. Don’t believe him when he acts like that’s a big deal—at banks, they hand out titles to everybody; it’s how they avoid paying them a decent salary.”
“He’s an investment banker and he is very successful,” CJ responded testily.
“Speaking of investments, I have pretty important news.”
“Do tell.”
“Carl is going to propose.”
“Carl.”
“I told you about Carl. He made a fortune selling coin thingies, what you put a quarter in for machines like dryers at the Laundromat. He has a home in Florida with a sixty-four-foot sailboat! He also has an apartment in Vancouver and owns part of a hotel in Vail where we can go whenever we want. Vail! I’ve always wanted to go to Vail but have never met the right person. They say Vail is like Aspen only without all the locals to ruin it.”
“So you’re getting married?”
“Yes. He’s going to propose next month; we’re going to the Caribbean. That’s where he proposed to both his wives. So, you know, two and two together. Want to see his picture?”
“Sure.”
I looked up, yawning, as Gloria handed over something. CJ squealed with laughter. “This is Carl? Is he a Civil War veteran?”
“I’m sure I don’t know what you mean.”
“He’s like a thousand years old.”
“He is not; he’s very distinguished. I’ll ask you not to be rude. He’s going to be your stepfather.”
“Oh lord. How many times have I heard that? What about the one who paid off the mortgage, who you made me call ‘Dad’?”
“Most men are unreliable. Carl’s different.”
“Because he’s ancient?”
“No, because he is still friends with his ex-wives. That says something.”
“Sure does.” CJ put her hand on my head and I became drowsy with the warm feeling of pure love. Soon I was asleep. I woke up, though, when I heard and felt anger in CJ.
“What do you mean you won’t discuss it?” CJ asked Gloria.
“That family was horrible to me. We won’t have anything to do with them.”
“But that’s not fair to me. I’m related to them by blood. I want to know them, who I come from.”
“I raised you all by myself without help.”
I felt a rising sense of sadness in CJ, but she was still angry. “I remember so little from when my dad took me there when I was a kid. I remember … I remember there was a horse. And my aunts, and grandma. It’s all I have, just fragments from when I was like six years old.”
“That’s how it should be.”
“You don’t get to decide that!”
“Now listen.” Gloria stood up and she was angry, too. “You are no longer in high school and I won’t have you behaving like a spoiled child. You’re going to be living under my roof, with my rules. Understand?”
“No, she won’t,” Trent said quietly from the doorway.
They both turned to look at him as he came in.
“This is not your concern, Trent,” Gloria said.
“It is my concern. CJ doesn’t need this right now. She’s supposed to avoid stress. And she’s not going home with you. Her acting career is here.”
“Oh … I don’t think I’m ever going to be an actress,” CJ said.
“Exactly,” Gloria said.
“Then you’ll be something. You can do whatever you want. You’re not helpless, CJ. You get to decide you have the power,” Trent said emphatically.
“What are you talking about?” Gloria asked coldly.
“You believe me, don’t you, CJ?” Trent demanded.
“I … I can’t stay, Trent. I can’t afford—”
“I have more than enough room at my place—you can move into the spare bedroom until you’re back on your feet.”
“What about Liesl?”
“Oh. Liesl.” He laughed. “We broke up again. I think this one’s going to stick, because I’m not begging her to take me back. I realized finally that what she likes is the drama of breaking up and getting back and breaking up.… It’s like an addiction.”
“When did this happen?”
“The night before you … dropped off Max.”
I wagged.
“I feel awful you’ve been dealing with that and I never asked,” CJ said.
“It’s okay; you’ve been a little distracted,” Trent said with a wry grin.
“Can we please get back to the subject?” Gloria demanded.
“Meaning, what you want to talk about?” CJ responded.
“No, that’s not what I mean at all. I mean that we’re leaving Wednesday. Arrangements have already been made,” Gloria said firmly.
“You need to be with someone who believes in you. Me, I believe in you. I’ve always believed in you,” Trent said.
I could feel Gloria’s anger getting worse. “No one is going to accuse me of not ‘believing in my daughter.’ I supported this whole ridiculous move to New York, didn’t I?”
“Supported it!” CJ replied.
“You’re not good for her, Gloria. She needs to heal. You’re the last person who could help her with that,” Trent said.
“I am her mother,” Gloria said icily.
“Well, yes, you gave birth to her, that much is true. But she’s a grown-up. Once a child grows up, your work is done.”
“CJ?” Gloria said. I looked at Gloria, who was staring at CJ, and then at Trent, who was looking at Gloria, and then finally at CJ, who was looking back and forth between them. Gloria put her hands on her hips.
“You’ve never thanked me. All the sacrifices I’ve made,” she said bitterly. She turned to stalk out, pausing in the doorway to glare at her daughter. “I’ll be back tomorrow, and we’re leaving the day after, as scheduled. There’s nothing more to be said.” She glared at Trent. “By anybody.”
I wagged because Gloria was leaving. I always felt a little less stressed with her gone.
When Trent and I went back to his home that night, I wondered if this was the new routine: we’d sleep at his place, then go to CJ’s new room with the slick floors. CJ seemed to prefer to live in smaller and smaller places.
Trent tossed a rubber toy for me that bounced crazily across the kitchen, and I chased it and brought it back to him and he laughed and told me I was a good dog.
Later, as he was bending over to scoop some delicious wet food on top of the dry food in my dish, I caught a metallic, unmistakable odor on his breath. I was surprised, but I did what I was trained to do a long time ago.
I signaled.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
TWENTY-SIX
A few days after the visit from Gloria, CJ came to live at Trent’s place. She put her things in a different room from Trent’s and some of her clothes still had Sneakers’ smell on them. The new living arrangements seemed to fatigue her, as she spent an awful lot of time in her bed and was sad and weak and in pain for most of it. I tried to cheer her up by delivering her chew toys, which Trent kept bringing home in little bags, but other than holding them slackly in her hand for me to tug on, CJ wasn’t interested much in playing.
Trent would come home at least once during the day to let me out. “It’s no problem; I’m right around the corner.”
“Maybe tomorrow I’ll feel up to taking Max for a walk,” CJ said.
“Take your time,” Trent said.
They liked to play a game where Trent would sit by her and wrap her arm in a sweater like mine and then squeeze a little ball. I would hear an odd hiss, and CJ and Trent would hold still. “Good, BP is still good,” Trent would usually say. When it came off, her sweater made the same ripping sound as mine.
I was not allowed to play with that ball because it was apparently Trent’s favorite.
It was Trent who fed me, and I learned that to earn a meal I had to signal when I smelled the odd metallic odor on his breath, which was most times.
“Aren’t you going to pray, Max?” he would ask me sometimes. I would signal, and then he would say, “Good boy, Max,” and reward me with dinner.
“Max prays before he eats dinner,” Trent told CJ. I was scampering around the room, burning energy, but I froze when I heard my name mentioned with the word “dinner.” I’d already eaten but would not have objected if Trent wanted to give me a treat.
“What do you mean?” CJ asked, laughing.
“I swear. He bows his head down and clasps his hands together, like he’s saying grace. It’s really cute.”
“I’ve never seen him do that,” CJ said.
“Pray, Max!” Trent called to me. I could tell I was supposed to be doing something, so I sat and barked. They both laughed, but they didn’t give me a treat, so apparently I had done it wrong.
When CJ finally got up out of bed to go to the couch, she went very, very slowly, pushing a thing that looked a little like a chair in front of her that she held on to very tightly. The chair-thing had tennis balls on it, yet she didn’t throw them for me to chase. I scampered around at her feet, delighted to see her up, but she was breathing loudly and didn’t seem happy.
Trent, though, was very pleased when he walked in the door. “You made it to the couch!” he greeted her, smiling.
“Yeah, only took me an hour.”
“That’s really great, CJ.”
“Sure it is.” CJ looked away with a sigh. I jumped up on the couch and nuzzled her hand to help her feel better.
Every day after that CJ would get out of that bed to move around the apartment, always pushing the thing with tennis balls. Then one day we started taking walks outside. The snow was melting the first time we she did this, so the car tires were making loud ripping noises on the pavement and everywhere I could hear dripping and splashing. We only went a few feet down the sidewalk, the tennis balls on CJ’s chair-thing getting wet. A few days later, it had snowed again and we only went a few steps before we turned around. The day after that, the sun was out and it was warm and the snow was melting and under it I could smell new grass.
Our house had an outside room called a balcony. Trent put a box lined with rough carpet out there and called me to it. “This is where you can go to the bathroom, okay, Max? It’s your own special porta-potty.”
The rough carpet was softer than the cement floor of the balcony. I loved to lie on it when it was breezy and open my nose to the intoxicating mix of smells from the loud streets below. Sometimes I’d smell Mrs. Warren, the lady who often came out onto the balcony next to ours. “Hello, Max,” she would say to me, and I’d wag.
“You’re not supposed to lie in it, Max,” Trent told me when he came out to see me there. CJ laughed with delight. I didn’t know what was going on but resolved that if it made my girl so happy I’d lie on the rough carpet as often as possible.
As the days turned warmer, CJ would take her chair-thing and walk farther and farther, always going very slowly. On none of these walks did we stop to pick up Katie or any other dogs.
I became familiar with our route and looked forward to stopping at a bed of nose-level flowers along the way. There was some male dog I had never before met who had always marked the plants, and I sniffed very carefully before raising my leg in the same area.
“Max loves to stop here and smell the flowers,” CJ told Trent one time when they were both walking me.
“Good dog, Max. Stop and smell the roses,” Trent said. I heard that I was a good dog but was much more focused on the scent of that other dog.
Some days were better than others for CJ. On one of her bad days she was lying in bed when I heard fumbling at the front door, so I raced up to it, barking. When it opened, I was astounded to smell who was with Trent.
Duke!
Duke bounded into the room, full of manic energy. I raised up on my back legs and took his head in my front paws and licked at his lips, truly glad to see him. His big tongue came out and slapped against my face over and over and he was moaning and shaking, so happy was he to be with me. He dropped onto his back so I could climb on him, and we wrestled and squirmed joyously together.
“Come on back, guys,” Trent said. We went to CJ’s room and she sat up in bed.
“Duke!” she called out.
Duke was so excited to see her that he jumped right up on her bed. CJ gasped with pain. “Hey!” Trent yelled.
The lamp next to CJ fell to the floor and there was a flash and then the room was darker. Duke, panting, leaped around, crashing into things, then launched himself back on the bed. “Get off, Duke!” CJ said, and she was angry.
Snarling, I bit at Duke’s heels, and he shrank to the floor, his ears back.
What my girl needed, I realized at that moment, was calm and stillness. When Duke jumped on her it hurt her and his boisterous behavior made her and Trent mad.
To be a good dog in this house meant being less loud and active. CJ needed quiet.
With Duke finally more under control, CJ pulled his head to her and scratched his ears. “Okay, Trent, how did you pull this off?” she asked.
“Not hard to track Barry down. I just called him at his office and explained what I wanted. He wasn’t going to say no,” Trent said.
CJ stopped scratching Duke and looked at Trent. “You mean, he wasn’t going to say no to you.”
“Right. Well…”
“Oh, Duke, I am so, so happy to see you,” CJ crooned.
I jumped up on the bed but did so nimbly and crept up to where Duke was getting all the love. I knew CJ would want me there, too. I was the most important dog in the situation.
After Duke left, CJ and Trent had dinner at the table instead of back in her bedroom. I liked it better when she ate in bed because she often would hand me little morsels, but they seemed happier sitting with just their legs within reach of my nose, for some reason. I sat patiently under the table, on patrol for falling food.
“Maybe dialysis wouldn’t be that bad,” Trent said.
“Oh God, Trent.”
“I’m just saying, if it has to happen, we’ll deal with it.”
“If it happens to me, we will deal with it?” CJ said sharply.
For a few moments there was nothing but the sound of their forks on their plates.
“I’m sorry,” CJ said softly. “I do appreciate everything you’re doing for me. God, that was so Gloria of me.”
“No, you’ve been through a lot, you’re in pain, and dialysis is scary. It makes sense for you to get pissed for me to suggest it would somehow be my experience, too. But what I really meant is that I’ll support you every way I can, no matter what it takes. That’s all.”
“Thank you, Trent. I don’t deserve a friend like you,” CJ replied.
When they were done eating, Trent put food in my bowl. I loved the plinking sound of dinner landing in my metal bowl, and danced circles waiting for him to put it down.
“Now watch. Pray, Max, pray.”
Trent held the food away from me, but he was leaning over and I caught the smell on his breath. I knew what he wanted, and signaled.
“See?” Trent said, laughing delightedly.
“That’s so weird. I’ve never seen him do that before,” CJ said.
“He’s saying grace,” Trent said.
As the weather grew warmer, CJ and I would venture farther and farther on our walks. She eventually stopped pushing her tennis ball chair-thing out in front of her but would lean on a hooked stick a little as we slowly made our way down the sidewalk. I had learned to be very patient and would walk next to her at the pace she wanted to go—protecting her now meant making sure she didn’t fall over or feel pain from walking too fast. Sometimes Trent would come home in the middle of the day and walk with us, and he, too, adopted a slow gait.
It had been so long since I had been on a car ride, I had pretty much written off the idea that I would ever get to be a front-seat dog again, though there were always plenty of cars in the streets. So I was surprised when I was put in a crate, one with hard sides and a lot more room to move around in than the soft one, and carried out of the building by Trent. He put me on the backseat of a big car.
“Buckle the crate in,” CJ said. “It’s safer with the seat belt on.”
I yipped a little when the car drove off with Trent at the wheel. Had they forgotten I was here?
“Oh, Max, I know, but we’re right up front. You’re safer in the back,” CJ said.
I hadn’t heard anything I understood, but I could feel the love in CJ’s voice. I pondered my reaction. I wanted to keep barking until they let me out of the crate, but I remembered the time when, as Molly, I left the ocean with CJ and I took the long noisy ride with a dog barking the whole way—nobody let him out of his crate, and his barking was irritating to me. I didn’t want to irritate CJ—not upsetting her was how I took care of her now. So I settled down with a long, forlorn sigh.
“First time I’ve ever left New York in August. I was always so envious of everybody—the heat was murderous,” CJ said.
It was a long car ride.
“You’re not going to tell me where we’re going? Not even now?” CJ said after a while.
“You’ll figure it out,” Trent replied. “Until then I want it to be as much of a surprise as possible.”
It was very hot outside every time we stopped, but we spent the night in a place so cold I slept under the blankets with CJ. Trent had a different room, but it smelled pretty much the same as ours.
As I fell asleep, I thought of the last really, really long car ride I’d taken, where we wound up going to the ocean. Was that where we were headed now?
We had been driving a long time the second day and CJ slept a lot of the time, but when she woke up she suddenly became very excited.
“Oh my God! Are we going where I think we are?” she asked.
“Yeah,” Trent said.
“How did you find it?”
“It wasn’t hard to do. Public records. Ethan and Hannah Montgomery. So I called and said you wanted to visit.”
In my crate I wagged a little at hearing the names Ethan and Hannah spoken in the same sentence.
“Wasn’t hard to do for you. How come you know how to do all this stuff? I was always so much smarter than you,” CJ said.
“Oh right, you were smarter? I can’t even reply to that; it’s frying my memory circuits.”
They both laughed.
“Do they know we’re coming?” CJ asked.
“Oh yes. They’re pretty excited.”
“Oh my God, I can’t wait. This is amazing!”
I fell asleep, made drowsy by the steady droning of the car noises.
When I woke up, the scent wafting through the car made me dizzy. I knew where we were, and when the car stopped I cried, eager to get out. “Okay, Max,” Trent said. Warm evening air flowed over me as Trent opened my crate door and held my leash. I bounded into the grass.
Ultimately I shouldn’t have been surprised: eventually everyone returned to the Farm.
Several people poured out of the house and ran down to see me and also CJ.
“Aunt Rachel?” CJ asked uncertainly.
“Look at you!” the woman shouted, hugging CJ as the others milled around.
There were three women and two men and one little girl. I recognized the scents of all but the little girl.
“I’m your aunt Cindy,” another woman said. She bent down to offer her hand to sniff, but Trent pulled me back, my collar going tight as he yanked the leash.
“Uh, that’s Max; he’s not real friendly,” Trent said.
I was wagging, so happy to see everyone and to be back home. Were we going to live here now? That would be fine by me.
“He seems nice,” Cindy said. I strained forward and managed to lick her hand and Trent laughed. Pretty soon Cindy picked me up and I was nose-to-nose with everyone in the family.
“Let’s go inside,” Cindy said. She handed the leash to the little girl, whose name was Gracie.
It was such a pleasure to mount the wooden steps, even though it did take more of an effort than when I was a bigger dog. Proud that I knew my way, I forced myself through the door first, feeling the leash go slack as Gracie dropped it.
There was a woman sitting in a chair in the living room. She was old, but I’d know her scent anywhere. I bounded right across the room and into her lap. It was Hannah, Ethan’s mate.
“My goodness.” She laughed as I squirmed and licked at her face.
“Max!” Trent called. He sounded stern, so I hustled off Hannah’s lap and ran over to see what sort of trouble I’d gotten into. He snagged my leash.
“Grandma?” CJ said.
Hannah stood up slowly and CJ walked to her and they hugged for a long time. They were both crying, but the love and happiness between them swept through and touched everyone who was watching.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
TWENTY-SEVEN
We did not stay on the Farm to live, but we spent more than a week there. I loved racing around with my nose down, tracking all the familiar scents. There were ducks in the pond, a whole family as always, but though I stood and watched them for a while, I didn’t bother to chase them. Not only was there never any profit in that, but the two largest ones were as big as I was. It was the first time in a long while that I thought about how small a dog I was as Max. It did not seem right that a dog should be the same size as a duck.
There were strong horse smells in the barn but no horse to be found, which I considered fortunate. If CJ had wandered in there I would have faced down that horse again, but the prospect of doing so as Max, and not Buddy, made me more than a little afraid.
CJ spent much of her time walking and talking with Hannah, who moved at the same slow speed as my girl. I stayed by their side, proud to be protecting both of them. “I never gave up hope,” Hannah said. “I knew that this day would come, Clarity. CJ, I mean, I’m sorry.”
“That’s okay,” CJ said. “I like it when you call me that.”
“I could barely contain myself from screaming like a teenager when your boyfriend telephoned.”
“Oh, Trent? No, he’s not my boyfriend.”
“He’s not?”
“No. We’ve been best friends forever, but never like as a couple.”
“Interesting,” Hannah said.
“What? Why are you looking at me like that?”
“Nothing. I’m just happy you’re here, that’s all.”
One afternoon it rained and the roar on the roof was as loud as the cars I could hear from my special carpet on the balcony, only without the honking. The windows were open and the wet, earthy smells came flooding into the room. I lay lazily at CJ’s feet as she and Hannah sat and ate cookies without giving me one.
“I feel guilty that I didn’t try harder,” Hannah told CJ.
“No, Grandma, no. If Gloria sent you that lawyer letter…”
“It wasn’t just that. Your mother moved so many times after Henry … after the plane crash. And life has a way of getting so busy you don’t notice how quickly time is passing. Still, I should have done something, maybe hired my own lawyer.”
“Are you kidding? I know Gloria. I grew up with her. If she said she’d sue you, she meant it.”
My girl went to Hannah and they hugged. I sighed, smelling the cookie crumbs still on the plate. Sometimes people will set a plate down for a dog to lick, but most of the time they forget.
“I have something for you, though,” Hannah said. “See that box on the shelf, the one with the pink flowers? Look inside.”
CJ crossed the room and I sprang to my feet, but she merely picked up a box and brought it back. It didn’t smell very interesting.
CJ held the box in her lap. “What are these?” she asked. Whatever was inside smelled like papers.
“Birthday cards. Every year I bought you a card and wrote you what had happened since your previous birthday. Marriages, births … they’re all in there. I didn’t realize when I started how many cards I’d wind up writing. At one point I had to find a bigger box. No one expects to live into her nineties.” Hannah chuckled.
CJ was playing with the papers in the box, completely oblivious to the obvious connection between the cookie crumbs and her deserving dog, Max.
“Oh, Grandma, this is the most wonderful gift I’ve ever received.”
At dinner I would lie under the table and Rachel and Cindy and other people would sit with CJ and talk and laugh and everyone was very happy. So I was surprised the day when Trent began moving suitcases out of the house and into the car, because I knew it meant that despite how happy CJ was, we were leaving.
Humans do that: though it might be more fun at the Farm, or a dog park, they will decide to leave and then that’s it; they leave. It’s the job of the dog to go with them once he’s marked the area with his scent.
I was in my crate in the car. My girl had completely forgotten I was a front-seat dog. “It’s like Grandma gave me all the memories of my life, the life I missed. All my memories in a box,” CJ said as we drove. She was crying and I whimpered, wanting to comfort her even though I couldn’t see her.
“It’s okay, Max,” CJ told me. I wagged at my name. “I’m not crying because I’m sad. It’s just, I’m so happy to have seen them, and yet to know I missed so much, and that I could have missed so much more…”
“It’s overwhelming,” Trent said quietly.
“God, yes.” She sighed.
I curled up in a ball. Clearly, whatever was going on, they were not going to invite me out to be a part of it.
After driving for many hours, I sat up in my cage, because for the second time on the car ride the smells were familiar. Eventually the car stopped and I waited patiently in my crate to be let out, but CJ and Trent just sat in their seats.
“Okay?” Trent said.
“I don’t know. I don’t know if I want to see her.”
“Okay.”
“No,” CJ said. “I mean, whenever I see her I just wind up feeling bad about myself. Is that terrible? She’s my mother.”
“You get to feel however you feel.”
“I don’t think I can do it.”
“Okay then,” Trent said.
Well, I’d had as much of this as I could stand. I yipped in frustration.
“Be a good dog, Max,” CJ said. I wagged at being a good dog.
“So, you’re sure? You want us to leave?” Trent asked.
“Yes. No! No, I should go in; I mean, we’re right here,” CJ said. “You wait, okay? I’ll run up and see which kind of mood she’s in.”
“Sure. Max and I will sit tight.”
I wagged. The car door opened and I could hear CJ getting out. I waited expectantly when the door shut, but she didn’t come around to let me out.
“It’s okay, Max,” Trent said. I whimpered. Where was my girl? Trent leaned over and stuck his fingers through the bars and I licked them.
The door opened and the car rocked as CJ jumped back in. I wagged, hoping she would let me out and pet me to celebrate her return, but she just shut her door. “You won’t believe this.”
“What?”
“She moved. The woman who answered the door has lived there for a year, and she bought it from some old man.”
“You’re kidding. I thought that boyfriend of hers, the one whose father was a senator, paid off the mortgage so she’d always have a home,” Trent said.
“That’s right, but she apparently sold it anyway.”
“Well … you want to call her? Her cell phone is probably the same.”
“No, you know what? I’m going to take this as a sign. It’s like the joke where your parents move and don’t tell you their forwarding address—well, that’s what Gloria has done to me. Let’s just go.”
We started driving again. With a sigh, I settled down.
“Do you want to drive past your old place?” CJ asked.
“No, that’s okay. This trip was for you. I have a lot of good memories about that house, but after my parents retired and sold it—I’d rather keep it as it was in my memory than see all the changes, you know?”
We drove for a long time without anyone making any sounds. I was sleepy, but I woke up when I heard CJ’s voice, because there was a little bit of fear in it.
“Trent?”
“Yeah?”
“That’s true, isn’t it. This trip was all for me. Everything you’ve done since I went into the hospital has been for me.”
“No, I had fun, too.”
“The whole thing. Tracking down my relatives. Making the detour so I could see Gloria even though we both knew that at the last minute I’d probably turn chicken.”
I cocked my head. Chicken?
“Ever since we were kids growing up, you’ve been there for me. You know that? You’re my rock.”
I turned around in my box and lay down.
“But that’s not why I love you, Trent. I love you because you’re the best man in the world.”
Trent was quiet for a moment. “I love you, too, CJ,” he said. Then I felt the car turn and slow to a stop. I stood up in my crate and shook myself.
“I think maybe I need to stop driving for a minute,” Trent said.
I waited patiently to be let out, but all I could hear was rustling around in the front seat, plus what sounded like eating noises. Could they be having chicken? I didn’t smell any, but the thought made me agitated anyway. I finally barked.
CJ laughed. “Max! We forgot all about you.”
I wagged.
As it would turn out, that was not the last time we saw Hannah and her whole family. Not long after we returned home, I was taken to a big room full of people sitting in rows of chairs, as if we were going to play the game that Andi had taught me when I was Molly. Trent held me tightly, but I squirmed out of his arms when I smelled Cindy and Rachel and Hannah. Rachel laughed and scooped me up and held me to Hannah and I licked her face. I was careful and gentle in my behavior, though, not at all like Duke would have been, because Hannah seemed frail and there was always someone holding her by the arm. Trent’s sister, Carolina, and his mother and father were there, too, which was a surprise to me because I never smelled them on Trent and so had assumed they were no longer alive.
I was so happy to see all of them! CJ was happy, too, as happy as I could ever remember her being. There was so much joy and love in the air, flowing through the people in the chairs and between CJ and Trent, that I couldn’t help but bark. CJ picked me up and cuddled me. “Shhh, Max,” she whispered, kissing my nose.
I wore something soft on my back and walked with CJ between the people to where Trent was standing, and I sat there with them while they talked and then they kissed and everyone in the room yelled and I barked again.
It was such a wonderful day. Every table was draped with cloth so that there were little rooms under each one, rooms with people’s legs and morsels of meat and fish. Flowers and plants everywhere made the whole place smell as wonderful as a dog park. I played with laughing children who chased me, and when Trent picked me up to take me outside to do my business I couldn’t wait to get back in.
CJ wore large folds of cloth so that there was a little room under there, too, though no food—just her legs. When I crawled under there my girl always giggled and reached in to pull me out. “Oh, Max, are you having fun?” CJ asked me after one such incident. She scooped me up and kissed me on the top of my head.
“He’s been running around like a maniac the whole time,” Trent said. “He’ll sleep like a log tonight.”
“Well … that’s good,” CJ said, and they both laughed.
“It’s a perfect day. I love you, CJ.”
“I love you, too, Trent.”
“You’re the most beautiful bride in the history of weddings.”
“You’re not so bad yourself. I can’t believe I get to be married to you.”
“For as long as you want. Forever. You’re my wife forever.”
They kissed, which they had been doing a lot, lately. I wagged.
“I got a message from Gloria,” CJ said finally, setting me down.
“Oh? Did she unleash the curse of the seven demons upon us and our lands?”
CJ laughed. “No, actually, for her it was pretty nice. She said she was sorry she had to boycott the wedding, but she knew I’d understand why.”
“I don’t understand,” Trent replied.
“It’s okay. She told me she was proud of me and that you’re a good catch and to have a wonderful wedding even though she’s not here. She also said her biggest regret was that she’d always thought she’d sing at my wedding.”
“Well, that’s not my biggest regret,” Trent said.
By the end of the day I was so full and so exhausted it was all I could do to wag my tail as people bent to kiss me and talk to me. I was held up to Hannah and I kissed her face, licking something sweet off her lips, my heart full of love for her.
“Good-bye, Max, you are such a sweet doggy,” Hannah said to me. “Such a good, good dog.”
I loved hearing those words come from Hannah’s mouth.
That winter CJ was able to take longer, quicker walks. Trent would still play with his rubber ball every day, sitting next to her and making hissing noises with it. How it never once occurred to him to throw it for me I will never understand.
“BP good,” Trent would usually say. In this instance “good” had nothing to do with “dog.” “You take your amino acids?”
“I’m so sick of this low-protein diet. I want a hamburger with a steak on top of it,” CJ told him.
We didn’t have Happy Thanksgiving that year, though one day it smelled like it throughout the whole building. Trent and CJ left me alone for several hours and when they came home the wonderful scents of Happy Thanksgiving were all over their clothes and hands. I sniffed them suspiciously. Could people even have Happy Thanksgiving without a dog? Seemed unlikely.
We did have Merry Christmas, though. Trent built a thing in the living room that smelled like my outside carpet and hung cat toys from it. When we tore open packages, mine had a delicious chew toy in it.
After Merry Christmas CJ started leaving me alone most of the day several days a week, but she never smelled like any of the other dogs, so I knew she wasn’t walking them without me.
“How were your classes today?” Trent would often ask on these days. She seemed happy to have left me alone, which made no sense. In my opinion, being without a dog should just make people sad.
I could tell, though, that sometimes she was feeling very weak and tired. “Look how puffy my face is!” she wailed to Trent.
“Maybe we should talk to the doctor about increasing your diuretics.”
“I spend all my time in the bathroom as it is,” she replied bitterly. I nuzzled her hand, but she didn’t take as much pleasure in the contact as I did. I so wanted her to feel the happiness that I felt whenever we touched each other, but people are more complicated creatures than dogs. We always love them joyfully, but sometimes they’re mad at us, like when I chewed the sad shoes.
One day my girl was very sad and when Trent came home she was sitting in the living room, looking out the window, with me in her lap. “What’s wrong?” he asked.
She started crying again. “It’s my kidneys,” she told him. “They said it’s just too dangerous for us to have children.”
Trent put his arms around her and they hugged. I pushed my nose in between them so that they both petted me. Trent was sad, too. “We could adopt. We adopted Max, didn’t we? Look how well that turned out.”
I wagged at my name, but CJ pushed him away.
“You can’t fix everything, Trent! I screwed up. This is the price we all have to pay because of it, okay? I don’t need you telling me everything is okay.” CJ stood up, dumping me on the floor, and stomped away. I trotted right at her heels, but when she got to the end of the hall she shut the door in my face. After a minute I turned and went back to Trent and jumped into his lap, because I needed comfort from him.
Sometimes people were angry at each other and it would have nothing to do with shoes. It was beyond a dog’s comprehension, but the love between my girl and her mate, Trent, I did understand. They spent many days holding each other on the couch and in bed and often sat with their heads nearly touching.
“You are the love of my life, CJ,” Trent would often say.
“I love you, too, Trent,” CJ would reply. The adoration between the two of them at moments like these made me wiggle with delight.
As much as I liked wearing my sweater, I was happiest when the air turned hot and moist. That year, though, CJ would sit on the balcony with blankets on and I could tell she was cold by the way she hugged me to her. I could feel her fading, losing strength, becoming more and more tired.
The woman named Mrs. Warren often came out onto her balcony next to ours to play with plants. “Hi, Mrs. Warren,” CJ would say.
“How are you feeling today, CJ, any better?” Mrs. Warren would reply.
“A little,” CJ usually told her.
I never saw Mrs. Warren anywhere but on her balcony, though I sometimes smelled her in the hallway. She did not have a dog.
“Look at my wrists; they’re all swollen,” CJ told Trent when he came home one afternoon.
“Honey, have you been out here in the sun all day?” he asked.
“I’m freezing.”
“You didn’t go to class?”
“What? What day is it?”
“Oh, CJ. I’m worried about you. Let me check your BP.”
Trent got his special ball out and I watched him alertly as he squeezed it, thinking maybe this time he’d let me have a turn with it.
“I think it’s probably time to talk about … about a more permanent treatment regimen.”
“I don’t want to do dialysis, Trent!”
“Honey, you’re the center of my universe. I’d die if anything happened to you. Please, CJ, let’s go to the doctor. Please.”
CJ went to bed early that night. Trent didn’t give me the command to pray when he fed me, but the odor on his breath was so strong I did it anyway. “Good dog,” Trent said in the way people will praise dogs without really even looking at them.
The next morning, just after Trent left, CJ fell down in the kitchen. One minute she was making a second trip from the balcony to the kitchen to fill a can of water and the next she toppled to the floor. I felt the crash through the pads in my feet and when I ran to her and licked her face she was unresponsive.
I whimpered, then barked. She didn’t move. Her breath smelled sickly and sour as she shallowly inhaled and exhaled.
I was frantic. I ran to the front door but could hear no one on the other side. I barked. Then I ran out on the balcony.
Mrs. Warren was kneeling, playing with her plants. I barked at her.
“Hello, Max!” she called to me.
I thought of my girl lying in the kitchen, unconscious and sick. I needed to communicate what was happening to Mrs. Warren. I pushed forward until my face was sticking out between the bars and I barked at her with such high urgency that a clear note of hysteria rang in my voice like a bell.
Mrs. Warren knelt there looking at me. I barked and barked and barked.
“What is it, Max?”
Hearing my name as a question, I turned and ran back into the apartment, so Mrs. Warren would know the problem was in there. Then I ran back out onto the balcony and barked some more.
Mrs. Warren stood up. “CJ?” she called tentatively, leaning out to try to see into our home.
I kept barking. “Shush, Max,” Mrs. Warren said. “Trent? CJ?”
I kept barking. Then Mrs. Warren shook her head, went to her door, opened it, and stepped inside. When she slid her door shut I was so dumbfounded I stopped barking.
What was she doing?
Whimpering, I dashed back in to my girl. Her breathing was getting weaker.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
TWENTY-EIGHT
Though it was hopeless, I went to the door and desperately scratched at it. My nails carved a groove in the wood, but that was all. I was crying my fear, my voice shrill and brittle. Then I heard a noise on the other side, the sound of footfalls. I barked and put my nose to the crack at the bottom of the door and smelled Mrs. Warren and a man named Harry, who often carried tools with him in the hallway.
The door opened a crack. “Hello?” Harry called.
“CJ? Trent?” Mrs. Warren said. They cautiously pushed into the room. I headed toward the kitchen, looking over my shoulder to make sure they were following.
“Oh my God,” Mrs. Warren said.
A few minutes later some men came and put CJ on a bed and took her away. Mrs. Warren picked me up while this was happening, petting me and telling me I was a good dog, but my heart was pounding and I was sick with a frantic fear. Then she put me down and she and Harry and everyone left and I was alone in the place.
I fretfully paced back and forth, anxious and worried. The light faded and it was night and still CJ wasn’t home. I remembered her lying with her cheek pressed to the floor of the kitchen and the thought made me whimper.
When the door finally opened it was Trent. CJ was not with him.
“Oh, Max, I’m so sorry,” he said.
He took me for a walk and it was a relief to be able to lift my leg on some shrubbery. “We have to be there for CJ, now, Max. She isn’t going to like dialysis, but she has no choice. We have to do it. This could have been much, much worse.”
When CJ came home a few days later she was very tired and went right to bed. I curled up next to her, relieved and yet apprehensive about how sad and frustrated she seemed.
From that point forward, CJ and I would take a trip every few days in the back of a car that would pick us up out in front of our building. At first, Trent always went with us. We’d go to a room and lie there quietly while some people fussed over my girl. She always felt weak and ill when she arrived and was exhausted and sad when she got up off the couch, but I realized it was not the fault of the people who were bending over her, not even when they hurt her arm. I didn’t growl at them as I might have before.
The day after we went to this place was usually a good day for CJ. She felt stronger and happier.
“They say it will probably be years before I get a kidney,” CJ said one night. “There are just so few of them available.”
“Well, I was wondering what to buy you for your birthday,” Trent replied with a laugh. “I’ve got one just your size right here.”
“Don’t even think about it. I’m not taking yours or any other living person’s. I put myself in this position, Trent.”
“I only need one. The other one’s a spare; I hardly ever even use it.”
“Funny guy. No. I’ll get one from a cadaver eventually. There are some people who have gone twenty years on dialysis. It will happen when it happens.”
That winter CJ walked in the door one day with a plastic crate. I was astonished when she opened the door and out walked Sneakers! I rushed up to the cat, frankly excited to see her, and she arched her back and drew her ears back and hissed at me, so I skittered to a stop. What was wrong with Sneakers?
She spent the day sniffing around the apartment, while I followed her, trying to interest her in a little game of tug-on-a-toy. She would have nothing to do with me.
“How are Mrs. Minnick’s kids doing?” Trent asked at dinner.
“I think they’re feeling guilty. They hardly ever visited her, and then one day she was gone,” CJ said.
I watched Sneakers leap silently onto a counter and regard the kitchen disdainfully from her perch.
“What? What is it?” Trent said.
“I’m just thinking about Gloria. Is that how I’m going to feel? One day she’ll be gone and I’ll regret I didn’t make more of an effort?”
“Want to go see her? Invite her to come out?”
“Truthfully? I have no idea.”
“Just let me know.”
“You’re the best husband in the world, Trent. I’m so lucky.”
“I’m the lucky one, CJ. My whole life, I only really wanted one girl, and now she’s my wife.”
CJ stood and I leaped to my feet, though all she did was jump on Trent’s chair with him, pressing her face to his. They started to lean, falling sideways.
“Okay, be brave now,” CJ said as they slid off the chair and landed on the floor, laughing. Then they wrestled for a while. I looked over at Sneakers, who didn’t seem to care about anything at all, but what I felt between Trent and my girl was a love both powerful and complete.
Sneakers eventually became more affectionate. She might be walking through the room and then, without warning, would pad over to me and rub her head against my face, or lick my ears while I lay curled on the floor. But she never wanted to play any wrestling games like we used to. I couldn’t help but feel that the time she had spent without a dog in her life had been bad for her.
CJ and Trent spent cool evenings wrapped in a blanket together on the balcony and cold nights lying together on the couch. Sometimes CJ would put on nice-smelling shoes and they’d leave in the evening, but when they returned they were always happy—though even if she’d been sad I doubted I would have done anything to her shoes.
We took walks down the streets and in the park. Sometimes CJ would fall asleep on a blanket on the grass and Trent would lie with her, watching her, a smile on his face.
When we spent the day in the park I was always famished and wanted to eat as soon as we got home. I was dancing around impatiently in the kitchen on one such day, watching Trent make my dinner, when there was a slight change in the routine.
“Going to take forever to finish my degree and then, when I think of my master’s, it’s like I’m going to be in my thirties. That used to seem so old!”
CJ held my bowl up in the air. “Okay, Max. Pray,” she said.
I tensed. I wanted dinner, but the command only made sense in the context of the odor that sometimes lingered on Trent’s breath.
“He always does it for me,” Trent remarked. “Max? Pray!”
CJ had my dinner and I was starving. I went over to Trent and, as he was leaning down, caught the scent. I signaled.
“Good dog!” Trent praised. CJ put my bowl down and I raced over to eat. I was conscious of her standing over me, her hands on her hips.
“What is it?” Trent asked CJ.
“Max never prays for me. Just you.”
“So?”
I was bolting down my food. “I want to try something when he’s finished,” CJ said. I focused on my eating. When I was done I licked the bowl. “Okay, call him.”
“Max! Come!” Trent said. I obediently went over to him and sat. There had been a time when he would call me and always give me a treat when I responded, but sadly, those days had passed for some reason.
“Now, lean down close to him, like you’re putting the food bowl on the floor,” CJ said.
“What are we doing?”
“Just do it. Please.”
Trent bent down to me. The odor was particularly strong today.
“Pray!” CJ called.
I obediently signaled.
“Oh God. Is that possible?” I snapped my head up and focused on CJ. A jolt of fear had come off her, and now she had her hand to her mouth. I went to her, nuzzling her, not sure what the threat was.
“CJ, what’s wrong? Why do you look like that?” Trent asked.
“There’s something I want you to do for me,” CJ replied.
“What? What is it?”
“I want you to go to the doctor.”
“What? Why?”
“Please, Trent!” CJ replied, her voice breaking. “You have to do this for me!”
Over the next year, Trent became very sick. Many times he would vomit in the bathroom, and it would remind me of how CJ used to throw up on a regular basis, which she did not do anymore. CJ seemed just as upset when Trent vomited as when she used to do it herself, and I always whimpered anxiously for both of them.
Trent’s mother and father came to visit several times, and his sister, Carolina, and a man and some children from the wedding showed up as well, from which I concluded that Carolina now had a family. These visits were odd, though, not at all like when everyone gathered at the Farm, in that only the children seemed happy and ready to laugh and pay attention to a good dog.
All of the hair on Trent’s head came off and I could make him laugh by licking his scalp while he lay in bed. CJ would laugh, too, but there was always an underlying sad desperation in her, a constant anxious worrying.
“I don’t want this to be my last Christmas with my husband,” she said that winter.
“It won’t be, honey; I promise,” Trent replied.
I had learned from watching Duke’s rambunctious conduct with CJ how not to behave around a sick person, so I concentrated on being calm and comforting, which Trent and CJ both seemed to appreciate very much. It had been my job to keep threats at bay and I had done that, and now it was my job to try to keep the sadness away, and that required a different set of behaviors.
I still went with CJ a few times a week to lie on the couch and let people fuss over her. They all knew me and loved me and petted me and told me that I was a good dog, and I knew it was because I would lie quietly and not jump around the room. When we left the place with the couch it always seemed to me that my girl wasn’t nearly as sick as she had been when we first started going, but I was just a dog and could have been wrong.
One night CJ and Trent were cuddled on the couch together and I was burrowed in snug between them. Sneakers was across the room, watching us expressionlessly. I never knew what cats were thinking, or even if they were thinking.
“I just want you to know, I’ve got plenty of insurance and investments. You’ll be okay,” Trent said.
“But we’re not doing that. You’re going to get better. You are getting better,” CJ said. She felt angry.
“Yes, but just in case, I want you to know it.”
“It doesn’t matter. It’s not happening,” CJ insisted.
There were a few times when Trent would be gone for days at a time and CJ would mostly be missing as well, though she always came home to walk me and feed me and always smelled like Trent, so I knew the two of them had been someplace together.
One day it was just the two of us, CJ and me, sitting in the grass on a warm summer day. I’d run around as much as I’d wanted and was now content to sit in my girl’s lap. She stroked my head.
“You are such a good dog,” she told me. Her fingers scratched the itchy part along my spine and I groaned in pleasure. “I know what you were doing, Max. You weren’t saying grace, were you? You were trying to tell us about Trent, trying to say you could smell his cancer. We just didn’t understand at first. Did Molly tell you that? Does she talk to you, Max? Is that how you knew? Is she an angel dog, watching over us? Are you an angel dog, too?”
I liked hearing the name Molly spoken by CJ. I wagged.
“We got it in time, Max. Because of you they got it and it hasn’t come back. You saved my husband. I don’t know how, but if you talk to Molly, would you tell her thank you for me?”
I was pretty disappointed when Trent’s hair grew back on his head, because my licking his scalp always made him laugh. But things change: CJ’s hair, for example, was longer than it had ever been, a glorious tent that would fall over me when she bent over. And when Trent bent over I could no longer detect that metallic odor. When he said “Pray” to me now I looked at him in frustrated confusion. What did he want? I was even more confused when, after I sat and stared at him for a long moment after the Pray command, he and CJ both laughed and clapped and said, “Good dog!” and fed me a treat—though I had done nothing.
It cannot be a dog’s purpose to understand what people want because it is impossible.
The summer after Trent’s hair grew back some men came and took everything from our home. CJ spoke to them and led them through the house, so I knew it was okay, but I still barked at them out of habit. CJ put me in my crate when I barked and also put Sneakers in the cat crate, which I felt was a bit of an overreaction on CJ’s part.
Sneakers and I went for a long car ride in the backseat of a car, still in our crates.
At the end of the car ride the same men were there, this time carrying all of our things into a new house. What fun to explore the unfamiliar rooms! Sneakers sniffed around suspiciously, but I was rampant with joy, racing from place to place.
“This is where we live now, Max,” Trent said. “You don’t have to live in an apartment anymore.”
Since he was talking to me, I ran over and put my paws on his legs and he lifted me up in the air. I looked smugly down at Sneakers, who was pretending not to care. Trent was a good man. He loved CJ and me and I loved him. That night, as I dozed off, curled against my girl with Trent sleeping on the other side of the bed, I thought about how devoted Rocky had been to Trent. You can usually tell that a man is good if he has a dog who loves him.
We didn’t ever go back home again. We were in a small house with stairs and, most delightfully, a grassy lawn in the back. Sneakers was unimpressed with the yard, but I loved it out there. It was quieter and there were fewer food scents, but I could hear the musical sound of barking dogs and smell the plants and the rain.
Trent left most days right after breakfast, but CJ stayed home to be with me. There was a little room she liked to sit in with a desk and a couch and soft chairs and a bed for me to lie in. Friends would come over and sit in a different room, one that had a door to the outside, and then CJ and I would go down the hall to bring the friends into CJ’s favorite room to talk. I learned never to bark at any of these people, though I always knew when they were waiting in the other room and would go to the door wagging my tail.
“Good boy, Max,” CJ would say.
Sometimes the people would be sad and I learned that if I jumped up into their laps a little of the sadness would go away as they petted me and cried. I loved that my girl had so many friends who came to visit.
I was happy. A year went by, and then another. CJ was always a little sick, but gradually she seemed to be improving, getting stronger.
We had lived in the new house for a long time when my legs began bothering me in the winter. They were stiff and sore when I woke up in the morning, slowing me down. Our walks outside became as halting and short as they had been when CJ was very sick and pushed a chair in front of her.
Sneakers was slowing down, too. The two of us often napped on the couch at opposite ends, getting up in the middle of the day to switch places.
“You okay, Max? Poor dog. Is the medicine doing you any good?” CJ would ask me. I could hear the concern in her voice and I would wag at my name. My purpose now was to be with my girl when she went to lie on the couch every few days, and to snuggle with her and take as many naps as possible. That’s what she needed.
I did my best to hide my pain from her and Trent. I could feel her sharp concern whenever she could tell that my joints were flaring with a sensation very much like when Beevis tore into my ear and made it bleed.
I no longer tore around in the backyard, barking with sheer joy. I was too tired. I still felt the joy; I just kept quiet about it.
Sometimes I would be lying in the sun when CJ would call me and I would lift my head, but my legs wouldn’t seem to want to move. CJ would come and pick me up and hold me in her lap and I would feel her sadness, so I’d struggle against the weakness that was enfeebling me and manage to lift my head and lick her face.
“Are you having a good day, Max? Are you in much pain?” she asked me after a particularly bad spell, when I was barely able to move for several minutes. “I think maybe it’s time. I’ve been dreading this moment, but tomorrow, I’ll take you to see the Vet. You won’t have to suffer anymore, Max. I promise.”
I sighed. It felt good to be held by CJ. Her hands as they stroked me seemed to smooth away the pain. Trent came out and I felt him right there, too, his hand petting me.
“How’s he doing?” Trent asked.
“Not good at all. I came out and I thought he was gone.”
“Such a good boy,” Trent murmured, stroking me. “You’re the best dog, Max. You took care of CJ your whole life. Now it will be my job. You can let go any time you need to. I won’t let you down. Okay? You did a good job, Max.”
“Oh, Max,” CJ whispered. She sounded so, so sad.
Just then, I felt a familiar sensation rising up within me, a warm and gentle blackness. Something was happening inside me, something swift and surprising. The searing agony in my joints began to withdraw. “Max?” CJ said. Her voice sounded far away.
I was unable to move, or to see them anymore. My last thought, as I felt the rising waters float me away, was that I was glad CJ and Trent still had Sneakers to take care of them.
Sneakers was a good cat.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
TWENTY-NINE
I was vaguely conscious of sleeping for a long time, of awakening from a long, long nap. Eventually I opened my eyes, but everything was milky and dark.
When my vision cleared enough for me to be able to focus on my mother and my siblings, I saw that we were all colored with splotches of brown, white, and black and all had short fur.
I could not hear CJ’s voice, nor could I smell her. There were other people, though, many of them, often wearing long, flowing clothes and also small blankets on their heads.
We were in a tiny room with a few rugs on the floor and light coming in from a window up close to the ceiling. My siblings—two girls and three boys—were involved in continual play, wrestling and, as we got older, merrily chasing each other. I tried to ignore them to concentrate on sitting in front of the door to watch for CJ, but the fun was just too infectious.
For the first time it occurred to me to wonder if any of them had experienced other lives and had people they, too, needed to find, but they sure didn’t act like it. I was the only puppy who seemed to have any concerns at all beyond playing, playing, playing.
The people who came to see us were all women. I soon learned to identify their smells and discern that though their garments were all the same, there were six separate people, all of them older than CJ but younger than Hannah. The women delighted in us, coming in to laugh as the puppies jumped on them and tugged on their long robes. They picked me up and kissed me, but one of them in particular paid more attention to me than the other women did. “This is the one,” she would say. “See how calm he is?”
“There’s no such thing as a calm beagle,” one woman responded to this.
“Oh, Margaret, a puppy isn’t going to work out,” said another. “I know they’re cute, but they’re too full of energy. We should get another mature dog like Oscar was.”
The woman holding me was, I soon realized after hearing her name a number of times, called Margaret.
“You weren’t here when we got Oscar, Jane,” Margaret said. “We had several false starts, and when we finally found Oscar he was with us such a short time before he passed. I think training a puppy from the start will give us many years.”
“But not a beagle,” the first woman said. “A beagle is too hyper. That’s why I didn’t want to foster a pregnant beagle in the first place.”
I wondered which one of the women was named Beagle.
I could tell from the heaviness in my bones and muscles that I was destined to be a bigger dog than I had been as Max. I felt a sense of relief that I wouldn’t need to devote so much energy to proving to dogs and people that inside I was a big dog who could protect my girl. When the woman set me down I went over and jumped on one of my sisters—I was already larger than she was, and I enjoyed being able to dominate her with my size rather than my attitude.
Soon after we had started eating mushy food out of a communal bowl, we were led outside into a grassy area that was fenced in. It was spring and the air was warm and fragrant with flowers and new grass. I could smell that we were in a humid climate with rains frequent enough to support many species of trees and bushes. My siblings thought the yard was pretty much the most wonderful place imaginable and reacted every morning to being let out into it by racing around in circles. I thought it was silly but generally joined in the fray because it was fun.
I wondered when CJ would come get me. That had to be why I was a puppy again. Our fates were inextricably linked, so if I was reborn it must be that my girl still needed me.
One day a family entered the yard—two little girls and a man and a woman—led by one of the six women who took care of us. I knew what their presence meant. The puppies all ran over to play with them, but I hung back, though when one of the little girls picked me up I couldn’t resist kissing her giggling face.
“This one, Daddy. This is the one I want for my birthday,” the little girl said. She carried me over to her father.
“Actually, one of the nuns has already spoken for that one,” the woman said. “He’s going to have a job. We hope, anyway.”
The little girl dropped me to the ground. I gazed up at her, wagging. She was older than when CJ was called Clarity but younger than when Rocky and I were taken home by Trent and CJ—I had never known my girl at this particular age. When the little girl scooped up one of my brothers, I was oddly disappointed. I would have enjoyed playing with her some more.
In rapid succession, my siblings went home with other people, until soon I was the only dog left to be with my mother, who was named Sadie. The two of us, my mother and I, were out in the yard taking a nap when several of the women came out to see us. I picked up a small rubber bone and carried it over to the women, hoping one of them would want it and would chase me.
“You’ve been such a good dog, Sadie, such a good mother,” Margaret said.
I tossed the rubber bone and pounced on it so they would call me a good dog, too.
“You’re going to love your new home,” another woman said.
A third woman picked me up and held me nose-to-nose with my mother. We sniffed each other, a bit disconcerted by the awkward and unnatural situation.
“Say bye-bye to your puppy, Sadie!”
The woman snapped a leash onto Sadie’s collar and led her away. Margaret held me so I couldn’t follow my mother—clearly, something was going on.
“I’m going to call you Toby, okay? Toby, you’re a good dog, Toby. Toby.” Margaret crooned to me. “Your name is Toby.”
It occurred to me that my name must be Toby. I was stunned—Toby had been my very first name, long, long ago. Margaret obviously knew that.
Humans know everything, not just how to take car rides or where to find bacon but also when dogs are good or bad and where dogs should sleep and what toys they should play with. Still, I was astounded to hear Margaret call me Toby. I’d always marked every new life with a new name.
What did it mean that I was Toby again? Did it mean it was all starting over, that I would next be named Bailey?
Sadie did not come back, and gradually I came to understand that this place full of women draped in blankets was my new home—a home like none I’d ever been in. For the most part, I lived in the fenced-in area, though at night I was brought in and put in the room where I had been born. I wasn’t lonely, though—throughout the day women would come out to see me, often tossing a rubber ball or pulling on a toy with me. I soon learned to recognize most of them by smell, even though their hands all were cloaked in similar scents.
What was bewildering was that unlike any other life, there was no single person for me to take care of. More women than I could ever count would play with me and talk to me and feed me. It was as if I was the dog for everyone there.
Margaret taught me a new command: “Be Still.” At first she would hold me down and say, “Be Still,” and I thought she wanted to wrestle, but she kept saying, “No, no, Be Still.” I had no idea what she was saying, but I knew that “no” meant I was doing something wrong. I tried licking her and squirming and every other trick I could think of, but none of them pleased her. Finally I gave up in frustration. “Good dog!” she said, giving me a treat even though I hadn’t done anything.
This went on for several days until finally it dawned on me that “Be Still” meant “just lie there.” Once I made that connection, I could lie down and not move for as long as she wanted, though I could scarcely contain my impatience—why did we have to wait so long for me to get a treat?
Then Margaret took me places I’d never been before inside the building. I saw women sitting and women standing and women eating—this last group seemed the most interesting to me, but we spent no time with them before moving on. Margaret wanted me to “Be Still” while sitting in people’s laps. I didn’t care much for the whole operation, but I cooperated.
“See how good he is? Good dog, Toby. Good dog.”
One woman went to a couch to lie down and I was placed on a blanket next to her and given the command. The woman was giggling and I was dying to kiss her face, but I did as I was told and got a treat out of it. I was still lying there motionless, holding out for another morsel, when several women gathered around me.
“All right, Margaret, I’m convinced. You can take him to work with you and see how he does,” said one of the women.
Margaret reached down and picked me up. “He’ll be fine, Sister.”
“No, he won’t. He’ll upset everyone and chew on everything,” another woman warned.
The next morning Margaret put a collar on me and led me on a leash out to her car. “You’re so good, Toby,” she said to me.
We took a car ride and I was a front-seat dog! I wasn’t tall enough to stick my nose out the window yet, though.
Margaret took me to a place very much like where I’d gone with CJ to sit with her on the couch. I could smell many people and could tell some of them were sick. It was quiet, and the floor was soft.
Margaret carried me around and people petted me and hugged me, or, in the case of a few of them, they lay unmoving in their beds and gazed at me. “Be Still,” Margaret commanded. I concentrated on not moving, because I’d learned this was what was required when people were ill. I did not signal when I caught the strong, familiar scent coming off of a couple of them—the smell that had been on Trent’s breath for so long. I’d learned that the command to signal under such circumstances was “Pray,” and no one instructed me to do that.
Margaret soon put me down on the ground outside in a yard that was walled in on all sides. I had a lot of energy pent up inside me and ran around for a while, and then Margaret gave me a rope with a rubber ball on the end of it and I shook it and dragged it around, wishing I had another dog with me to join in the fun. I could see, on the other side of the windows, people watching me, so I made sure I put on a show with that rope.
Then Margaret took me back inside the building and introduced me to a cage. “Okay, Toby, and this is your home.” A new pillow was on the floor of the cage, and when Margaret squatted and patted it I dutifully went over and sat on it.
“This is your bed, Toby. Okay?” Margaret said.
I didn’t know if I was supposed to stay on the pillow, but I was tired and took a nap. I woke up when I heard Margaret speaking. “Hi, would you page Sister Cecilia for me, please?… Thanks.”
I gazed drowsily at her. She smiled at me when I yawned, a phone to her face.
“Cecilia?… It’s Margaret. I’m still at the hospice with Toby.… No, even better than that. They love him. This afternoon some of the guests even sat and watched him play out in the courtyard. No barks, not even once.… I really do, yes.… Thank you, Cecilia.… No, of course, but I don’t think that’s going to happen. He’s a very special dog.”
I heard the word “dog” and wagged my tail a couple of times before easing back into sleep.
Over the next several days I adjusted to my new life. Margaret came and went, but not every day, and I soon learned the names of Fran and Patsy and Mona—three other women who liked to take me around for visits with people who were lying in beds. Patsy smelled strongly of cinnamon and faintly of dog, and none of them wore the flowing clothing that Margaret wore. They’d tell me to Be Still, so I’d lie there with the person. It reminded me a little of when CJ’s friends would come to visit and cry and I would lie on the couch with them. Sometimes the people wanted to play with me and sometimes they petted me and often they just wanted to nap, but nearly always I could feel their joy coming through.
“You’re an old soul, Toby,” Fran said to me. “An old soul in a young dog’s body.”
I wagged, hearing the praising tones in her words. People are like that; they can talk and talk without ever saying “good dog,” but that’s what they mean.
Other than those visits, I had the run of the place. Everyone called out to me, some of them sitting in chairs that moved when Fran or one of the others stood behind them and pushed. The people loved me and hugged me and snuck me treats.
One place I loved was the kitchen, where a man named Eddie was always cooking. He would tell me to sit and then give me a wonderful treat, even though Sit was the easiest of tricks for a dog.
“You and I are the only men in this place,” Eddie would say to me. “We got to stick together, right, Toby?”
Always before I had been with just one person and had devoted my life to loving that person. At first that person was Ethan—so sure was I that loving him was the reason I was a dog that when I started taking care of baby Clarity it was only because I knew Ethan would want me to. Gradually, though, I came to love CJ just as much, and began to understand that it wasn’t disloyal to Ethan to do so. Dogs can love more than one person.
At this place, though, I had no particular person at all—my purpose seemed to be to love each one of them. It made them happy.
I was a dog who loved many people—it’s what made me a good dog.
My name might be Toby, but I had come a long, long way since the first time that was what people called me. I knew many more things now, things I had learned along my life’s journey. I understood, for example, why I was being told to “Be Still.” Many of the people lying in bed had pains in them that I could sense, and if I climbed on them to play I might hurt them. I only had to step on one man’s stomach one time to learn my lesson—his sharp cry rang in my ears for days, making me feel awful. I was not Duke, a rambunctious dog who couldn’t control himself. I was Toby. I could Be Still.
When I was wandering around on my own and not being taken places by Mona, Fran, or Patsy, I would go see the man I had stepped on. His name was Bob, and I wanted him to know I was sorry. As was the case in most rooms, he had a chair pulled up next to his bed, and by leaping first onto this I was able to land on his blankets without hurting him. Bob was asleep every time I went to visit him.
One afternoon Bob was alone in his bed and I could feel him easing away from this life. The warm waters were rising up around Bob, washing away his pains. I lay quietly next to him, being with him as best I could. It seemed to me that if my purpose was to provide comfort to people who were ailing, it was even more important that I be with them when they were breathing their final breaths.
Fran found me lying there. She checked on Bob and covered his head with his blanket. “Good dog, Toby,” she whispered.
From that point forward, whenever I knew someone’s time was close I would go into their room and lie on their bed with them to provide comfort and company as they left this life. Sometimes their families were gathered around and sometimes they were alone, though usually one of the many people who spent their days in the building helping the sick was sitting there quietly.
Occasionally family members would feel fear and anger when they saw me.
“I don’t want the death dog near my mother!” a man shouted once. I heard the word “dog” and felt the sharp lash of his fury and left the room, not sure what I had done wrong.
Most of the time, though, my presence was welcomed by everyone. Having no single person as my master meant that I was given a lot of cuddles. Sometimes people would be grieving as they hugged me and I could feel their sadness lose its grip a little while I was in their arms.
What I missed was other dogs. I loved all the attention from the people, but I missed the sensation of another dog’s throat in my mouth. I found myself dreaming about Rocky and Duke and all the dogs in the dog park, which was why I involuntarily barked in surprise when Fran led me out into the yard and there was another dog there!
He was a compact, stocky, strong little guy named Chaucer. He carried the scent of Patsy’s cinnamon on his fur. We immediately began wrestling, as if we’d known each other for years.
“This is what Toby needed,” Fran said to Patsy with a laugh. “Eddie says he’s seemed almost depressed.”
“It’s a treat for Chaucer, too,” Patsy said.
Chaucer and I both looked up. Treat?
After that day, Chaucer came to visit a lot, and though I had Be Still to do, I always found time to wrestle with him.
Other dogs sometimes came with families to be in the rooms with the beds, but they were always anxious and rarely wanted to play, even if they were let out in the yard.
A few years went by like this. I was a good dog who had done many things and could be comfortable in my new role as the dog who belonged to no one and yet to everyone.
When it was Happy Thanksgiving there were always lots of people and lots of smells and lots of treats for a deserving dog. When it was Merry Christmas time the women who wore blankets on their heads came to play with me and give me treats and to sit around the big indoor tree. There were cat toys on the tree, as always, but no cats to play with them.
I felt content. I had a purpose—not as specific as taking care of CJ, but I still felt important.
And then one afternoon I jerked out of my nap, my head cocked. “I need my shoes!” a woman called from one of the rooms.
I instantly recognized her voice.
Gloria.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
THIRTY
I scampered down the corridor, nearly knocking over Fran as I barreled into the room. Gloria was in the bed, her strong perfumes filling the air, but I ignored her and focused on the thin woman standing next to her. It was my CJ, watching me in amusement.
I completely broke protocol, abandoning the reserved composure I always adopted in people’s rooms, and instead leaped up on my girl, my paws reaching for her.
“Wow!” she said.
I sobbed, my tail low and beating the floor, spinning in circles and jumping. She reached out and put her hands around my face and I closed my eyes and groaned with the pleasure of feeling her touching me. CJ had come for me at last. Elation went through me in a shiver. I was back with my girl!
“Toby! Get down,” Fran said.
“It’s okay.” CJ dropped to her knees, her joints firing off snapping sounds as she bent them. “What a good doggy.”
Her hair was short now and did not drape me as it once did. I licked her face. She smelled of sweet things, and of Gloria. CJ was, I realized, frail and weak, her hands trembling a little as they touched me. This meant I needed to contain myself, which seemed scarcely possible. I wanted to bark and run around the room and knock things over.
“Toby is our therapy dog,” Fran explained. “He lives here. He comforts our guests—they really love having him around.”
“Well, not Gloria,” CJ said with a laugh. She gazed fondly into my eyes. “Toby, you’re a therapeagle!”
I wagged. Her voice had a slight quaver to it and sounded strained, but I loved hearing it all the same.
“Clarity stole my money,” Gloria declared. “I want to go home. Call Jeffrey.” CJ sighed but kept stroking my head. Gloria, I realized, was still as unhappy as ever. She was also really old; I could tell by her smells. I had been around a lot of really old people lately.
Patsy came in, smelling like cinnamon and Chaucer as usual. “Good morning, Gloria, how are you?” Patsy asked.
“Nothing,” Gloria said. She slumped in her bed. “Nothing.”
Patsy stayed with Gloria while CJ and Fran went into a little room with a small table. “Why, Toby, are you coming, too?” Fran laughed when I darted in the door before it closed.
“Such a nice dog,” CJ said. I wagged.
“He certainly seems to have taken a shine to you.”
CJ sat in a chair, and I picked up a quick flash of pain as she did so. Concerned, I pressed my head to her knees. Her hand came down and absently petted me, a light tremor in the fingers. I closed my eyes. I had missed her so, so much, but now that she was here it was as if she had never left.
“Gloria has good days and bad days. This is a pretty good day. Most of the time she’s not really lucid,” CJ said.
I wagged. Even hearing Gloria’s name spoken by CJ gave me pleasure.
“Alzheimer’s can be so cruel, its progression so inconsistent,” Fran replied.
“That thing about the money drives me crazy. She tells everyone I stole her fortune and her house. The truth is I’ve been supporting her the past fifteen years—and of course whatever I sent her, it was never enough.”
“In my experience there nearly always will be unresolved issues in situations like this.”
“I know. And I should be better able to cope with it all. I’m also a psychologist.”
“Yes, I saw that from your file. Do you want to talk about how that affects your relationship with your mother?”
CJ took a deep, reflective breath. “I guess. The light went on for me in grad school—Gloria’s a narcissist, so she never really questions her own behavior or thinks she’s ever done anything to apologize for. So no, there will never be any closure with her—there wasn’t a chance at that even when she was fully functional. But a lot of children have narcissistic injuries, so having her for a parent has really helped me with my work.”
“Which is in high schools?” Fran asked.
“Sometimes. My specialty is working with eating disorders, which are nearly always most acute in adolescent girls. I’m semi-retired, though.”
I realized at that moment that there was a ball under one of Fran’s cabinets. I went over and stuck my nose under there, inhaling deeply. It had Chaucer’s scent painted on it. What was Chaucer doing with a ball in here?
“I also read that you’ve been on dialysis for more than twenty-two years? I hope you don’t mind my asking, but it would seem you’d be a good candidate for a transplant. Was that never a consideration?”
“I guess I don’t mind answering that,” CJ said, “though I’m not sure what these questions have to do with Gloria.”
I dug at the ball with my paws, touching it but otherwise failing to dislodge it.
“Hospice isn’t just about the guest. It’s about the needs of the whole family. The better we know you, the better we can serve you,” Fran said.
“All right, sure. I did have a transplant, actually—the twenty-two years is cumulative. I received a kidney from a cadaver donor when I was in my thirties. It gave me more than two decades before it began to fail. They call it chronic rejection, and there’s really nothing that can be done about it. I restarted dialysis seventeen years ago.”
“What about another transplant?”
CJ sighed. “In the end, there are just so few organs available. I couldn’t see taking one when there were others more deserving who were waiting in line.”
“More deserving?”
“I destroyed my kidneys in a suicide attempt when I was twenty-five years old. There are children who are born with conditions that, through no fault of their own, require transplant. I’d already taken one. I wasn’t going to use up another.”
“I see.”
CJ laughed. “The way you just said that brought back about fifty hours of psychoanalysis. Believe me, I’ve thought this all out.”
I leaned into CJ’s leg, hoping she’d get the ball for me.
“Thank you for even discussing it, then,” Fran said. “It just helps to know.”
“Oh, my mother would have mentioned it to you. She delights in telling everybody I drank anti-freeze. I’ve had her in assisted care for the past three years—she had all the people there convinced I was the spawn of the devil.…”
I yawned in agitation. Did no one else care about the ball?
“What is it? Why did you just pause?” Fran asked after a moment.
“I was just thinking that maybe she won’t tell you. She’s been more and more unresponsive, and, of course, she’s pretty much stopped eating. I guess part of me is having trouble adjusting to the idea that this is truly the end.”
“It’s hard,” Fran said, “to lose someone who has been so important in your life.”
“I didn’t think it would be,” CJ said very quietly.
“You’ve experienced loss before.”
“Oh, yes.”
I sat up, watching my girl, the ball forgotten. She reached for a fluffy piece of paper and pressed it to her eyes. “My husband, Trent, died last fall.”
They sat quietly. My girl reached down to me and I licked her hand. “That’s how I came to be exposed to hospice. Trent passed peacefully, surrounded by people who cared about him.”
There was another long, sad pause. I liked hearing Trent’s name, but there was no scent of him clinging to CJ. It was similar to when, as Max, I realized Rocky’s smells were no longer all over Trent. I knew what it meant when a smell faded away, whether it was man or dog.
It was good to be with CJ, but I was sad to think I would never see Trent again.
“Does Gloria’s disease stir up feelings about your husband?” Fran asked gently.
“Not really. This is so different. Besides, I always have feelings about Trent. He was the friend I could always turn to who never asked for anything for himself. I think for a long time I modeled my understanding of love based on my relationship with my mother. When I finally shook that off, Trent was waiting for me, and we had the most wonderful life together. I couldn’t have children, so it was just the two of us, but he made every day seem special. He liked to surprise me with trips—and planning a getaway when your wife needs dialysis takes some doing. But that was Trent, the most capable man I’ve ever met. He could do whatever he decided to do. Through everything that happened—and it was no picnic, with my transplant and the immunosuppressants and the trips to the emergency room—he was always my rock. Even now, I can’t really believe he’s gone.”
“He sounds very special,” Fran said. “I would have liked to have known him.”
From that day forward, my girl would come to visit Gloria and I would greet her at the door and stay by her side until she left. Sometimes CJ pulled treats out of her pocket and fed them to me without me having to do any tricks. “Such a good dog,” she would whisper.
Eddie told me I was a good dog, too, and he reinforced the sentiment with meat treats!
“‘Dog’ is ‘God’ spelled backward; you know that. That’s why you’re here, to help the nuns do God’s work. So I figure a little stew meat between us boys is the least I can give you,” Eddie said. I never knew what he was saying, but his treats were the best I’d ever had!
Just as I had once watched the baby Clarity for Ethan, I now reasoned that it was my job to take care of Gloria for CJ. I spent a lot of time in Gloria’s room even when CJ wasn’t there with her. I didn’t try to jump on Gloria’s bed, though, because the one time I tried it her eyes were filled with terror and she screamed at me.
Some people just don’t appreciate having a dog around. It’s sad to think there are people like that. I knew Gloria was that way—maybe that’s why she could never be truly happy.
Fran and CJ became friends and often ate lunch together out in the courtyard. I would lie at their feet and watch for falling crumbs.
Falling crumbs were my specialty.
“I’ve got a question for you,” CJ told Fran at one of these lunches, “but I want you to think about it before answering.”
“That’s exactly what my husband said to me when he proposed,” Fran replied. They both laughed.
I wagged at CJ’s laughter. She seemed to have so many sharp pains digging at her from inside; I could sense them from the way she’d start and gasp when she moved, or when she exhaled in a long, loud sigh as she carefully sat down. Any time she laughed, though, the pain seemed to retreat.
“Well, it’s not that kind of proposal,” CJ said. “What I’m thinking is that I’d like to work here at the hospice. In counseling, I mean. I see how hard it is for you and Patsy and Mona to keep up—and I’d volunteer. I really don’t need money.”
“What about your current practice?”
“I’ve been winding that down for a long time—I only work as a consultant now as it is. To tell you the truth, I’m finding it harder and harder to relate to teenagers—or maybe it’s the other way around. I tell them I identify with what they are going through and I see the skepticism in their eyes—to them, there’s little difference between being in your seventies and being a hundred years old.”
“We normally discourage any volunteer relationships with the hospice by family members until a year after the guest has passed.”
“I know; you said that. That’s why I want you to think about it—I believe an exception could be made for me. I know very, very well what it’s like to lie in bed and feel horrible—I do it three times a week. And certainly what I’m going through with Gloria gives me tremendous insight into how families feel.”
“How is your mother?”
“She’s … It won’t be much longer.”
“You’ve been a good daughter, CJ.”
“Yeah, well, maybe under the circumstances. Not sure Gloria will agree, or would ever have agreed. So will you think about it?”
“Of course. I’ll talk to the director and to the nuns about it, too. It’s really up to them, you know. The rest of us are just employees.”
About a week after that, I was sitting at CJ’s feet in Gloria’s room when I felt a change come over Gloria. I could hear that her breathing was getting lighter and lighter, and then it would stop, and then she’d take a couple of deep breaths. With each cycle, though, the breathing was weaker, the exhalations more gentle.
She was passing.
I jumped up on the chair next to her and looked at her face. Her eyes were closed, her mouth open, her hands clutched across her chest. I glanced back at CJ, who was asleep. I knew she would want to be awake, so I barked, a single, sharp yip that sounded very loud in the silent room.
My girl awoke with a start. “What is it, Toby?” She stood and came over to stand beside me. I lifted my nose and licked her fingers. “Oh,” she said. After a moment, she reached down and clutched Gloria’s hand in hers. I saw tears falling from her eyes and could feel the sad pain in her. We stood like that for several minutes.
“Good-bye, Mom,” CJ finally said. “I love you.”
When Gloria took her last breath and faded away, CJ went back to her chair and sat down. I jumped into her lap and curled up and she held me, rocking softly. I did what I could for her, being with her as she grieved.
At the end of that day, I walked with CJ and Fran to the front doors.
“I’ll see you at the service,” Fran said. They hugged. “Are you sure you’re okay to go home alone?”
“I’m okay. To tell you the truth, it’s actually a relief to have it over with.”
“I know.”
CJ looked down at me and I wagged. She knelt, wincing a little as she did so, then gathered me to her.
“You’re such an amazing dog, Toby. What you do for everyone, comforting them and guiding them at the end—you’re just a miracle, an angel dog.”
I wagged—“angel dog” was something like “doodle dog,” another name that meant I was good and I was loved.
“Thank you so, so much, Toby. You be a good dog. I love you.”
CJ stood, smiled at Fran, and walked out into the night.
CJ didn’t come back the next day, nor the next. More days went by, until I no longer rushed over to the sliding doors when they gasped open—my girl, it seemed, didn’t need me right now.
That was just how things were. I would rather have gone with CJ wherever she was, but my job now was to take care of and love everyone in my building and to be with people as they left this life. And also to Sit for Eddie so that he would feed me chicken.
I knew that if CJ needed me, she could find me, just as she always had done before.
In the meantime, all I could do was wait.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
THIRTY-ONE
And then one day, when the brown leaves outside scuttled before the wind so loudly I could hear them from everywhere in the building, my girl walked in the door. I was wary as she came up the sidewalk because I wasn’t sure it was her—there was an odd hitch to her walk, a limp, and the bulky coat across her shoulders hid her frail thinness. But when the door whooshed open and the blustery wind blew her wonderful scent into my face I scampered across the floor and right up to her. I was careful not to jump up, fearing I might knock her over, but my tail wagged with joy and I closed my eyes when her hand came down to stroke me.
“Hello, Toby, did you miss me?”
Fran walked up and embraced her and CJ put some things on a desk in one of the rooms, and from that day forward we lived life backward from the way we had always lived it before. Now CJ left at night and didn’t return until morning, instead of leaving in the morning and not coming back until night. She never took me to the room with the couches, but I could smell that she was still going there on a regular basis.
CJ moved through the building, visiting people in the rooms and talking to them and sometimes hugging them. I was always at her heels, but when she left at night there was often someone who needed me on their bed, so I would lie there with them, and sometimes their family members would hold me.
People were often in pain when they talked to CJ, whether they were lying in bed or standing next to it, but usually after a quiet conversation I could feel their pain lessen a little. Often someone in the family would reach for me, and it was my job to let them hug me for as long and as hard as they needed to, even if it made me uncomfortable.
“Good dog,” CJ would say. “Good dog, Toby.”
Often Fran or Patsy would be in the room with CJ, and they said the same thing. “Good dog, Toby.”
I was glad to be a good dog.
CJ was in pain, too—I could sense it, could see how it slowed her down. Hugging me made her feel a little better, too.
One family was very sad because a woman who was lying in bed was suffering and had a strong metallic tang to her breath. There was a man her age and three children who were the age CJ had been when I was Molly. When one of the children picked me up and put me in bed with the woman I did Be Still.
“Dawn,” CJ said to the oldest of these children, a girl taller than CJ and with long, light hair that smelled of flowery soap and whose hands carried with them the strong scent of apples. “Would you join me for a cup of coffee?”
I felt some alarm go through Dawn. She looked at her mother, who was sleeping, unaware of my presence next to her, then up at the man, her father, who nodded. “Go ahead, honey.”
I could feel something like guilt stirring in Dawn as she reluctantly left her mother’s side. I decided that whatever was happening, CJ needed me more to be with her and Dawn than with the woman in the bed. Moving as carefully as possible, I eased onto the floor and silently padded down the hall after my girl.
“Hey, you want something to eat? A banana, maybe?” CJ asked.
“Sure,” the girl said. I soon smelled the pungent, sweet smell of a new fruit mingling with the apples on the girl’s hands as they made chewing noises. I lay down at their feet under the table.
“It must be hard to be the oldest. Your sisters look up to you; I can tell,” CJ said.
“Yeah.”
“Do you want to talk about it?”
“Not really.”
“How’s your dad doing?”
“He’s … I don’t know. He keeps saying we have to fight. But Mom…”
“She’s not fighting anymore,” CJ said softly after a moment.
“Yeah.”
“Must be very stressful.”
“Uh-huh.”
They sat for a little while.
“What are your comfort foods?” CJ asked.
“Peanut butter,” Dawn replied with a wry laugh. “Oh, and you know those lasagnas you can heat up?”
“Eating helps with the stress,” CJ said.
Dawn was quiet.
“And then when you’ve eaten too much?” CJ asked quietly.
A jolt of alarm went through Dawn. She sat up in her chair. “What do you mean?”
“When I was in high school I had this problem. I could always make myself feel better by eating,” CJ said. “But with every bite I’d be hating myself because I already felt fat and I knew I was just putting on pounds—I could practically feel my butt getting bigger. So then I got rid of what I ate.”
When Dawn spoke I could hear the tremor her heartbeat put in her voice. “How?”
“You know how, Dawn,” CJ replied.
Dawn inhaled sharply.
“My eyes had little bits of blood in them all the time. Just like yours,” CJ said. “Sometimes my cheeks were as swollen as yours, too.”
“I have to go.”
“Sit with me for just a bit longer, would you?” CJ asked.
Dawn shuffled her feet. I could tell that she was afraid.
“These aren’t my own teeth, you know,” CJ continued. “I lost them when I was young, from all the acidity—people my age often have implants, but I had them in college.”
“Are you going to tell my dad?” Dawn asked.
“Does your mom know?” CJ replied.
“She … I think she does, but she never said anything to me. And now…”
“I know. Dawn, there’s a program.…”
“No!” Dawn said sharply. She pushed her chair back from the table.
“I know how you feel. How awful it is to have this secret, how it can make you hate yourself.”
“I want to get back to my mother’s room.”
They both stood. I eased to my feet, yawning anxiously. CJ was not as tense as Dawn, but strong feelings were running through both of them.
“I’m on your side, Dawn,” CJ said. “In the coming days and weeks, any time you feel that urge, that uncontrollable need, I want you to call me. Will you do that?”
“Will you promise not to tell my dad?”
“Only if I know for sure you’re not going to hurt yourself, honey.”
“Then you’re not on my side,” Dawn blurted. She turned and walked away much more rapidly than my girl could move.
My girl sighed sadly, and I nudged her with my hand. “Good dog, Toby,” she said, but she wasn’t really paying attention to me.
I was lying next to Dawn’s mother when she died, and they were all very sad and the children clutched me and I did Be Still for them. Fran and Patsy were there, but CJ was not. Often, even if CJ was in the building, I would be with Fran or Patsy because they would need me more.
It was a good way to pass the years. There was no dog door, but whenever I walked up to the door to the small yard it would swish open for me, and the smells out there told me when it was going to snow or rain and when it was summer and when it was fall. Chaucer still came to play on a regular basis, though once he learned Eddie could be counted on for treats we spent almost as much time in the kitchen as we did out in the yard.
“Now Chaucer, you’re like me, you work hard, but it’s not fancy work. Nobody looks at you and sees anything but a hardworking dog,” Eddie said one time. Chaucer whined a little and shuffled his feet, impatient for the treat. “But Toby here, he’s a doctor. Neither one of us will ever be smart as Toby.”
I wagged at my name. Chaucer licked his lips.
“You both get bacon today, though.”
I could hardly contain myself. Bacon!
Sometimes CJ would be gone for a week or two at a time, but she always came back. One day at lunch, shortly after one of her long absences, I could feel that CJ was a little afraid as she talked to Fran, so I sat up alertly.
“We have a new guest coming in. Probably as early as Monday,” CJ said.
“Oh?” Fran said.
“Me. I’m the guest.”
“What?”
“It’s almost a blessing, Fran. There are so many things going wrong with me now the doctors almost don’t know where to start. And to tell you the truth, I’m tired of it. I’m tired of all the pain and the sleeplessness and the sickness. I’m tired of the forty pills a day. When Gloria died I realized that it meant my obligations were over. I don’t owe anybody anything.”
“CJ…”
CJ shifted in her seat, leaning forward. “This is a decision I reached a long, long time ago, Fran. You won’t be able to talk me out of it. At my family reunion I told everyone and said my good-byes. My affairs are in order.” CJ gave a little laugh. “This way, I will always and forever be younger than Gloria. That will drive her crazy.”
“I think we should talk about this. Maybe you could see someone.…”
“I’ve worked it through with my therapist. Believe me, we’ve spoken about almost nothing else for the past year and a half.”
“I still think—”
“I know what you think, but you’re wrong. This isn’t suicide; it’s acceptance. My doctors say it’s only a matter of time before something else happens inside me. They agree with my decision. I’m terrified another stroke might leave me debilitated—after watching Gloria I can’t face the idea of something like that happening to my brain. This way, I control what happens, and where and when. Isn’t that what hospice is all about? Ensuring that quality of life extends into the dying process?”
“You can’t know, though, that you’ll have another stroke.”
“Fran. I’ve stopped dialysis.”
“Oh God.”
“No, you have no idea. The freedom. I don’t have to go back there ever again. I have had my ups and downs, but it has been a good, long life and I don’t regret my decision. Please, try to understand. It feels to me like I’ve been kept artificially alive, and maybe for a good reason—I’ve helped a lot of people. But the prognosis is for it all to end badly. I want my leaving to be at a time of my choosing and not artificially extended, with no regard for my quality of life. I don’t want to end up a vegetable.”
The fear was gone from CJ now. I nuzzled her hand and she stroked me with tenderness.
A few days later, CJ came to the building to live. Right away, though, I could tell that she was feeling more ill than ever before. I jumped up on her bed and remained there with her, sometimes climbing up to be by her head, sometimes curling up in a ball by her feet.
“Good dog, Toby,” she always said. Her voice, though, was weaker and weaker. “You’re not just a therapeagle; you’re an angel dog, just like Max, just like Molly.”
I wagged, hearing those names spoken so tenderly. My girl knew who I was, that I had always been with her, taking care of her and guarding against dangers.
Many people came to visit CJ in her room, and CJ was always happy to see them. Some of them I knew, such as Gracie, who had been a little girl when I was Max but was now a grown woman with children of her own. CJ kissed all the children and laughed and the pain inside her receded until it was all but hidden. Another was a woman I recognized from not long ago. Her name was Dawn, the girl with the apple-scented hands, and she sat next to CJ and talked for hours. I left for a while to check to see if Fran or Patsy needed me, but when I came back Dawn was still there.
“People are always asking me what specialty I want, and I just keep telling them that I’m just focused on getting into med school. How do I know what area will appeal to me? I haven’t even been accepted yet.”
“You will,” CJ said. “I know you will.”
“You’ve always believed in me, CJ. You saved my life.”
“No, you saved your own life. You know what they say in the program—no one else can do it for you.”
“Yeah, I know,” Dawn said.
CJ coughed weakly and I jumped up to be next to her. Her hand came down and stroked my back.
“I guess I’d better get going,” Dawn finally said.
“I so appreciate you making the trip, Dawn.”
They hugged each other and I felt the love flow between them.
“Have a safe flight,” CJ said. “And remember, you can always call me.”
Dawn nodded, wiping her eyes. She smiled and waved as she left the room, and I snuggled next to my girl, feeling her drop into a deep nap.
One afternoon CJ was feeding me pieces of a ham and cheese sandwich that Eddie had brought her when she stopped and looked at me. I kept my eye on the sandwich.
“Toby,” she said, “listen to me. I know that you’re really bonded to me, but I’m going to be leaving you. I could stay, but I’ve had all the good things this life can offer me and I’m weary of all the bad—especially of what is to come if I try to prolong it. I just want to be with my husband. The only regret I have is leaving my friends, and you’re one of those friends, Toby. But I know you are loved and taken care of, and I know that to be loved and to have a job is more important than anything to a dog. You remind me in so many ways of my dog Molly, her gentleness, but also of Max, with his self-assurance. Will you tell my angel dogs I’m coming to be with them soon? And will you be with me in my final moments? I don’t want to be afraid—and if you’re there, I know I’ll be brave. You’re my forever friend, Toby.”
The love ran strong between us as my girl pulled me close to her.
CJ left one cool, clear spring afternoon. Fran had been sitting with her all day, and I had lain with my head on her chest, her hand loosely stroking my fur. When the hand stopped moving, I looked at Fran, who moved her chair closer and took the now slack hand in hers. Bit by bit CJ let go of life, until, with one final breath, my girl was gone.
“Good dog, Toby,” Fran told me. She hugged me and her tears fell on my fur.
I thought about baby Clarity falling off the dock at the Farm. How her eyes had been on me when Gloria picked her up. “Bubby,” she’d said. I remembered her coming into the yard with Trent to take me home. I thought about her hugs and kisses, how when I was Max she would hold me to her chest to keep me warm.
I would have to live without her hugs now.
My CJ. She taught me that it was a good thing to love more than just my boy, Ethan, opening my eyes to the fact that I’d actually loved many people in my lives, that loving humans was my ultimate purpose. Her presence in my lives formed the center point of my existence and enabled me to help the people who lay in beds in their rooms to fight off their fears and find ultimate peace and acceptance.
I served those people for many years after CJ left, but never did I let a day go by without remembering her—remembering baby Clarity as she slipped into the horse’s kennel, remembering CJ as she held me in the car by the ocean, remembering living with Trent when I was Max.
When a sharp pain made me cry one morning as I did my business, Patsy and Fran and Eddie took me to the Vet, and I knew why they were all going on the car ride. I was nearly blind at that point, but I could still smell the cinnamon and Chaucer on Patsy’s hands as she picked me up and carried me, panting, into the Vet’s office and laid me on the cool table. Eddie’s strong, chicken-scented hands soothed me, and they all whispered in my ear as the quick stab brought with it almost instant relief.
“We love you,” they said.
This time as the waves swept over me, they were not dark but had a frothy luminance dancing on millions of bubbles. I raised my head up and floated toward this brightness, bursting through the water’s surface and into the glorious light of sunrise. Gold, the light was gold as it played across the gentle waves, and my vision was suddenly as clear and sharp as a puppy’s. A bouquet of wonderful scents met my nose, and my heart leaped when I realized who I was smelling.
“Molly!” I heard someone call.
I whipped my head around and there they were, the people I’d been smelling. Everyone I’d ever loved in my life, standing at the edge of the water, smiling and clapping. I saw Ethan and Hannah and Trent and CJ standing in front, along with Andi and Maya and Jakob and all the others.
“Bailey!” Ethan yelled, waving.
My name was Toby, and Buddy, and Molly and Max and Bailey and Ellie. I was a good dog, and this was my reward. Now I would get to be with the people I loved.
I turned, whimpering with joy, and swam toward those golden shores.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This is the part of the book where I have to admit that a lot of people helped contribute to the whole process, and the easiest thing would be to begin at, well, the beginning. In July 2010, yet another book with a dog on the cover joined the burgeoning crowd of books with dogs on their covers—A Dog’s Purpose, it was called. The first week it was eligible, this novel (my first) leapt onto the bestseller lists, where it remained for nineteen weeks. Now, you can’t bribe your way onto those lists, though I’m sure someone has tried. People have to buy the book, and enough people gave A Dog’s Purpose a chance that it added up to a wonderful run at the bookstore.
And that, you see, led to this, the sequel. No one publishes the sequel to a book that didn’t sell, so the best place to start thanking people is with everyone who bought my novel in the first place. Because of you, A Dog’s Journey found a home with Tom Doherty Associates, an imprint of Macmillan, the same people who did such a great job supporting A Dog’s Purpose.
At Tom Doherty, I want to thank Kristin Sevick, my editor, who gave me such great advice and wonderful ideas while the novel was still in manuscript that I found my way to exactly the book I wanted to write. I want to thank Linda Quinton, who has been a tireless advocate for my novels and who has shown innovation, wisdom, and (I need to say it) tolerance in dealing with my books and my aspirations. Thanks to Karen Lovell, for her publicity magic and marketing support. Thanks to Kathleen Doherty, for making my books important to school kids, and to Tom Doherty, for being the man behind the curtain.
I wouldn’t even have a published novel if it weren’t for Scott Miller, my agent at Trident Media. Scott believed in me when we couldn’t sell anything to anybody, and I won’t forget that, Scott.
Kayla Ibarra has been here at the worldwide headquarters of Cameron Productions, Inc., and without her we wouldn’t have been able to respond to reader requests or run the amazing Dog of the Week program at www.adogspurpose.com. That website was designed and implemented by the amazingly talented Hillary Carlip at www.flyhc.com.
Researching this book was easy because my daughter Georgia works in animal rescue at Life is Better Rescue in Colorado, which she owns and runs. You do amazing work and I’m proud of you.
Much of what I know about hospice and end-of-life care I learned from my aunt Lucy, who volunteered for decades at Angela Hospice in Livonia, Michigan. She introduced me to Bob Alexander, and he, Barb Iovan, Mary Ann Joganic, LMSW, Peggy Devos, RN, and Karen Lemon, RN, CHPN, BS, were patient and kind in answering my questions and helping me to understand what it means to have a family member in hospice care. I want to thank them, both for their information and their gentle assistance to Aunt Lucy when she passed away this last summer. Aunt Lucy, you were a second mother to me.
Speaking of hospice, my friend Dannion Brinkley and his Twilight Brigade are on a mission to raise society’s consciousness about the needs of the dying and to make sure no one, especially our nation’s veterans, dies alone. Thank you, Dannion.
I would urge anyone facing end-of-life choices to read Final Gifts: Understanding the Special Awareness, Needs, and Communications of the Dying by Maggie Callanan and Patricia Kelley (Bantam, 1997). It’s a wonderful book.
I never write a book about animals without reading Temple Grandin’s invaluable Animals Make Us Human: Creating the Best Life for Animals (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2009) and Animals in Translation: Using the Mysteries of Autism to Decode Animal Behavior (Mariner Books, 2006). Catherine Johnson is the coauthor of both of these works and I regret that I failed to give proper credit in earlier citations of these two wonderful books.
While researching canines I came across a wonderful little gem of a book by Roger Abrantes called Dog Language: An Encyclopedia of Canine Behaviour (Wakan Tanka Publishers, 1997.) It really helped me decode what was going on in the dog park! I also recommend, and found really helpful, How Dogs Think: What the World Looks Like to Them and Why They Act the Way They Do by Stanley Coren (Free Press, 2005) and Inside of a Dog: What Dogs See, Smell, and Know by Alexandra Horowitz (Scribner, 2010).
When it came to understanding eating disorders, I was able to turn to friends of mine who have done battle with such demons and, to respect their privacy, I will not name them here. They know I’m grateful for their insights. I also can recommend Life Without Ed: How One Woman Declared Independence from Her Eating Disorder and How You Can Too by Jenni Schaefer and Thom Rutledge (McGraw-Hill, 2003), Eating in the Light of the Moon: How Women Can Transform Their Relationship with Food Through Myths, Metaphors, and Storytelling by Anita A. Johnston, Ph.D. (Gurze Books, 2000), and Unbearable Lightness: A Story of Loss and Gain by Portia de Rossi (Atria, 2010).
My friend Dina Zaphiris, the “Behavior Savior,” has been training dogs to detect cancer, much the way that Andi does during the life of Molly. Thank you, Dina, for your advice, your help, and for being such a good second mother to Tucker.
Of course, that’s not it, meaning that a book doesn’t come together just because of some research, a great team, and a public willing to read the finished product—my personal support group starts with my parents, Bill and Monsie Cameron, who never told me anything other than if I wanted to be a novelist, I could be a novelist. My sister Julie has turned her medical practice into a bookstore and literally cheers for me with every success, whether minor or major. I am so blessed to have her in my life. My sister Amy, the schoolteacher, and her friend Judy Robben did an amazing job writing the study guide for A Dog’s Purpose, and for my other novel, Emory’s Gift. I’ll probably talk them into doing the same for A Dog’s Journey, as well. She could have been Miss America, but instead decided to just help plain old Bruce.
As could be expected from such a wonderful father as myself, I’ve got great children and children-in-law. My daughter Georgia’s animal rescue wouldn’t be possible without Christopher, her husband, who tirelessly and without complaint works at her side. Daughter Chelsea and her husband, James, flew out to be with me on the day Emory’s Gift was released and even went to Hawaii to celebrate the event. My son, Chase, recruited Charlie Salem and, between the two of them, have done a wonderful job supporting my writing.
Thanks to my Nobel Prize–winning sister-in-law, Maria Hjelm, for running the Northern California campaign, and for giving the world Ethan, Maya, and Jakob. Thanks, Ted, for doing your part in that.
By the time anyone reads this, my newspaper column, which ran for thirteen glorious years, will have folded. It was my decision: after winning (in 2010) the Newspaper Columnist of the Year Award, I decided that my weekly musings, which started with a column called “The Family Meeting” and focused mainly on raising children, had run its course. I’m going out on top of my game and before it becomes possible to write about grandchildren. Bob Bridges has been my copyeditor for nearly every single one of my columns, all of it on a volunteer basis. Thank you, Bob. And thanks to my column editor, Anthony Zurcher, and to Jack Newcombe, and everyone else at Creators, for syndicating my column.
Thanks to Gavin Palone, for his belief and support of my writing and for staking his professional reputation on it.
Thanks, Geoff Jennings, for being tirelessly supportive in word and deed, and to all the independent bookstores that got behind A Dog’s Purpose and pushed.
Thank you, Deb Mangelsdorf, for your wise advice about dogs and veterinary medicine.
Thanks, Claire LaZebnik, a wonderful writer and great friend, who helps keep me mentally steady when I’m about to fall, or throw myself, off the high wire that is being an author in today’s world. (Not that I’m complaining—I wanted to be on the high wire!) Thanks to all the LaZebniks, for sharing Claire and everything else with me.
Julie, Norma, Marcia—the Coven. Thank you, I’m still under your spell.
Maxine Lapiduss is a genius.
Toni Marteney, thank you for starting the Bruce Cameron fan club in Hawaii. When are you going to fly me out for a meeting?
Tucker, you’re a good dog.
Ted and Evie Michon created one of the most beautiful things I’ve ever seen: Cathryn Michon.
Cathryn, you know how much of you is in everything I write. Your love gives me purpose, it is a gift, it makes me treasure the journey.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR

W. BRUCE CAMERON is the New York Times bestselling author of A Dog’s Purpose and 8 Simple Rules for Dating My Teenage Daughter, which was turned into the hit ABC television series. He has twice received the National Society of Newspaper Columnist’s Award for Best Humor Columnist. He lives in California. Visit him on the Web at www.brucecameron.com.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
 
This is a work of fiction. All of the characters, organizations, and events portrayed in this novel are either products of the author’s imagination or are used fictitiously.
A DOG’S JOURNEY
Copyright © 2012 by W. Bruce Cameron
All rights reserved.
A Forge Book
Published by Tom Doherty Associates, LLC
175 Fifth Avenue
New York, NY 10010
www.tor-forge.com
Forge® is a registered trademark of Tom Doherty Associates, LLC.
e-ISBN 978-1-4299-9285-5
First Edition: May 2012
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
A Q&A with W. Bruce Cameron about
A Dog’s Purpose & A Dog’s Journey
1. What was the inspiration behind your novels A Dog’s Purpose and A Dog’s Journey?
My very first dog was a Labrador named Cammie. Cammie was sweet and docile and ate nearly everything left lying around: T-shirts, balloons, shoes. Cammie and I were best friends, a little boy and his dog, exploring and playing and wrestling every single day. So when, years later, I was riding my bicycle in Colorado and I came across a dog behind a fence who barked like Cammie, stared at me with Cammie’s eyes, even wagged her tail with a curious little butt-bounce, I felt as if I was interacting with my childhood buddy, my first dog.
I rode away from that encounter with a couple of questions on my mind: what if dogs never truly die? What if they are reborn, remembering each life, so that they might recognize their people just as Cammie recognized me? And, if that were true, what would it look like from the dog’s perspective?
A Dog’s Journey and A Dog’s Purpose are based on a couple of things we all know to be certain: True love never dies, and our real friends are always there for us if we know where to look.
2. How did you conduct your research for these two books?
I did what you might expect: I walked around with a tennis ball in my mouth, I dug up my neighbor’s shrubs, I lifted my leg on a fire hydrant. Then I read a lot of books on canine behavior, some of which led me to conclude that the author had never even met a dog. I mean, you might think that a dog pack is organized like the military, with everyone knowing their rank and saluting their superiors (see lifting leg reference, above) but in my observation, when a new dog shows up, the deck gets completely shuffled. We train our dogs and that, of course, changes everything, but if all you’ve done is adopt a dog and then beg it not to sleep on the couch, it is going to be this happy-go-lucky creature who just does not spend a lot of time stressing over the org chart.
3. Has the reception to A Dog’s Purpose and A Dog’s Journey surprised you?
Frankly, it surprised everyone, though I don’t think my dog was as shocked as I was. These books have both camped out on the New York Times bestseller list, they are taught in schools, and all the emails and social media response suggest people are really taken with these two stories. I guess it may have something to do with the fact that in the end, you don’t have a sobbing family standing around having a dog funeral. There are goodbyes, of course, but neither novel is a “dead dog book.” And A Dog’s Purpose and the sequel concern a real dog—that is, not a dog who understands spoken English, but a real dog who is hoping all the words he’s hearing will eventually wind up with his name and “treat” in the same sentence.
4. Reincarnation plays a critical role in A Dog’s Purpose, A Dog’s Journey, and even your coming-of-age novel Emory’s Gift. Do you believe in reincarnation?
Well, I can tell you one thing: If I’m coming back, I’m not doing eighth grade again.
I wouldn’t say reincarnation is part of my faith so much as I’m open to the idea, as open as I am to time travel, superheroes, inexpensive gasoline, and a host of other unlikely notions. It’s a device I employed to tell a story. I’d say limiting one’s consumption of fiction to only those stories which might realistically happen is to cut oneself off from a rich wealth of fun novels.
5. So are all W. Bruce Cameron novels “dog books?”
42.5 million households in this country have dogs living in them, according to the latest surveys, with millions and millions more worldwide. My characters have dogs in their lives because dogs are really special—who doesn’t appreciate coming home to a creature who is absolutely delighted to see you? Why there aren’t more dogs wandering in and out of the pages of novels, I don’t know, but when I write a book, I’ll put a dog in the story because dogs belong with us. That’s their purpose: to be by our sides on our life’s journey.
W. Bruce Cameron is the bestselling author of A Dog’s Purpose, (a USA Today bestseller that also spent a year on the New York Times bestseller list with a movie by Dreamworks in the works), and its New York Times and USA Today bestselling sequel, A Dog’s Journey. A Dog’s Purpose and A Dog’s Journey have been absolute success stories with over 325,000 “Likes” on the A Dog’s Purpose Facebook Fan page and countless readers who have fallen in love with their moving tales. He’s also the author of 8 Simple Rules for Dating My Teenage Daughter, which was turned into the hit ABC series; Emory’s Gift, and The Dogs of Christmas, which Fox 2000 recently acquired the rights for producer Wyck Godfrey and Marty Bowen’s Temple Hill (Twilight, The Fault in Our Stars). He has written for television and wrote, along with his wife and co-writer Cathryn Michon, the feature film Muffin Top: A Love Story, which will be released in 2014. Cameron was also named 2011 Newspaper Columnist of the year by the National Society of Newspaper Columnists. To learn more about W. Bruce Cameron and his work, visit: www.brucecameron.com & www.adogspurpose.com.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
Meet Ellie—a very special dog with a very important purpose!
Read on for an excerpt from Ellie’s Story, a heartwarming and inspiring tale for young animal lovers by W. Bruce Cameron

Adorable black-and-white illustrations by Richard Cowdrey bring Ellie and her world to vibrant life. A discussion and activity guide at the end of the book will help promote family and classroom discussions about Ellie’s Story and the insights it provides about humankind’s best friends.
Available April 14, 2015
Copyright © 2015 by W. Bruce Cameron
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set

Also by
W. Bruce Cameron
A Dog’s Purpose
A Dog’s Journey
The Dogs of Christmas

Also by
W. Bruce Cameron
A Dog’s Purpose
A Dog’s Journey
The Dogs of Christmas
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set

A Dog’s Purpose:
Ellie’s Story
W. Bruce Cameron
Illustrations byRichard Cowdrey

A Tom Doherty Associates Book
New York

A Dog’s Purpose:
Ellie’s Story
W. Bruce Cameron
Illustrations byRichard Cowdrey

A Tom Doherty Associates Book
New York
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set

For Eloise and Gordon

For Eloise and Gordon
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
1
 The first thing I knew was my mother’s smell and the taste of her milk.
I had to fight my way to her, struggling over and around the soft, fuzzy bodies of my brothers and sisters, to reach that milk and fill my empty stomach. I squirmed and pushed with my feeble legs, inching forward, until I could taste the warm sweetness spilling over my tongue.
In a few days my eyes were open and I could see my mother’s dark brown face and the pale blue blanket that she lay on, though at first everything was very blurry.
Sometimes, when I felt lonely or cold or lost, I’d whimper, pressing closer to her. My brother and sisters always got confused and took my whimpers for signs of weakness. Then they’d jump on me. There were seven of them, all brown with black markings, and I couldn’t understand why it was so hard for them to figure out who was going to be in charge around here.
When it wasn’t Mother, it was going to be me. I was, in my opinion, the smartest puppy.
A woman with soft hands and a softer voice often came down a set of stairs to see us. On the first day my mother growled at her, just a little, and the woman was careful to stay back. But later my mother seemed to change her mind and decided that it was all right for the woman to pick us up, cuddle us, and hold us close.
She had an interesting smell, this woman. Something clean (a kind of soap), something delicious (that was food), and something that was just her. I didn’t mind her picking me up—or not much. But I was relieved each time she laid me gently back down on the blanket beside my mother.
A man sometimes came down the stairs to look at us, too, and to bring a dish of food and a bowl of water for my mother. That water! The first time I went near the bowl to sniff at it, one of my brothers knocked into me from behind and I fell face-first into the bowl.
Cold! Water went up my nose and stung my eyes, and when I tried to whimper and let my mother know that I needed help water rushed into my mouth, too. It took all my strength to heave myself up out of that slippery bowl and shake my fur clean and dry. After that I stayed away from the water bowl as much as I could. My brother acted as if nothing happened, though it was clearly all his fault.
After a few weeks, when my legs were stronger, the man came down the stairs holding something big and brown. He set the brown thing down on the floor and gently picked up one of my brothers, popping him inside.
“In the box, buddy,” the man said. “Don’t worry. It won’t be for long.”
My brother yelped. I could hear him, but I couldn’t see him! All of us started yipping and barking as the man picked us up, one by one, and put us where he had put my brother—in the box.
It was like being in a tiny room, with a floor and walls of something smooth and slippery. My tiny claws slipped and slid. They slipped and slid even worse when the man lifted the box into the air.
My brothers and sisters scrambled all over each other, trying to figure out what was happening. I stood on two sisters and hooked my paws over the edge of the box and peeked out. The man was climbing up the stairs, and my mother was trotting behind him. That made me feel better. We could not be going anywhere dangerous if Mother was coming.
“Whoops, back inside, girl,” said the man. “Don’t fall out.”
He gently pushed my paws off the box’s edge, and I landed on the same idiot brother who had knocked me into the water bowl. He chewed on my foot before I yanked it away.
The man carried us for a little while longer and then set the box down. One by one he and the woman lifted us out.
We were somewhere incredible. It was called Outside.
The light was the first thing. It was so bright I could barely see for several minutes. Then there was something strange under my paws—something springy and soft, like the blanket, but prickly. Grass! I bit it, to show it who was boss. It didn’t bite back, so I figured that was settled. I was in charge of the grass.
And the smells! I had learned the smells of my mother and my littermates and the blanket where we had lived and of the woman and the man who came to visit us. But now the air was moving, blowing past me and tickling my nose with a million smells that I couldn’t sort out. My brothers and sisters rushed past me, yelping, stumbling, falling on their faces, and rolling onto their sides. I stood still, with my nose in the air, trying to understand where I was.
The grass underfoot smelled sharp and fresh. There was another smell underneath that, dark and dense and rich. It smelled like something that would be good to dig. The moving air brought more smells from farther away—something smoky and tasty from inside the house, something sweet from the bushes alongside it, something harsh and sour and stinking that roared by, too fast, on the other side of a tall wooden fence.

Art Not Final
And something mysterious and furry and alive, like me.
That smell was a grown-up dog in a pen. My mother trotted over to him, and they touched noses through a wire fence. I knew this other dog was male, like my brothers, and I sensed that he was important to Mother. Without knowing how, I knew this dog was my father.
“He seems like he’ll be fine with the puppies,” the man said to the woman.
“You going to be okay, Bernie? You want to come out?” Our father’s name was Bernie. The woman opened his cage. He bounded out, sniffed at us, and then went over to pee on the fence.
We all galloped after him, falling over every minute but getting up again. Bernie put his face down and one of my brothers jumped up and bit at Bernie’s ears. Very disrespectful! But he didn’t seem to mind. He just shook his head, sending my brother rolling over.
Some of the other pups took that for an invitation and pounced on Bernie. He knocked a few of them gently aside, sniffed at the rest, and came over to me.
I didn’t bite at him or jump on him, so I got to stay on my feet. But he put his nose down and sniffed me all over, then put a paw on top of me, just because.
I knew I should not fight back. I might have been in charge of my littermates, even if some of them had strange ideas about that. But this father dog, like Mother, was in charge of me. I let him squash me down into the soft, springy grass and hold me there for a few seconds before Bernie wandered off to let the man pet him and scratch behind his ears.
After that we did Outside every day. I learned that the dark, fascinating stuff under the grass was dirt. And I also learned how to make sure my brothers and sisters didn’t get the wrong idea about me. They would creep up behind me and pounce or race across the yard to barrel into me, so I would have to snarl and show my teeth or roll over and over until I was on top. Then I’d walk away and later take the chance to sneak up on them.
It was funny how they didn’t just accept that I was the boss. They’d wrestle and wriggle and try to squash me down with their tiny paws, the way Bernie had done with his big one. They were not Father or Mother, though, so I never let them get away with it. But they kept trying.
Bernie sometimes played with us a little, too, and the woman came out with funny-smelling things for us to chew on. “Here are your toys, pups,” she’d say.
Then one day a new man came into the yard. He had different ideas about playing. First he clapped his hands loudly. One of my brothers yelped and ran to Mother. Several more of the puppies jumped back a few steps, and one whimpered. I was startled, too, but something told me there was no danger. The man picked up the ones who hadn’t seemed scared and put us in a box, carrying us away to a different section of the yard.
One by one, he lifted us out. When it was my turn, he put me down on the grass and then he turned and walked away from me, as if he’d forgotten I was even there. I followed him, curious to see what he’d do next.
“Good dog!” he told me. A good dog, just for following him? This guy was a pushover.
Then the man took something out of his pocket. He opened it up and put the soft folds over me. “Hey, girl, can you find your way out of the T-shirt?” he asked.
I had no idea what was going on, but I didn’t like it. The white cotton was all over the place, as if I were wrapped up in a blanket. I tried to fight it, showing it who was boss, just as I did with my littermates. That didn’t work. I could scratch it or bite it, but it didn’t go away. It just clung to me, all over my face, all over my body.
I tried to walk, figuring maybe I would get away from it. The T-shirt walked with me. I growled and shook my head hard. That helped a little. The cloth fell away from my face, and I got a glimpse of green grass near my tail.
My tail! That was it! The way to get out of this thing was to back up. I did that, shaking my head again to shuffle the shirt off me. In a few seconds I was out on the grass. The man was nearby, so I ran over to him for more praise.
The woman had come out into the yard to watch.
“Most of them take a minute or two to puzzle it out, but this one’s pretty bright,” the man remarked. He knelt down and took hold of me, flipping me over onto my back in the grass. I squirmed. It wasn’t fair. He was so much bigger than I was!
“She doesn’t like that, Jakob,” the woman said.
“None of them like it. The question is, will she stop struggling and let me be the boss or will she keep fighting? I got to have a dog that knows I’m the boss,” the man answered the woman.
I heard the word “dog,” and it didn’t sound angry. I wasn’t being punished. But I was being pinned down. It was kind of like the way Bernie had pushed me down into the grass, the first day I had met him. And this man was bigger than me, the way Bernie was bigger. Maybe that meant this man was supposed to be in charge, the way Father was.
Anyway, I figured I didn’t know what kind of game we were playing now, so I just relaxed. No more struggling.
“Good dog!” the man said again. I guessed his name was Jakob. He sure had some strange ideas on how to play with a puppy.
Next he took something flat and white from his pocket and crumpled it up. It made the most fascinating noise while he was doing that! I wished I could get a better look—and more than that, I wished I could get a taste. What was this new thing?
“Want it, girl? Want the paper?” Jakob said.
I wanted it! He moved it around in front of my face, and I chased it, snapping, trying to get a hold on it. I couldn’t do it! My mouth was too small, and my head moved too slowly. Then the man flipped the thing into the air and I raced after it. Pounce! I landed on it with both my front paws and settled down to chewing it. Ha! Try to get it now!
It tasted interesting but not as good as I thought it would. It had been more fun when it was moving anyway. I picked it up and brought it back to the man, dropping it at his feet. Then I plopped my rear end into the grass and wagged my tail, hoping he’d get the hint and throw it again.
“This one,” Jakob said. “I’ll take this one.”
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
2
 Jakob scooped me up and carried me out of the yard. I was amazed. Outside was bigger than I had ever thought. It went on forever!
In front of the house, big, loud things zoomed past, smelling of metal and smoke and other sharp and unpleasant odors. I had no idea what these things were, but I was pretty sure they were dangerous. Jakob opened the back of one, and I squirmed against his chest and whimpered.
“It’s okay, girl,” Jakob said. “Just a quick ride in the truck. Don’t worry about it. Okay? Just a truck.”
Truck. His tones were soothing, but I was plenty worried. I didn’t want to go anywhere in anything that smelled like this.
There was something like a box, only made out of metal, in the back of the truck. Jakob opened it up with one hand and with the other dumped me gently inside.
Then he left me. He left me!
This was not right. I was sure about it. Of course I didn’t like the idea of being taken away from my mother and brothers and sisters, but something told me that it was the way things had to be. Dogs were supposed to be with people. Jakob was going to be my family now.
But that meant Jakob was supposed to be with me! He wasn’t supposed to go far away and leave me in a cold metal box in the back of a loud, smelly truck!
I barked. I whimpered. I did everything I could to let Jakob know he had made a mistake and was supposed to come back. But he must not have heard me, because he didn’t show up to take me out of the box. I heard a loud thump and then the metal box started to shake, and we were moving. It was just like being carried in a box out into the yard, my body rocking back and forth. I really didn’t like this! The truck growled and roared and I was pretty sure it was going to eat me. Where was Jakob?
My frantic barking must have gotten through to him at last, because he came back and took me out of the cage when the truck finally stopped moving. “Not too bad, huh, girl?” he said to me.
He seemed awfully cheerful after what we’d just been through together. Still, I was so grateful that he had returned I didn’t hold a grudge. I just rested against his chest as he carried me up several flights of stairs and into my new home.
There was a lot to explore. A kitchen, with fascinating smells and little doors that I couldn’t open, even when I pawed at them. A living room, with a couch that smelled like Jakob and a box that made noise sometimes. A balcony, where I could sit with Jakob and look over houses and yards and trees and more zooming, loud things like the truck.
There was a bedroom, with a big bed that smelled like Jakob, too. I tried to climb up on it the first day, and Jakob firmly dumped me off. “No, girl. This is your bed,” he said, and showed me a soft, furry circle on the floor. It felt a little like the blanket I used to sleep on with Mother and my littermates, but it didn’t smell like them. It smelled empty and cold.
What I liked the best, though, was the park. Jakob took me there more than once that first day. There was more of the springy grass that was fun to run around on, and Jakob tossed some sticks for me to pounce on and bring back. Then he pulled a little round thing from his pocket and threw it for me. I chased it down and tried to get my tiny mouth around it.
Then a little animal darted past, shaking a strangely fuzzy tail. I dropped the ball immediately and dashed after it. This was much more fun!
Obviously the animal was made for chasing. It zigged and zagged across the grass and headed for a tree. To my astonishment, it went straight up the trunk! I tried it myself and fell over on my back. The animal sat on a high branch and laughed at me as I ran around the trunk yapping in frustration. Why wouldn’t my paws take me up? The little animal had done it so easily!
Jakob came to sit beside me and scratch behind my ears. “Don’t give up, girl,” he told me. “Never give up. Now, I can’t keep calling you girl. Elleya.” I wondered what he was talking about. “It’s Swedish for ‘moose.’ You’re a Swedish shepherd, now.” I knew he was talking to me, so I wagged, even though his words made no real sense. “Elleya, Elleya,” he said, and moved a little away from me. “Come, Ellie, Come.”
Pretty soon I started to recognize that word, “Come.” It was one of Jakob’s favorites. When he said it, I’d sometimes wander over to see what was going on and he’d pet me and give me something tasty from his hand. “Come” meant praise and petting and a treat, so pretty soon I always showed up for it. But my favorite words from him were “Good dog!” “Good dog!” always meant he would pet me, rubbing my fur until I wriggled from my toes to my tail with happiness. His hands smelled of oil and his truck and of papers and other people.
Jakob never seemed to get angry about anything, even when my little bladder signaled that it was full and let go all in one rush. When I did manage to get outside before anything happened, he gave me such praise that I decided I’d try to do it as much as possible, since it seemed to please him so much.
I wanted to make Jakob happy. I just wasn’t sure how.
He was patient with me, always. He petted me and called me Good Dog and seemed to like having me nearby. But I could tell that he wasn’t happy. When he wasn’t taking me out for walks, he mostly sat on the couch. Sometimes he’d turn on the talking box; sometimes he just sat or lay down flat and looked at the ceiling. If I went over and nuzzled at his hand, he’d rub my ears a little, but never for long.
I would sigh and lie down beside him. I thought he’d probably feel better if he let me up on the couch with him, and so would I—but I’d learned that wasn’t going to happen.
On our first night together, Jakob had watched the noisy box for a while and then he’d yawned and wandered into the bedroom. I followed him. After he’d undressed, he crawled under the covers on the bed. It looked so comfortable that I immediately went up after him. It was all I could do to leap so high, so I figured I was due for some praising and maybe a treat.
Instead, he got out of bed and put me back into the furry circle on the floor. “This is your bed,” he told me. “Yours, Ellie.”
He climbed back into the big bed. I could see he didn’t want me to join him up there, but I couldn’t understand why. He had so much room! My bed was comfortable, but it was lonely. I was used to sleeping with Mother and my brothers and sisters. This was not at all the same. I whimpered, to let Jakob know something was wrong.
“You’ll get used to it, Ellie,” I heard him say from the big bed. “We all have to get used to being alone.”
After some time I got used to it, but that didn’t mean I liked it. I still tried to sneak under Jakob’s covers every now and then. He never shouted or pushed me, but he never let me stay. In a few minutes I’d be back in my own bed. After a while I decided it was less trouble just to stay there.
For a few days, Jakob was home with me all the time. Then one morning, he got dressed in different clothes. Everything he wore was a dark color, and he pulled on a heavy belt with things hanging from it. “Got to go to work, Ellie girl,” he told me. “Don’t worry, I’ll be home soon.”
Then he left.
This did not seem right. I hadn’t liked it when Jakob had left me alone in the truck, but he had come back. I remembered that. He’d come back this time, too. I settled in to wait.
Waiting was very hard.
I lay in my bed for a while, but then I nosed my way under Jakob’s blankets. They smelled like him, and that was comforting. But after a while I got restless and went to the living room so I could look out of the glass door that led to the balcony. Maybe I’d see Jakob from there.
I didn’t.
I sniffed the couch cushions. They smelled like Jakob. I chewed a little on one of the rubber bones he’d gotten me. It was odd to chew something with so little taste, but my teeth wanted to gnaw something and Jakob said, “Good dog!” when I bit this. So I chewed it and waited some more.
Jakob still hadn’t come back.
Maybe this time he’d really forgotten me. Or maybe something had happened to him! Maybe he was hurt and couldn’t come back to get me! Maybe he needed me! How could I get to him, shut up in this? I paced back and forth in front of the door, whining.
Then the lock made a clicking noise. I jumped back. The door swung open. Jakob! He’d come back!
“Oh, hello there, sweetie!” cooed a voice.
It wasn’t Jakob at all.
It was a woman. She came in as if she belonged here, and sat right down on the floor, putting out her hands to me.
“There, there, sweetie, don’t worry. I’m Georgia. I’m here to take you out. Oh, aren’t you cute. Aren’t you the cutest thing! You’re Ellie, right? You’re Ellie-wellie Cuddle-Coo. Come here, Ellie, sweetie; come to Georgia.”
I knew that word, “Come.” Was this woman like Jakob? Did she want me to move closer to her? I did it, and she petted and praised me. “Good girl, Ellie. Good girl!” She clipped the leash onto my collar and took me outside to the park.
I decided I liked Georgia very much.
She laughed when I chased the small, fuzzy animals, and she petted me a lot, rubbing her hands through my fur, talking to me in a stream of words. None of it made any sense, except for “Ellie” and “Come,” but I liked hearing her anyway. She was happy to see me. She was happy to be with me. She was happy in a way Jakob never was.
But then Georgia left, too. She brought me back to the apartment, petted me, checked that I had water in my bowl, kissed me between my ears (Jakob definitely never did that!), and went out the door.
These people! Why didn’t they understand that a dog was supposed to be with humans? Not left behind in an apartment. Not chewing on a tasteless rubber bone. I tried to sleep, tried to chew my bone, but mostly paced around, whining a little in frustration, until the door creaked again and Georgia came back to take me out once more. Finally, when I thought I couldn’t stand it any longer, Jakob came home.
I ran to him and got so excited I jumped up on my back legs. “Off!” he said sternly, and pushed me back to the floor. Of all the words I’d heard so far, “off” was my least favorite. But then he petted me and rubbed my ears, sighed at a puddle on the floor, took me outside to the park, and brought me back to feed me dinner. After that he went to sleep in the big bed while I curled up alone in my little one.
That was the way things went until we started Work.
“Let’s go to work,” Jakob said one day. I was a bit older, then, and Georgia had started coming only once a day to walk me while Jakob was gone. Jakob seemed as calm as ever, but I could tell there was something extra under the calmness, some kind of excitement. Work must be something important.
At first Work was just more words. I was already pretty good at Come. Now Jakob took me to the park and taught me Drop, which meant to lie down, and Stay. That was a hard one. I would Drop and then Jakob would walk away from me, as if he’d forgotten (again!) that it was my job to be near him. But I had to stay, with my belly in the grass, until I heard “Come!” Then I bounded after him. It took me a little while, but I got good at “Stay.” I could tell that Jakob was pleased, and I was glad.
Jakob didn’t love me the way Georgia did. It didn’t make him happy just to see me. But it did make him happy when we did Work together. So I decided there and then to be very, very good at Work.
If it made Jakob even a little bit happy, it was what I should be doing. But I still loved the times Georgia would come to see me and call me Ellie-wellie Cuddle-Coo.
After I’d gotten good at my words, Work changed. Jakob took me to a new place. There were lots of trees and plenty of those distracting little animals—I knew now that they were called squirrels. But I did my best to stay near Jakob, waiting patiently until he showed me what kind of Work he wanted me to do.
A man got out of a car a little way away and walked over to us, waving. “Hey there, Jakob!” he called out cheerfully.
“Wally,” Jakob said, nodding.
“This the new dog?”
“This is Ellie.”
Wally bent down to pet me. “You’re a big girl, Ellie, huh? You going to be good at this?”
“I think she will,” Jakob said quietly. “Let’s see.”
Wally did something odd then. He ran away.
“What’s he doing, Ellie? Where’s he going?” Jakob asked.
I watched Wally, who was looking over his shoulder at me.
“Find him! Find!” Jakob told me.
I could tell from his voice that this was a new word he wanted me to learn. But I wasn’t sure what I should do. Something to do with Wally. There was Wally, over there, waving excitedly. I started toward him. Was this right? Was it what Jakob wanted me to do?
Wally saw me coming and dropped down to his hands and knees, clapping and smiling. When I caught up to him he showed me a stick. I loved sticks! I grabbed it right away, and Wally hung on so that we could have an excellent game of tug. This was fun! Much better than Drop and Stay.
Then Wally got up, brushing off his knees. “Look, Ellie. What’s he doing? Find him!” Wally said.
I looked around. Didn’t “Find” mean I should go to Wally? But I was right next to Wally! What was I supposed to do?
Jakob was strolling off, so I ran after him. I’d always rather be near Jakob anyway. “Good dog!” Jakob told me, and played with a stick, too. My tail thrashed with happiness.
Honestly, I thought the game of Find was a little dull. But Wally and Jakob seemed to like it, so we played more of it that afternoon. I was willing to do it for Jakob, especially if it meant I got to play tug-on-a-stick. That, to me, beat Find Wally hands down.
I was doing Work and doing it right. Jakob had called me a good dog. This game of Find was important to him, so I would try my best to learn it. I wanted to be a good dog for Jakob. I even dreamed about Finding Wally. They were happy dreams.
Sometimes, though, I would dream a bad dream about a boy named Ethan. In the dream, Ethan was swimming in cool green water and then suddenly he would slip beneath the surface. Fear would grip me as I watched him go down until with a cry I would lower my head and plunge after him, eyes and mouth open, straining to reach the boy, who kept sinking, sinking, sinking, just out of reach.
When I awoke from this dream I was often panting and would wander the house sniffing. The dream felt real, meaning it felt as if it had really happened.
Why did I keep having that dream?
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
3
 Jakob took me back to the park nearly every day, and Wally was always there. Sometimes a friend of Wally’s, Belinda, would come, too.
The game of Find got harder and harder to play. Wally would run faster, or start farther away, or duck behind a tree or a bush. He couldn’t fool me, though. I always would Find him. And that always mean praise and petting and a good wrestle with a stick. The stick still was the best part, as far as I was concerned.
One day the rules changed. Find Wally got harder than ever.
Jakob and I were at the park, but Wally was not there. Fine. Maybe Jakob would throw a stick for me. He didn’t usually do that during Work, but when he was just taking me for a walk in the evenings a stick was often involved, or the ball he carried in his pocket.
But he didn’t do that, this time. Instead he looked at me and said, “Find!”
Huh? Find what? Wally wasn’t there.
Where was Wally, anyway?
I began to sniff at the ground. I would know a Wally smell if my nose came across it. His sweat, his skin, the soap he used, and a sharp-smelling gum that he liked to chew—all of those things were mixed into the smell that was Wally. Was he around here somewhere? I’d like to know. He might have a stick, since Jakob didn’t seem inclined to throw one.
“Good girl, Ellie. Good dog. Find!”
Was I being a good dog? Jakob had called me a good dog just for sniffing? I sniffed harder and walked a few steps. And there it was! The smell that meant Wally! It was strong and fresh. He’d been here not long ago.
What was he doing, running away before I could Find him? Didn’t he know this wasn’t the way the game was supposed to be played?
I followed the trail that Wally had made. Jakob followed me. He didn’t tell me I was a good dog again; he was silent, as if he didn’t want to distract me. But I could tell he was pleased. I must be doing this right.
There was a delicious smell close by the trail. It smelled like a sandwich Jakob ate sometimes—bread, roast beef, a strange, spicy sauce (how could humans like that stuff?), and some odd plant things that Jakob sometimes ate, too. I glanced up. A sandwich wrapper was lying in the grass. It smelled so good, my mouth began to water.
“Find, Ellie. Find!” Jakob insisted.
I pulled my nose away from the wrapper. This was Work. I could not let myself be distracted. The rules had changed, but the game was still the same. I was supposed to Find Wally.
So I didn’t stop trying, even when the trail got difficult. It ran around a bench, and two people sitting there smiled at me. One of them, a woman, offered me her hand. I smelled something in it, something delectable—a bite of bagel smeared with cream cheese. Yum! Sometimes Jakob dropped a piece of his breakfast bagel in my bowl. I loved it. I’d love this, too. I took a step toward the bench.
“Please don’t,” Jakob said behind me. “She’s working.”
“Oh, sorry,” the woman answered, pulling her hand back.
But I already had my nose back to the ground. Bagels and cream cheese were very nice, but they weren’t what the game of Find was about. When another dog, a silly, long-legged puppy with a frantically lashing tail, bounced up to me, putting both front legs flat on the ground and asking to play, I ignored him. This was not play. This was Work. Jakob and I did Work together. We had no time for puppy games.
Finally, the trail led me beneath some trees. I smelled several dogs who’d been there before me. Three or four had peed on a big clump of grass. I was tempted to squat and add my own contribution, just so they’d know I’d been here, too, and that they didn’t have these woods to themselves.
But Wally was around here somewhere. The trail was stronger and stronger now, and I was getting excited. My tail started to wag. My ears were forward, straining. My nose had never been so busy before. Wally? Wally? I was almost on top of him. …
And then I was. The trail led me around a tree with a wide trunk, and on the other side was Wally, stretched out on the grass and leaning back on a thick root.
The minute he saw me, he jumped up. “You did it, Ellie! You Found me!”
“Good girl. Good dog!” Jakob praised.
There was the stick and I enjoyed it, but even more I enjoyed the tone of Jakob’s voice. “She’s good, huh? I was hardly here ten minutes!” Wally said to Jakob.
“She’s good,” Jakob agreed quietly.
“She could really be something special.”
Jakob rubbed behind my ears. “I think she could.”
After that Wally was never there when we got to the park and I always had to Find him wherever he had wandered off to. Jakob stopped following me, and I learned two new words: “Show me!” This meant taking Jakob to where I’d found Wally sprawled under a tree or sitting behind a bush. Or sometimes it even meant showing Jakob where I’d found one of Wally’s socks or a T-shirt lying on the ground. (The man was a disaster, always leaving his clothes around for us to Find and pick up.) Somehow, Jakob always knew when I’d Found something after I came running back to him. “Show me!” he’d say, but only if I had something to show.
I was starting to feel pretty good about Work when Jakob took me to a new place. It was like a park with a playground in it. I knew about playgrounds; there was one at the park where we went in the evenings. Young humans would run around it like puppies, climbing up ladders, barreling down slides, swooping high into the sky on swings. They certainly looked like they were having fun. But there weren’t any children at this playground, and I didn’t know how I was supposed to Find Wally here, where there were no trees or bushes for him to hide behind.
First Jakob took me up to a plank that was tipped over, with one end resting on the ground and the other high in the air. I sniffed, but Wally wasn’t nearby. I couldn’t pick up his scent at all.
It turned out there was more to Work than Find Wally.
Jakob tugged gently on my leash, showing me he wanted me to walk up the ramp. Fine. I walked up it. On the other side was a ladder going down.
This side I didn’t like as much. Where were my feet supposed to go? I put one paw hesitantly on a rung. Then the next.
“Good dog, Ellie. Keep going,” Jakob encouraged me.
I was eager to be on the nice, safe ground again, so I leaped to the ground.
“No, don’t jump,” Jakob said.
I didn’t know what he was saying, but the word “no” I certainly recognized. It was one of my least favorite words.
Jakob took me up the ramp and down the ladder again and again, and after a while I got it: he wanted me to take a step at a time, even though it wasn’t the fastest way to the ground. “Good dog, Ellie!” I loved being a good dog.
The next thing to try was a stack of logs. They were uneven under my feet, and that was a little disturbing. I was used to grass or dirt or sidewalks, or to smooth floors and carpets indoors. I had to balance and leap from one log to the next.
“Come, Ellie. Good dog, Ellie!”
Jakob’s voice encouraged me, and I kept going.
Then came the tube.
Jakob showed it to me, and I sniffed it carefully. Still no sign of Wally, though I supposed he could have squeezed in there with a little effort. I could smell a hint of dogs who’d been here before me. Other than that, it just smelled of plastic.

Art Not Final
Jakob went to the other side of the tube. “Come, Ellie. Come!” he called.
Come through the tube?
I knew I was supposed to obey right away. There was never any fooling around during Work. No hesitation. Work meant to do what Jakob said and to do it quickly.
But that tube was dark. Where exactly would it take me?
“Come!”
One more word from Jakob was all that it took. I plunged into the tube, nose first. My front paws clawed at the smooth plastic. My back feet shoved. It was cramped and hot, and the plastic smelled strange. I didn’t like the feeling. The walls of the tube were all around me, pressing in on me. I wanted to get through, to get out, to get where Jakob and his voice were waiting for me.
One last wriggle, one frantic shove with my back paws, and I was tumbling onto the fresh-smelling grass.
“Good, Ellie. Good dog!” Jakob’s hands were in my fur, petting and scratching, and I was panting a little. It hadn’t been easy, but I had done my Work.
We went back to that playground-park many times, and I got quick at all the climbing and balancing and crawling Jakob asked of me. I never grew to like the tube, but I didn’t let Jakob know. I’d dive in as soon as I heard his command and wiggle through as quickly as I possibly could.
Jakob showed me a harness, too, a floppy orange thing that looked like a shirt. The first time he put it on me, I wondered if he wanted me to find a way to wriggle out of it, as I’d done with that T-shirt so long ago. But it turned out that wasn’t the idea.
“Okay, Ellie, hold still while I put your harness on,” Jakob said, and he clipped something onto my back. Then he stepped away.
I looked at him, confused. What was about to happen?
Something pulled on my back. I twitched with surprise and tried to twist my head around. But I couldn’t see. The pull got stronger and stronger, and I was lifted right off my feet!
“Ellie, it’s okay. Ellie, it’s fine. You’re all right,” Jakob said firmly. “Sometimes a rescue dog needs to be hoisted.”
I was not at all sure about any of this. My paws were off the ground! I wanted to run away, but how could I do that when all I could touch was air? I didn’t panic, though. Jakob’s voice was steady and reassuring. He was watching me with that look he only had when we were Working. So this must be part of Work, and that meant I should accept it, no matter how strange it might feel.
In a minute or two, I had been hauled up to a platform a few feet above the ground. Jakob quickly climbed up beside me and unclipped the cable from my harness. “Good girl, Ellie. Good dog! You’re brave, aren’t you, girl?” I was still shaking a little, and he ran his hands through my fur until I felt calm. We practiced the harness on other days, and I learned that it never took long before I was back on my feet.
Another time Jakob took something out of a special pocket at his side. He showed it to me.
“Good girl, Ellie. This is a gun. See?”
I saw it and I sniffed at it, but I was glad when he didn’t throw it for me to fetch. It didn’t look like it would fly far, and it smelled odd. I didn’t think I wanted it in my mouth.
Jakob pointed the thing in the air and it made a horrible bang that hurt my ears. I jumped and whined. But when he did it a few more times, I decided that it was simply noise. I didn’t like it, but it wasn’t going to hurt me.
“No reason to be afraid,” Jakob promised. “It’s a gun, Ellie. A gun. It makes a loud noise, but you’re not afraid, are you, girl?”
I wasn’t afraid. Guns, it seemed, were part of Work. And Work was nothing to be scared of.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
4
 A few days after Jakob had shown me the gun, he took me to a new park. There were several people—most of them men, a few women—sitting at long tables, and I noticed that a lot of them had guns as well. They called out to us.
“Sit down, Jakob!”
“This the new dog?”
“Haven’t seen you in a while!”
“Hey, Jakob made it! Somebody take a picture!”
This didn’t seem to be Work. The people at the table were talking and laughing and eating. I found a potato chip on the ground—delicious!—and went to lie down near Jakob, hoping for more.
Jakob was eating and someone had given him a brown bottle to drink from, but he wasn’t talking or laughing, like the rest of them.
“Isn’t that right, Jakob?” someone said.
Jakob didn’t answer. I sat up and nuzzled his hand. He petted me, but I could sense he wasn’t really thinking about me.
“I said, ‘Isn’t that right, Jakob?’ ”
Jakob turned and looked at everyone watching him, and I sensed his embarrassment. “What?”
“If there’s ever a riot in the city, we’re going to need every K-9 unit we can get.”
“Ellie’s not that kind of dog,” Jakob said coldly, not looking at anyone in particular. “She doesn’t attack people.”
I straightened up at the sound of my name, in case this was Work after all and a command was coming next. It didn’t. But everyone was looking at me now. I moved a little closer to Jakob. When the rest of them started talking again, it was to each other. No one spoke to Jakob. I nuzzled his hand again, and this time he scratched my ears.
“Good dog, Ellie,” he said softly. “Let’s go for a walk, huh?”
Walk? That was a word I knew and one I liked. I wagged my tail with enthusiasm. A walk was almost as good as more potato chips.
There was another playground at this park, the human kind, and some paths that wound around. I barked at one squirrel that was enough of a show-off to run past a foot away, but mostly I just walked at Jakob’s side. We ended up by a wide, deep pool. Water was shooting up out of the middle of it in white spray and bubbles. I stuck my nose in and lapped up a little, just to see what it tasted like. Yuck! Something sour and chemical had spoiled this water completely. I shook my head hard.
Jakob chuckled. “The fountain doesn’t taste like your water bowl at home, huh? Okay, Ellie.” He’d picked up a stick. “Get it!”
Fetch! I loved Fetch! Jakob held the stick up over his shoulder and threw it hard. It landed right in the water.
Right in the water!
I bent my nose down and sniffed at the strange-smelling water. Then I dipped a paw in it. Cold! I jerked the paw back.
I wasn’t a little puppy scared of my own water dish anymore. But still, I didn’t really like this. That was a lot of water. I knew what Jakob wanted, though. He wanted me to get the stick for him. He never liked to lose his sticks for long.
I put two paws in, expecting to support myself with my forelegs, but to my utter shock I didn’t touch bottom. I fell in the pool! Water flooded into my eyes and nose. Sputtering, choking, I scrabbled and clawed my way out of the pool in an utter panic, shaking myself off violently.
“Fetch! Get the stick, Ellie!”
Forget the stick. I wasn’t going back in there, ever. Plunging under the surface of the water reminded me too much of my dream about the boy. What was his name? Ethan. In the water, sinking down and down. The fear from that dream haunted me now, strong as any real-life memory.
The fountain was cold. And worse, the water was constantly moving up and down, sloshing back and forth. It was dangerous. I didn’t want to do this.
“The stick!” Jakob insisted.
You want a stick? I scampered across the lawn, jumping with both feet on a nice big stick. I picked it up and shook it to show Jakob how fun it was.
“Ellie, come!” he commanded sternly.
Oh-oh. I went to him with my tail lowered, dropping the new stick at his feet.
“You don’t like water, huh?” Jakob had crouched down and was eyeing me. “That could be a problem, you know. C’mon, Ellie, get the stick. You can do it. Go swim”
Swim? I couldn’t do it, if Swim meant going in the water.
Jakob picked up the new stick and threw it, too, in the water. Oh no! “Go on, Ellie. It’s not that bad. Fetch!”
Why didn’t he just throw the stick the other way? I ran a few feet, to show him where I wanted him to throw it. Come on, Jakob. This way! Throw the stick on the ground! The ground is so much nicer than the pool!
But he didn’t. He threw another stick into the fountain, and another. I whined a little, letting him know this was not a good idea. Water was not safe. People should not go into it. Dogs should not, either.
“Okay,” Jakob said thoughtfully, staring at me. “Okay. …”
And he jumped in.
One minute he was standing next to me; the next he was gone. He flopped forward in the water, made a few motions with his arms, and sank.
He sank! Just like that boy, Ethan!
I barked so Jakob would know to come up. I paced back and forth by the edge of the fountain. Jakob! Jacob had gone into the water!
He hadn’t given me a command, but I knew what I was supposed to do. I was supposed to Fetch him, the way I was supposed to Fetch the sticks. I was supposed to go into the water.
I didn’t want to. But Jakob was down there. I had to get him back!
The next thing I knew, I was in the water, too.
My paws seemed to know what to do—I paddled as best I could, and I was moving toward Jakob. But the water was every bit as awful as the first time. My coat got so heavy it was hard to keep moving. The strange-smelling stuff splashed in my eyes and surged into my mouth and nose. It stung! I couldn’t smell Jakob. I couldn’t smell anything. Panic was creeping up on me. It had been so long, and Jakob hadn’t come up, and I couldn’t Find him. Finding was my job; it was my Work; it was our Work. I was supposed to Find Jakob!

Art Not Final
Bubbles from underneath me tickled my belly. I looked down, blinking hard. There he was! Jakob!
He surged up, grabbing hold of me. Somehow he could stand, the water up to his waist. He shook the water out of his face and laughed one of his short laughs.
“Good girl, Ellie. You did it. You came in after me! Good dog!”
He gave me a push back toward the edge of the fountain and heaved me out, following me. We sat there, dripping, and he patted me more, scratching my wet ears.
“Hey! Hey there!” Someone ran out to us, someone in dark clothes like Jakob’s. “No swimming in that fountain. What are you doing, letting your dog play around like that?”
“She’s not playing,” Jakob said, unhooking something shiny from his belt and holding it up for the other man to see. “She’s working.”
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
5
 I knew Jakob had been happy that I’d gone in the water. I was glad he was pleased, but I was also very relieved when we went back to our old park the next day. I liked Find a lot better than Swim.
Wally wasn’t around; I was used to that by now. I looked up at Jakob, my ears alert for “Find.” But Jakob did something new. He had carried an old coat with him from the truck, and now he held it out to me. “Find, Ellie. Find!”
Find the coat? That was strange. The coat was right there over Jakob’s arm.
Jakob moved the coat closer to me, so that I could smell it. I breathed in the aromas of the person who’d been wearing it. It wasn’t Wally. The coat smelled of someone else, another man. My nose picked up sweat, something sweet that had spilled, coffee, smoke from those strange white sticks people liked to put in their mouths.
“Find, Ellie!”
I was still confused, but I sniffed around a little on the grass. Find usually started with smelling. And there it was—the same smell that was on the coat.
I remembered how I often found Wally’s socks or his T-shirts and showed them to Jakob. This seemed to be the same sort of thing. Except that I was not supposed to find this coat and bring Jakob to it; I was supposed to find the person who had worn the coat.
Now that I knew what to do, it was easy. The trail was fresh and strong, and it wasn’t hard to follow it along the grass, between two benches, under the trees—and there he was. A man in a yellow sweater and a brown hat, with one of those white sticks in his mouth. When I ran back for Jakob, he knew right away that I had something to Show and he followed me to where the man was still waiting. The man got up and shook Jakob’s hand, and I heard Jakob thanking him after I got a good game of tug-on-a-stick.
The next day was even stranger. Jakob and I went back to the park, and he did nothing but look down at me. “Find!” he said.
I sniffed. No smell of the man with the coat. No smell of Wally. I looked up at Jakob. What did he want me to do?
He was watching me intently. “Find!” he repeated. “Find, Ellie!”
I went back to sniffing the ground, hoping that would give me more clues. There were a lot of interesting smells: the grass itself, the dirt beneath, places here and there where other dogs had peed, some popcorn that had been dropped, a trail where a raccoon had wandered past in the night, another where a rabbit had hopped by a few hours ago. Feet had crisscrossed this area, and so had paws. I sniffed harder.
“Sometimes I need you to look for any people you can, Ellie,” Jakob said. I looked at his face when I heard my name. “Okay? Find!”
At the command I lowered my nose.
There was one smell that was fresh and stood out: female, human, not too old. I followed the trail a few feet. She wore rubber shoes. She’d eaten something with cream cheese for breakfast. She’d gone this way. I looked back at Jakob, to see if he’d tell me I was doing this wrong. He stood still as I moved away from him, watching me with that look he only got when we were Working, as if I were the only thing in the world he could see.
I put my nose back to the ground, not quite sure if this was the right thing to do. Still, Jakob had told me to Find. The easiest thing to Find around here was the track of the girl who’d eaten cream cheese. I started to follow her.
Her trail led me to a bench. I stopped and sniffed hard. She’d sat here for a little while; I could smell her shoes and her clothes, her skin and her hair. But she wasn’t here now. So Find was not over yet.
I followed the girl’s trail away from the bench, across a lawn with soft grass. Some young humans were throwing a ball there and shouting. I moved quickly across the soft grass, and a red ball rolled right in front of my nose. It would have been so easy to pick it up and run back with it to the boy who had thrown it. Jakob wasn’t here to see me do it, and it would only be a minute or two of play. The ball was right there, just inches from my nose. …
But what about the girl? I was supposed to Find her. Jakob had said so. I couldn’t stop and play now. There wasn’t time for that. This was Work. Play came later.
The girl’s trail led me across a muddy path. Then it started to wind around the roots of trees. I jumped across a thick root that twisted like a snake, and there she was, sitting under a tree with a book on her lap.
She looked up at me and smiled, then looked down and turned a page.
I ran to find Jakob, dashing back across the lawn, running right through the game of catch, feeling a little worried. Was this right? Was this what he’d wanted me to do?

Art Not Final
It seemed to be. “Show me!” he said as soon as I reached him. And, “Good dog!” when I brought him to the girl. “Good dog, Ellie!”
“What are you doing?” asked the girl, putting her book down on her lap and staring at us.
“She’s a search-and-rescue dog,” Jakob explained. “She’s training to find people.”
The girl smiled widely. “And she found me?”
“That she did.” Jakob found a stick for me and we played around the little clearing. The girl didn’t seem to know that it was her job to play tug-on-a-Stick. (Wally always knew.) But I didn’t care too much, so long as someone was willing to pull and wrestle with me.
Maybe the girl wasn’t all that bright, but she was still nice. She laughed and put out her hand when I came near, and I hoped she might have some cream cheese to share. She didn’t have any, but she scratched behind my ears. That was nice, too.
I didn’t like the next person I Found quite as much. He was crouched in a bush with a pair of big, strange-looking glasses held to his eyes, and he smelled sour, as if he hadn’t had a good bath in a while. Someone needed to spray him with a hose.
“Shoo!” he hissed at me when I Found him the first time, and when I brought Jakob to him he stood up and frowned as Jakob called me a good dog and let me tug him all around the bush with my stick.
“Do you mind playing with your dog somewhere else?” the man asked grumpily. “You’ve scared off a scarlet tanager!”
“Sorry, sir,” Jakob said. I didn’t know what was being said, but the man seemed unhappy and Jakob didn’t seem too concerned about it.
We Found a lot of people in the days after that. Some were glad to see us; some were not. But Jakob always told me I was a good dog, no matter how the person I Found acted. This was what Work meant, I decided. I was supposed to Find people and take Jakob to them, so that he could decide whether they were the right people or not. That was his job. Finding them was mine.
I had been with Jakob about a year when he started taking me to a new place to Work. This place had a lot of people in it, most of them dressed like Jakob. They were friendly and called me by name, but they drew back respectfully when Jakob told me to Heel.
There were also some other dogs in this Work place. Jakob took me out back to a fenced-in pen. “Here’s your kennel, girl,” he said. Two other dogs were inside already, Cammie and Gypsy. Cammie was jet-black and Gypsy was brown.
I stood still and let them sniff me all over when Jakob opened the door and let me inside. Then it was my turn to sniff them. They smelled all right. Gypsy was about my age; Cammie was older. After he’d inspected me, Cammie settled down on the ground with a sigh, as if he didn’t find a new dog all that interesting.
Gypsy, though, had a fuzzy green ball in her mouth. She put it on the ground and let it roll a few inches away. Then she snatched it up again. She looked at me.
Hmmmm. A ball. A ball was something I could play with. Why should Gypsy have the ball and not me?
I didn’t let on how much I’d like to have a ball, too. But the next time Gypsy allowed the ball to roll away, I pounced. She raced me to it, but she wasn’t fast enough. I had it now! Gypsy chased me all around the kennel, and Cammie groaned a little when we tore right past his nose. Then I let Gypsy have the ball again and it was her turn to chase me.
But when Jakob came out into the yard, I quickly dropped the ball and went to sit by the fence to watch him. Gypsy snatched the ball up, but she came over, too. Even Cammie sat up, and his ears were alert.
Was it time to Work?
It didn’t seem to be. Jakob just looked at me and nodded. “Getting on all right?” he asked, and then he scratched my ears through the wire fence before he left again.
That was how it was, in the kennel. When Gypsy and I had time, we played while Cammie watched. But if a person walked into the yard, our games were over. We dashed to the fence, ready if the call to Work came.
Gypsy worked with a police officer named Paul, and they were gone a lot. But sometimes I saw them work in the yard. They did it all wrong! Gypsy just poked her nose in between boxes and into piles of clothing, even when it was obvious there wasn’t a person hidden there. Worse, she’d alert Paul when she hadn’t Found anyone! But he always called her a good dog anyway and pulled a little package out from wherever her nose had been pointed.
Cammie didn’t bother to watch Gypsy. Probably he felt embarrassed for the poor dog. Cammie’s person was named Amy, and they didn’t go out much. When they did, though, they went fast. Amy would come and get Cammie and they’d leave at a run.
I didn’t really understand what either of them was doing. But I knew it couldn’t be as important as Find.
“Where you working this week?” Amy asked Paul once.
“Looking for drug smugglers out at the airport again, until Garcia comes off sick leave,” Paul told her. “How’s life on the bomb squad?”
“Quiet. I’m worried about Cammie, though. His scores have been a little off. I’m wondering if his nose is going.”
At the sound of his name Cammie raised his head, and I looked over at him.
“He’s, what, ten years old now?” Paul asked.
“About that,” Amy answered.
I stood up and shook myself because I could sense Jakob coming. A few seconds later he walked around the corner. He and the other officers stood and talked while we dogs watched them, wondering why they didn’t let us out into the yard to be with them.
Suddenly I felt a surge of excitement off Jakob. He spoke to his shoulder, in that same funny way humans sometimes held up boxes near their faces and talked into them. “10-4, Unit Eight-Kilo-Six responding,” he said.
Amy ran over to our gate. Cammie jumped up, but Amy didn’t call for him. She was looking at me. “Ellie!” Amy commanded. “Come!”
Jakob was running and I streaked past Amy, chasing him. In moments we were out of the yard and I was in the cage in the back of the truck. I found myself panting, picking up some of Jakob’s excitement.
Something told me that whatever was happening, it was far more important than Find Wally.
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set

This is a work of fiction. All of the characters, organizations, and events portrayed in this novel are either products of the author’s imagination or are used fictitiously.
A DOG’S PURPOSE: ELLIE’S STORY
Copyright © 2015 by W. Bruce Cameron
Reader’s Guide copyright © 2015 by Tor Books
All rights reserved.
A Starscape Book
Published by Tom Doherty Associates, LLC
175 Fifth Avenue
New York, NY 10010
www.tor-forge.com
ISBN 978-0-7653-7469-1 (hardcover)
ISBN 978-1-4668-4299-1 (e-book)
eBooks may be purchased for business or promotional use. For information on bulk purchases, please contact Macmillan Corporate and Premium Sales Department by writing to MacmillanSpecialMarkets@macmillan.com.
First Edition: April 2015
0  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1

This is a work of fiction. All of the characters, organizations, and events portrayed in this novel are either products of the author’s imagination or are used fictitiously.
A DOG’S PURPOSE: ELLIE’S STORY
Copyright © 2015 by W. Bruce Cameron
Reader’s Guide copyright © 2015 by Tor Books
All rights reserved.
A Starscape Book
Published by Tom Doherty Associates, LLC
175 Fifth Avenue
New York, NY 10010
www.tor-forge.com
ISBN 978-0-7653-7469-1 (hardcover)
ISBN 978-1-4668-4299-1 (e-book)
eBooks may be purchased for business or promotional use. For information on bulk purchases, please contact Macmillan Corporate and Premium Sales Department by writing to MacmillanSpecialMarkets@macmillan.com.
First Edition: April 2015
0  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set
Forge Books by W. Bruce Cameron
A Dog’s Purpose
Told from the perspective of a dog who reincarnates and remembers all of his lives and the people he loves, this is a joyous and moving story of the unbreakable bonds between humans and canines.
A Dog’s Journey
This direct sequel to A Dog’s Purpose shows us that true love never dies, and our real friends are always with us if we just know where to look. An uplifting, joyful, and ultimately satisfying conclusion to the life journey of a very wise dog.
The Dogs of Christmas
A charming and heartwarming holiday story that explores the power of love, trust, and a basket full of puppies—do we rescue dogs, or do they rescue us?
A Dog’s Purpose: Ellie’s Story
The story of Ellie, the search-and-rescue dog from A Dog’s Purpose, adapted for a middle-grade audience with adorable black-and-white illustrations.
Emory’s Gift
An endearing, profound, and sometimes hilarious look at one boy’s coming-of-age discovery of what really matters—faith, family, and love—when all seems lost.
The Midnight Plan of the Repo Man
A sweet romance, a murder mystery, a lazy but loyal dog, and a town full of cabin-fevered characters you can’t help but love. This is yet another laugh-out-loud, keep-you-up-late, irresistible read.
The Dog Master
30,000 years ago, humanity stood on the brink of extinction. In this sweeping epic, Cameron tells the story of the very first dog in the history of the world, and how her presence literally saved mankind.
-----
www.tor-forge.com
A Dog’s Purpose Boxed Set

A DOG’S PURPOSE BOXED SET. Copyright © 2014 by W. Bruce Cameron.
All rights reserved.
For information, address A Tom Doherty Associates Book, LLC, 175 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10010.
eISBN: 978-1-4668-7340-7
First eBook Edition: 2014
eBooks may be purchased for business or promotional use. For information on bulk purchases, please contact Macmillan Corporate and Premium Sales Department by writing to MacmillanSpecialMarkets@macmillan.com.

A DOG’S PURPOSE BOXED SET. Copyright © 2014 by W. Bruce Cameron.
All rights reserved.
For information, address A Tom Doherty Associates Book, LLC, 175 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10010.
eISBN: 978-1-4668-7340-7
First eBook Edition: 2014
eBooks may be purchased for business or promotional use. For information on bulk purchases, please contact Macmillan Corporate and Premium Sales Department by writing to MacmillanSpecialMarkets@macmillan.com.
