HOW THINGS WORK
T H E P H Y S I C S O F E V E R Y D AY L I F E
SIXTH EDITION

LOUIS A. BLOOMFIELD

6

TH
EDITION

How
Things
Work
THE PHYSICS OF EVERYDAY LIFE

Louis A. Bloomfield
The University of Virginia

To Karen for being such a wonderful friend and companion,
to Aaron, Elana, and Rich for being everything a father could want,
to Max and Rosie for being so cheerful and attentive,
and to the students of the University of Virginia for making teaching, research, and writing fun.
VP & DIRECTOR:
EXECUTIVE EDITOR:
DEVELOPMENT EDITOR:
ASSISTANT DEVELOPMENT EDITOR:
EXECUTIVE MARKETING MANAGER:
ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR, PRODUCT DELIVERY:
SENIOR PRODUCTION EDITOR:
PRODUCT DESIGNER:
SENIOR PHOTO EDITOR:
DESIGN DIRECTOR:
COVER AND TEXT DESIGNER:

Petra Recter
Jessica Fiorillo
Jennifer Yee
Mallory Fryc
Christine Kushner
Kevin Holm
Sandra Dumas
Geraldine Osnato
Billy Ray
Harry Nolan
Thomas Nery

This book was set in 10/12 Times Roman by Aptara Corporation. Book and cover were printed and bound by Quad Graphics/Versailles.
The book is printed on acid-free paper.
Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. has been a valued source of knowledge and understanding for more than 200 years, helping people
around the world meet their needs and fulfill their aspirations. Our company is built on a foundation of principles that include responsibility to
the communities we serve and where we live and work. In 2008, we launched a Corporate Citizenship Initiative, a global effort to address the
environmental, social, economic, and ethical challenges we face in our business. Among the issues we are addressing are carbon impact, paper
specifications and procurement, ethical conduct within our business and among our vendors, and community and charitable support. For more
information, please visit our website: www.wiley.com/go/citizenship.
Copyright © 2016, 2013, 2010, 2006, 1997. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either
the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center,
Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, website www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the
Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, website
www.wiley.com/go/-permissions.
Evaluation copies are provided to qualified academics and professionals for review purposes only, for use in their courses during the next academic year.
These copies are licensed and may not be sold or transferred to a third party. Upon completion of the review period, please return the evaluation copy to
Wiley. Return instructions and a free-of-charge return shipping label are available at www.wiley.com/go/returnlabel. If you have chosen to adopt this book
for use in your course, please accept this book as your complimentary desk copy. Outside of the United States, please contact your local representative.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Bloomfield, Louis, author.
Title: How things work : the physics of everyday life / Louis A. Bloomfield,
The University of Virginia.
Description: Sixth edition. | Hoboken, NJ : John Wiley & Sons, Inc., [2015] |
?2016 | Includes index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2015033708| ISBN 9781119013846 (loose-leaf : alk. paper) |
ISBN 1119013844 (loose-leaf: alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Physics—Textbooks.
Classification: LCC QC21.3 .B56 2015 | DDC 530—dc23 LC record available at http://lccn.loc.gov/2015033708
ISBN

978-1119-01384-6

(Binder Version)

The inside back cover will contain printing identification and country of origin if omitted from this page. In addition, if the ISBN on the back
cover differs from the ISBN on this page, the one on the back cover is correct.
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Foreword

I 

n today’s world we are surrounded by science and by
the technology that has grown out of that science. For
most of us, this is making the world increasingly mysterious and somewhat ominous as technology becomes
ever more powerful. For instance, we are confronted by
many global environmental questions such as the dangers of greenhouse gases and the best choices of energy
sources. These are questions that are fundamentally technical in nature and there is a bewildering variety of claims
and counterclaims as to what is “the truth” on these and
similar important scientific issues. For many people, the
reaction is to throw up their hands in hopeless frustration
and accept that the modern world is impossible to understand and one can only huddle in helpless ignorance at the
mercy of its mysterious and inexplicable behavior.
In fact, much of the world around us and the technology of our everyday lives is governed by a few basic
physics principles, and once these principles are understood, the world and the vast array of technology in our
lives become understandable and predictable. How does
your microwave oven heat up food? Why is your radio
reception bad in some places and not others? And why
can birds happily land on a high-voltage electrical wire?
The answers to questions like these are obvious once you
know the relevant physics. Unfortunately, you are not
likely to learn that from a standard physics course or
physics textbook. There is a large body of research showing that, instead of providing this improved understanding of
everyday life, most introductory physics courses are
doing quite the opposite. In spite of the best intentions of
the teachers, most students are “learning” that physics is
abstract, uninteresting, and unrelated to the world around
them.
How Things Work is a dramatic step toward changing
that by presenting physics in a new way. Instead of starting out with abstract principles that leave the reader with
the idea that physics is about artificial and uninteresting
ideas, Lou Bloomfield starts out talking about real objects
and devices that we encounter in our everyday lives. He
then shows how these seemingly magical devices can be
understood in terms of the basic physics principles that
govern their behavior. This is much the way that most
physics was discovered in the first place: people asked
why the world around them behaved as it did and as a
result discovered the principles that explained and predicted what they observed.

I have been using this book in my classes for several
years, and I continue to be impressed with how Lou can
take seemingly highly complex devices and strip away
the complexity to show how at their heart are simple
physics ideas. Once these ideas are understood, they can
be used to understand the behavior of many devices we
encounter in our daily lives, and often even fix things that
before had seemed impossibly complex. In the process of
teaching from this book, I have increased my own understanding of the physics behind much of the world around
me. In fact, after consulting How Things Work, I have had
the confidence to confront both plumbers and airconditioner repairmen to tell them (correctly as it turned out)
that their diagnosis did not make sense and they needed to
do something different to solve my plumbing and AC
problems. Now I am regularly amused at the misconceptions some trained physicists have about some of the
physics they encounter in their daily lives, such as how a
microwave oven works and why it can be made out of
metal walls, but putting aluminum foil in it is bad. It has
convinced me that we need to take the approach used in
this book in far more of our science texts.
Of course, the most important impact is on the students in my classes that use this book. These are typically
nonscience students majoring in fields such as film
studies, classics, English, business, etc. They often come
to physics with considerable trepidation. It is inspiring to
see many of them discover to their surprise that physics is
very different from what they thought—that physics can
actually be interesting and useful and makes the world a
much less mysterious and more understandable place. I
remember many examples of seeing this in action: the
student who, after learning how both speakers and TVs
work, was suddenly able to understand that it was not
magic that putting his large speaker next to the TV distorted the picture but in fact it was just physics, and now
he knew just how to fix it; the young woman scuba diver
who, after learning about light and color, suddenly interrupted
class to announce that now she understood why it was
that you could tell how deep you were by seeing what
color lobsters appeared; or the students who announced
that suddenly it made sense that the showers on the first
floor of the dorm worked better than those on the second
floor. In addition, of course everyone is excited to learn
how a microwave oven works and why there are these
strange rules as to what you can and cannot put in it.
v

vi

Foreword

These examples are particularly inspiring to a teacher,
because they tell you that the students are not just learning the material presented in class but they are then able
to apply that understanding to new situations in a useful
way, something that happens far too seldom in science
courses.
Whether a curious layperson, a trained physicist, or a
beginning physics student, most everyone will find this

book an interesting and enlightening read and will go
away comforted in that the world is not so strange and
inexplicable after all.
Carl Wieman
Nobel Laureate in Physics 2001
CASE/Carnegie US University Professor

Contents

CHAPTER 1

T H E L AW S OF M OTI ON, PART 1

1

Active Learning Experiment: Removing a Tablecloth from a Table
Chapter Itinerary
1.1

Skating

1

2

2

(inertia, coasting, vector quantities, position, velocity, force, acceleration, mass,
net force, Newton’s first and second laws, inertial frames of reference, units)

1.2

Falling Balls

12

(gravity, weight, constant acceleration, projectile motion, vector components)

1.3

Ramps

21

(support forces, Newton’s third law, energy, work, conservation of energy,
kinetic and potential energies, gravitational potential energy, ramps, mechanical
advantage)

Epilogue for Chapter 1 31 / Explanation: Removing a Tablecloth
from a Table 31 / Chapter Summary and Important Laws and
Equations 31

CHAPTER 2

T H E L AW S OF M OTI ON, PART 2
Active Learning Experiment: A Spinning Pie Dish
Chapter Itinerary
2.1

Seesaws

33
33

34

34

(rotational inertia; angular velocity; torque; angular acceleration; rotational mass;
net torque; Newton’s first, second, and third laws of rotation; centers of mass and
gravity; levers; balance)

2.2

Wheels

48

(friction, traction, ordered and thermal energies, wheels, bearings, kinetic energy,
power, rotational work)

2.3

Bumper Cars

59

(momentum, impulse, conservation of momentum, angular momentum, angular
impulse, conservation of angular momentum, gradients, potential energy,
acceleration, and forces)

Epilogue for Chapter 2 70 / Explanation: A Spinning Pie Dish 70 /
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 70
vii

viii

Content

CHAPTER 3

ME C HANI CAL OBJ ECTS PART 1

72

Active Learning Experiment: Swinging Water Overhead
Chapter Itinerary
3.1

72

73

Spring Scales

73

(equilibrium, stable equilibrium, restoring force, Hooke’s law, elastic potential
energy, oscillation, calibration)

3.2

Ball Sports: Bouncing

79

(collisions, energy transfers, elastic and inelastic collisions, vibration)

3.3

Carousels and Roller Coasters

86

(uniform circular motion, feeling of acceleration, apparent weight, centripetal
acceleration)

Epilogue for Chapter 3 94 / Explanation: Swinging Water Overhead 94 /
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 95

CHAPTER 4

ME C HANI CAL OBJ ECTS PART 2
Active Learning Experiment: High-Flying Balls
Chapter Itinerary
4.1

Bicycles

96
96

97

97

(stable, neutral, and unstable equilibriums; static and dynamic stability;
precession)

4.2

Rockets and Space Travel

104

(reaction forces, law of universal gravitation, elliptical orbits, escape velocity,
Kepler’s laws, speed of light, special and general relativity, equivalence principle)

Epilogue for Chapter 4 117 / Explanation: High-Flying Balls 117 /
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 117

CHAPTER 5

FL U ID S

119

Active Learning Experiment: A Cartesian Diver
Chapter Itinerary
5.1

Balloons

119

120

120

(pressure, density, temperature, thermal motion, absolute zero, Archimedes’
principle, buoyant force, ideal gas law)

5.2

Water Distribution

131

(hydrostatics, Pascal’s principle, hydraulics, hydrodynamics, steady state flow,
streamlines, pressure potential energy, Bernoulli’s equation)

Epilogue for Chapter 5 140 / Explanation: A Cartesian Diver 140 /
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 141

Content

CHAPTER 6

FL UI D S AND M OTI ON

142

Active Learning Experiment: A Vortex Cannon
Chapter Itinerary
6.1

ix

142

143

Garden Watering

143

(viscous forces, Poiseuille’s law, laminar and turbulent flows, speed and pressure
in a fluid, Reynolds number, chaos, momentum in a fluid)

6.2

Ball Sports: Air

153

(aerodynamics, aerodynamic lift and drag, viscous drag, pressure drag, boundary
layers, stalls, Magnus and wake deflection forces)

6.3

Airplanes

161

(airfoils, streamlining, lifting wings, angle of attack, induced drag, stalled wings,
thrust)

Epilogue for Chapter 6 171 / Explanation: A Vortex Cannon 171 /
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 171

CHAPTER 7

H E AT AND PHASE TRANSI TI ONS
Active Learning Experiment: A Ruler Thermometer
Chapter Itinerary

174

7.1

174

Woodstoves

173
173

(thermal energy, heat, temperature, thermal equilibrium, chemical bonds and
reactions, conduction, thermal conductivity, convection, radiation, heat capacity)

7.2

Water, Steam, and Ice

184

(phases of matter, phase transitions, melting, freezing, condensation, evaporation,
relative humidity, latent heats of melting and evaporation, sublimation, deposition,
boiling, nucleation, superheating)

7.3

Clothing, Insulation, and Climate

192

(thermal conductivity, electromagnetic spectrum, light, blackbody spectrum,
emissivity, Stefan-Boltzmann law, thermal expansion, greenhouse effect)

Epilogue for Chapter 7 205 / Explanation: A Ruler Thermometer 206 /
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 206

CHAPTER 8

TH E R M O DYNAM I CS
Active Learning Experiment: Making Fog in a Bottle
Chapter Itinerary
8.1

208
208

209

Air Conditioners

209

(laws of thermodynamics, temperature, heat, entropy, heat pumps and thermodynamic
efficiency)

x

Content

8.2

Automobiles

219

(heat engines and thermodynamic efficiency)

Epilogue for Chapter 8 228 / Explanation: Making Fog in a Bottle 228 /
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 228

CHAPTER 9

R E S O N ANCE AND M ECHANI CAL WAVES

230

Active Learning Experiment: A Singing Wineglass 230
Chapter Itinerary
9.1

Clocks

231

231

(time and space, natural resonance, harmonic oscillators, simple harmonic motion,
frequency, period, amplitude)

9.2

Musical Instruments

241

(sound; music; vibrations in strings, air, and surfaces; fundamental and higher-order
modes; harmonic and nonharmonic overtones; sympathetic vibration; standing and
traveling waves; transverse and longitudinal waves; velocity and wavelength in
mechanical waves; superposition; Doppler effect)

9.3

The Sea

254

(tidal forces; surface waves; dispersion, refraction, reflection, and interference in
mechanical waves)

Epilogue for Chapter 9 263 / Explanation: A Singing Wineglass 263 /
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 264

CHAPTER 10

E L E C T R I CI T Y

266

Active Learning Experiment: Moving Water without Touching It
Chapter Itinerary

266

267

10.1 Static Electricity 267
(electric charge, electrostatic forces, Coulomb’s law, electrostatic potential
energy, voltage, charging by contact, electric polarization, electrical conductors
and insulators)

10.2 Xerographic Copiers 276
(electric fields and voltage gradients, electric fields inside and outside conductors,
discharges, charging by induction, capacitors)

10.3 Flashlights 287
(electric current; electric circuits; direction of current flow; electrical resistance;
voltage drops; voltage rises; relationship among current, voltage, and power; Ohm’s
law; resistors; series and parallel circuits)

Epilogue for Chapter 10 299 / Explanation: Moving Water without
Touching It 300 / Chapter Summary and Important Laws and
Equations 301

Content

CHAPTER 11

MAG NET I SM AND ELECTRODYNAM I CS
Active Learning Experiment: A Nail and Wire Electromagnet
Chapter Itinerary

xi

302
302

303

11.1 Household Magnets 303
(magnetic pole, magnetostatic forces, Coulomb’s law for magnetism, ferromagnetism,
magnetic polarization, magnetic domains, magnetic materials, magnetic fields,
magnetic flux lines, relationship between currents and magnetic fields)

11.2

Electric Power Distribution

313

(direct and alternating currents, superconductivity, transformers, induction,
magnetic field energy, relationship between changing magnetic fields and electric
fields, Lenz’s law, inductors, induced emf, electrical safety, generators, motors)

Epilogue for Chapter 11 329 / Explanation: A Nail and Wire
Electromagnet 330 / Chapter Summary and Important Laws and
Equations 330

CHAPTER 12

E L ECT R O M AGNETI C WAVES
Active Learning Experiment: A Disc in the Microwave Oven
Chapter Itinerary

332
332

333

12.1 Radio 333
(relationship between changing electric fields and magnetic fields, electric field
energy, tank circuits, antennas, electromagnetic waves, speed of light, wave
polarization, amplitude modulation, frequency modulation, bandwidth)

12.2 Microwave Ovens 343
(speed, frequency, and wavelength in electromagnetic waves; polar and nonpolar
molecules; Lorentz force; cyclotron motion)

Epilogue for Chapter 12 351 / Explanation: A Disc in the Microwave
Oven 351 / Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 351

CHAPTER 13

LIGHT

353

Active Learning Experiment: Splitting the Colors of Sunlight
Chapter Itinerary

353

354

13.1 Sunlight 354
(light, Rayleigh scattering, index of refraction, impedance, refraction, reflection,
dispersion, and interference in electromagnetic waves, polarized reflection)

13.2 Discharge Lamps 363
(color vision, primary colors of light and pigment, illumination, gas discharges,
quantum physics, wave-particle duality, atomic orbitals, Pauli exclusion principle,

xii

Content

atomic structure, periodic chart, radiative transitions, Planck’s constant, atomic
fluorescence, radiation trapping)

13.3

LEDs and Lasers 377

(levels in solids; band structure; Fermi level; metals, insulators, and semiconductors;
photoconductors; p-n junction; diodes; light-emitting diodes; incoherent and coherent
light; spontaneous and stimulated emission; population inversion; laser amplification
and oscillation; laser safety)

Epilogue for Chapter 13 390 / Explanation: Splitting the Colors of
Sunlight 390 / Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 391

CHAPTER 14

O P T IC S AND ELECTRONI CS

392

Active Learning Experiment: Magnifying Glass Camera 392
Chapter Itinerary

393

14.1 Cameras 393
(refracting optics, converging lenses, real images, focus, focal lengths, f-numbers,
the lens equation, diverging lenses, virtual images, light sensors, vision and vision
correction)

14.2

Optical Recording and Communication

403

(analog vs. digital representations, decimal and binary representations, diffraction,
diffraction limit, plane and circular polarization, total internal reflection)

14.3 Audio Players 413
(transistors, MOSFETs, bits and bytes, logic elements, amplifiers, feedback)

Epilogue for Chapter 14 422 / Explanation: Magnifying Glass Camera 422 /
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 423

CHAPTER 15

MO D ER N PHYSI CS

425

Active Learning Experiment: Radiation-Damaged Paper
Chapter Itinerary

425

425

15.1 Nuclear Weapons 426
(nuclear structure, Heisenberg uncertainty principle, quantum tunneling, radioactivity,
half-life, fission, chain reaction, isotopes, alpha decay, fusion, transmutation of
elements, radioactive fallout)

15.2 Nuclear Reactors 438
(controlling nuclear fission, delayed neutrons, thermal fission reactors, moderators,
boiling water and pressurized water reactors, fast fission reactors, nuclear reactor
safety and accidents, inertial confinement and magnetic confinement fusion)

15.3

Medical Imaging and Radiation

448

(X-rays, X-ray fluorescence, Bremsstrahlung, photoelectric effect, Compton scattering,
antimatter, gamma rays, beta decay, fundamental forces, particle accelerators,
magnetic resonance)

Content

xiii

Epilogue for Chapter 15 458 / Explanation: Radiation-Damaged Paper 458 /
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 459

APPENDICES

460
A

Vectors

B

Units, Conversion of Units

Glossary

460

465

Index 481

462

Preface

hysics is a remarkably practical science. Not only
does it explain how things work or why they don’t,
it also offers great insight into how to create, improve, and repair those things. Because of that fundamental relationship between physics and real objects,
introductory physics books are essentially users’ manuals
for the world in which we live.
Like users’ manuals, however, introductory physics
books are most accessible when they’re based on realworld examples. Both users’ manuals and physics texts
tend to go unread when they’re written like reference
works, organized by abstract technical issues, indifferent
to relevance, and lacking in useful examples. For practical guidance, most readers turn to “how to” books and
tutorials instead; they prefer the “case-study” approach.
How Things Work is an introduction to physics and
science that starts with whole objects and looks inside
them to see what makes them work. It follows the casestudy method, exploring physics concepts on a need-toknow basis in the context of everyday objects. More than
just an academic volume, this book is intended to be
interesting, relevant, and useful to non-science students.
Most physics texts develop the principles of physics
first and present real-life examples of these principles
reluctantly if at all. That approach is abstract and inaccessible, providing few conceptual footholds for students as
they struggle to understand unfamiliar principles. After
all, the comforts of experience and intuition lie in the
examples, not in the principles. While a methodical and
logical development of scientific principles can be satisfying to the seasoned scientist, it’s alien to someone who
doesn’t even recognize the language being used.
In contrast, How Things Work brings science to the
reader rather than the reverse. It conveys an understanding and appreciation for physics by finding physics
concepts and principles within the familiar objects of
everyday experience. Because its structure is defined by
real-life examples, this book necessarily discusses concepts as they’re needed and then revisits them whenever
they reappear in other objects. What better way is there to
show the universality of the natural laws?
I wrote this book to be read, not merely referred to. It
has always been for nonscientists and I designed it with
them in mind. In the seventeen years I have been teaching

P
 

xiv

How Things Work, many of my thousands of students have
been surprised at their own interest in the physics of
everyday life, have asked insightful questions, have experimented on their own, and have found themselves explaining to friends and family how things in their world work.

Changes in the Sixth Edition
Content Changes
• Video figures. If a picture is worth a thousand words,
a video is worth a thousand pictures. That’s particularly true for this book because so much of physics
is about how things evolve with time. Most students
consider themselves visual learners—they need to
see what happens in order to understand it. Given
that requirement, still images are so 20th century.
In this edition, I have replaced many of the
static figures with video figures, using the tools of
modern 3D animation and video editing. In print,
those video figures are distilled into motionless
images but online, they move and talk. Whenever
possible and practical, the video figures are quantitatively accurate in both time and space. They’re
not just cartoons; they’re careful models of the real
world.
• Rewriting and editing. Despite teaching How
Things Work for almost 25 years, I am still learning how to explain the physics of everyday life.
I continue to discover clearer approaches, better
analogies, and more effective techniques for conveying understanding and avoiding misconceptions.
For this edition, I have examined every word of the
book, editing and rewriting it to make sure that it is
doing the best job possible.
• Improved discussions of many physics concepts.
No one book can or should cover all of physics, but
whatever physics is included should be presented
carefully enough to be worthwhile. In this edition, I
have refined the discussions of many physics issues
and added some new ones. Look for improved coverage of concepts such as orbits, magnetic induction, and antennas, to name just a few.

Preface

The Goals of This Book
As they read this book, students should:
1. Begin to see science in everyday life. Science is
everywhere; we need only open our eyes to see it. We’re
surrounded by things that can be understood in terms of
science, much of which is within a student’s reach. Seeing
science doesn’t mean that when viewing an oil painting
they should note only the selective reflection of incident
light waves by organic and inorganic molecules. Rather,
they should realize that there’s a beauty to science that
complements aesthetic beauty. They can learn to look at
a glorious red sunset and appreciate both its appearance
and why it exists.
2. Learn that science isn’t frightening. The increasing technological complexity of our world has instilled
within most people a significant fear of science. As the
gulf widens between those who create technology and
those who use it, their ability to understand one another
and communicate diminishes. The average person no
longer tinkers with anything and many modern devices
are simply disposable, being too complicated to modify
or repair. To combat the anxiety that accompanies unfamiliarity, this book shows students that most objects can
be examined and understood, and that the science behind
them isn’t scary after all. The more we understand how
others think, the better off we’ll all be.
3. Learn to think logically in order to solve problems.
Because the universe obeys a system of well-defined
rules, it permits a logical understanding of its behaviors.
Like mathematics and computer science, physics is a field
of study where logic reigns supreme. Having learned a
handful of simple rules, students can combine them logically to obtain more complicated rules and be certain that
those new rules are true. So the study of physical systems
is a good place to practice logical thinking.
4. Develop and expand their physical intuition. When
you’re exiting from a highway, you don’t have to consider
velocity, acceleration, and inertia to know that you should
brake gradually—you already have physical intuition that
tells you the consequences of doing otherwise. Such physical intuition is essential in everyday life, but it ordinarily
takes time and experience to acquire. This book aims to
broaden a student’s physical intuition to situations they
normally avoidor have yet to encounter. That is, after all,
one of the purposes of reading and scholarship: to learn
from other people’s experiences.
5. Learn how things work. As this book explores the
objects of everyday life, it gradually uncovers most of the
physical laws that govern the universe. It reveals those
laws as they were originally discovered: while trying to

xv

understand real objects. As they read this book and learn
these laws, students should begin to see the similarities
between objects, shared mechanisms, and recurring
themes that are reused by nature or by people. This book
reminds students of these connections and is ordered so
that later objects build on their understanding of concepts
encountered earlier.
6. Begin to understand that the universe is predictable rather than magical. One of the foundations of science is that effects have causes and don’t simply occur
willy-nilly. Whatever happens, we can look backward in
time to find what caused it. We can also predict the future
to some extent, based on insight acquired from the past
and on knowledge of the present. And where predictability is limited, we can understand those limitations. What
distinguishes the physical sciences and mathematics from
other fields is that there are often absolute answers, free
from inconsistency, contraindication, or paradox. Once
students understand how the physical laws govern the
universe, they can start to appreciate that perhaps the
most magical aspect of our universe is that it is not magic;
that it is orderly, structured, and understandable.
7. Obtain a perspective on the history of science and
technology. None of the objects that this book examines
appeared suddenly and spontaneously in the workshop of
a single individual who was oblivious to what had been
done before. These objects were developed in the context
of history by people who were generally aware of what
they were doing and usually familiar with any similar objects that already existed. Nearly everything is discovered
or developed when related activities make their discoveries or developments inevitable and timely. To establish
that historical context, this book describes some of the
history behind the objects it discusses.

Visual Media
Because this book is about real things, its videos, illustrations, and photographs are about real things, too. Whenever possible, these visual materials are built around
familiar objects so that the concepts they are meant to
convey become associated with objects students already
know. Many students are visual learners—if they see it,
they can learn it. By superimposing the abstract concepts
of physics onto simple realistic visuals, this book attempts
to connect physics with everyday life. That idea is particularly evident at the opening of each section, where the
object examined in that section appears in a carefully
rendered drawing. This drawing provides students with
something concrete to keep in mind as they encounter
the more abstract physical concepts that appear in that
section. By lowering the boundaries between what the

xvi

Preface

Features

• Chapter summary and laws and equations. The
sections covered in each chapter are summarized
briefly at the end of the chapter, with an emphasis
on how the objects work. These summaries are followed by a restatement of the important physical
laws and equations encountered within the chapter.

This printed book contains 40 sections, each of which
discusses how something works. The sections are grouped
together in 15 chapters according to the major physical
themes developed. In addition to the discussion itself, the
sections and chapters include a number of features
intended to strengthen the educational value of this book.
Among these features are:

• Chapter exercises and problems. Following the
chapter summary material is a collection of questions dealing with the physics concepts in that
chapter. Exercises ask the students to apply those
concepts to new situations. Problems ask the students to apply the equations in that chapter and to
obtain quantitative results.

• Chapter introductions, experiments, and itineraries. Each of the 15 chapters begins with a brief introduction to the principal theme underlying that chapter.
It then presents an experiment that students can do
with household items to observe firsthand some of
the issues associated with that physical theme. Lastly,
it presents a general itinerary for the chapter, identifying some of the physical issues that will come up as
the objects in the chapter are discussed.

• Three-way approach to the equation of physics.
The laws and equations of physics are the groundwork on which everything else is built. But because
each student responds differently to the equations,
this book presents them carefully and in context.
Rather than making one size fit all, these equations
are presented in three different forms. The first is a
word equation, identifying each physical quantity
by name to avoid any ambiguities. The second is a
symbolic equation, using the standard format and
notation. The third is a sentence that conveys the
meaning of the equation in simple terms and often
by example. Each student is likely to find one of
these three forms more comfortable, meaningful,
and memorable than the others.

students see in the book and what they see in their environment, the rich visual media associated with this book
makes science a part of their world.

• Section introductions, questions, and experiments. Each of the 40 sections explains how something works. Often that something is a specific object or group of objects, but it is sometimes more
general. A section begins by introducing the object and then asks a number of questions about it,
questions that might occur to students as they think
about the object and that are answered by the section. Lastly, it suggests some simple experiments
that students can do to observe some of the physical
concepts that are involved in the object.
• Check your understanding and check your figures. Sections are divided into a number of brief
segments, each of which ends with a “Check Your
Understanding” question. These questions apply the
physics of the preceding segment to new situations
and are followed by answers and explanations.
Segments that introduce important equations also
end with a “Check Your Figures” question. These
questions show how the equations can be applied
and are also followed by answers and explanations.
• Chapter epilogue and explanation of experiment. Each chapter ends with an epilogue that reminds the students of how the objects they studied in that chapter fit within the chapter’s physical
theme. Following the epilogue is a brief explanation of the experiment suggested at the beginning
of the chapter, using physical concepts that were
developed in the intervening sections.

• Glossary. The key physics terms are assembled into
a glossary at the end of the book. Each glossary term
is also marked in bold in the text when it first appears together with its contextual definition.
• Historical, technical, and biographical asides. To
show how issues discussed in this book fit into the
real world of people, places, and things, a number
of brief asides have been placed in the margins of
the text. An appropriate time at which to read a particular aside is marked in the text by a color-coded
mark such as .

Organization
The 40 sections that make up this book are ordered so that
they follow a familiar path through physics: mechanics,
heat and thermodynamics, resonance and mechanical
waves, electricity and magnetism, light, optics, and electronics, and modern physics. Because there are too many
topics here to cover in a single semester, the book is
designed to allow shortcuts through the material. In general, the final sections in each chapter and the final chapters
in each of the main groups mentioned above can be omitted

Preface

without serious impact on the material that follows. The
only exceptions to that rule are the first two chapters, which
should be covered in their entirety as the introduction to
any course taught from this book. The book also divides
neatly in half so that it can be used for two independent
one-semester courses—the first covering Chapters 1–9 and
the second covering Chapters 1, 2, and 10–15. That twocourse approach is the one I use myself. A detailed guide to
shortcuts appears on the instructor’s website.

WileyPlus Learning Space
With Orion
Within WileyPLUS Learning Space, instructors can organize learning activities, manage student collaboration,
and customize their course. Students can collaborate and
have meaningful discussions on concepts they are learning. ORION provides students with a personal, adaptive
learning experience so they can build their proficiency on
concepts and use their study time most effectively.
ORION helps students learn by learning about them and
providing them with a personalized experience that helps
them to pace themselves through the course based on
their ongoing performance and level of understanding.
The WileyPLUS Learning Space course includes the
following:
• Online book with extensive video figures and annotation. Although this book aims to be complete
and self-contained, its pages can certainly benefit
from additional explanations, answers to open questions, discussions of figures and equations, and reallife demonstrations of objects, ideas, and concepts.
Using the web, I can provide all of those features.
The online version of this book is annotated with
hundreds, even thousands of short videos that bring
it to life and enhance its ability to teach.
• Computer simulations of the book’s objects. One
of the best ways to learn how a violin or nuclear
reactor works is to experiment with it, but that’s not

xvii

always practical or safe. Computer simulations are
the next best thing and the student website includes
many simulations of the book’s objects. Associated
with each simulation is a sequence of interactive questions that turn it into a virtual laboratory experiment.
In keeping with the How Things Work concept, the
student is then able to explore the concepts of physics
in the context of everyday objects themselves.
• Interactive exercises and problems. Homework
is most valuable when it’s accompanied by feedback and guidance. By providing that assistance immediately, along with links to videos, simulations,
the online book, and even additional questions, the
website transforms homework from mere assessment into a tutorial learning experience.
For more information, go to: www.wileypluslearningspace.
com.

Instructor Companion Website
A broad spectrum of ancillaries are available to support
instructors:
• Test Bank (Word) – Includes over 800 multiple
choice, short answer, and fill-in-the-blank questions.
• Lecture PowerPoints highlight topics to help reinforce students’ grasp of essential concepts.
• Image PowerPoints contain text images and figures,
allowing instructors to customize their presentations
and providing additional support for quizzes and
exams.
• Solutions to Selected Exercises and Problems
• Additional Web Chapters - Materials Science and
Chemical Physics
To see a complete listing of these ancillaries, or to gain
access to them upon adoption and purchase, please visit:

www.wiley.com/college/sc/bloomfield

Acknowledgments
Many people have contributed to this book in one way or another and I am enormously
grateful for their help. First among them are my editors, Jessica Fiorillo and Stuart Johnson,
who together have guided this project and supported me for twenty years. Jennifer Yee has
been amazingly generous with her time and attention in helping me develop this sixth
edition, and Sandra Dumas and Jackie Henry have done a fantastic job of shepherding
it through production. I’m delighted to have had Thomas Nery working on the graphic
design, and Billy Ray working on the photographs. The online component that accompanies the print book would not have been possible or even conceivable without the help of
John Duval and Mallory Fryc. And none of this could have happened without the support,

xviii

Preface

guidance, and encouragement of Christine Kushner, Geraldine Osnato, and Petra Recter.
To my numerous other friends and collaborators at John Wiley, many thanks.
I continue to enjoy tremendous assistance from colleagues here and elsewhere who
have supported the How Things Work concept, discussed it with me, and often taught the
course themselves. They are now too many to list, but I appreciate them all. I am particularly grateful, however, to my colleagues in AMO physics at Virginia, Tom Gallagher, Bob
Jones, Olivier Pfister, and Cass Sackett, for more than making up for my reduced scientific
accomplishments while working on this project, and to Carl Weiman for his vision of physics education as outlined in the foreword to this book. I must also thank our talented lecturedemonstration group, Al Tobias, Max Bychkov, Mike Timmins, Nikolay Sandev, and
Roger Staton, for help to bring physics to life in my class and in the videos for this book.
Of course, the best way to discover how students learn science is to teach it. I am ever
so grateful to the students of the University of Virginia for being such eager, enthusiastic,
and interactive participants in this long educational experiment. It has been a delight and a
privilege to get to know so many of them as individuals and their influence on this enterprise has been immeasurable.
Lastly, this book has benefited more than most from the constructive criticism of a
number of talented reviewers. Their candid, insightful comments were sometimes painful
to read or hear, but they invariably improved the book. Not only did their reviews help me
to present the material more effectively, but they taught me some interesting physics as
well. My deepest thanks to all of these fine people:
Brian DeMarco,
University of Illinois, Urbana Champaign

Tim Kidd,
University of Northern Iowa

Dennis Duke,
Florida State University

Judah Levine,
University of Colorado, Boulder

Donald R. Francesschetti,
University of Memphis

Darryl J. Ozimek,
Duquesne University

Alejandro Garcia,
San Jose State University

Michael Roth,
University of Northern Iowa

Richard Gelderman,
Western Kentucky University

Anna Solomey,
Wichita State University

Robert B. Hallock,
University of Massachusetts, Amherst

Bonnie Wylo,
Eastern Michigan University

Mark James,
Northern Arizona University
The real test of this book, and of any course taught from it, is its impact on students’ lives
long after their classroom days are done. Theirs’ is a time both exciting and perilous; one
in which physics will play an increasingly important and multifaceted role. It is my sincere
hope that their encounter with this book will leave those students better prepared for what
lies ahead and will help them make the world a better place in the years to come.
Louis A. Bloomfield
Charlottesville, Virginia
bloomfield@virginia.edu

1

The Laws of Motion
PART 1

he aim of this book is to broaden your perspectives on familiar objects and situations by
helping you understand the science that makes them work. Instead of ignoring that science
or taking it for granted, we’ll seek it out in the world around us, in the objects we encounter
every day. As we do so, we’ll discover that seemingly “magical” objects and effects are quite understandable once we know a few of the physical concepts that make them possible. In short, we’ll
learn about physics—the study of the material world and the rules that govern its behavior.
To help us get started, this first pair of chapters will do two main things: introduce the language of physics, which we’ll be using throughout the book, and present the basic laws of motion
on which everything else will rest. In later chapters, we’ll examine objects that are interesting and
important, both in their own right and because of the scientific issues they raise. Most of these
objects, as we’ll see, involve many different aspects of physics and thus bring variety to each section and chapter. These first two chapters are special, though, because they must provide an orderly
introduction to the discipline of physics itself.

T

ACTIVE LEARNING
EXPERIMENTS

Removing a Tablecloth from a Table
helps because you can then pull the cloth slightly downward at the edge of the table. When you get up the nerve to
try—with unbreakable dishes, of course—make sure that
you pull suddenly and swiftly, so as to minimize the time
it takes for the cloth to slide out from under the dishes.
Leaving a little slack in the cloth at first helps you get
your hands up to speed before the cloth snaps taut and
begins to slide off the table. Don’t make the mistake of
starting slowly or you’ll decorate the floor.

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

One famous “magical” effect allows a tablecloth to be
removed from a set table without breaking the dishes. The
person performing this stunt pulls the tablecloth sideways
in one lightning-fast motion. The smooth, slippery tablecloth slides out from under the dishes, leaving them
behind and nearly unaffected.
With some practice, you too can do this stunt. Choose
a slick, unhemmed tablecloth, one with no flaws that
might catch on the dishes. A supple fabric such as silk

1

2

CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion

Give the tablecloth a yank and watch what happens.
With luck, the table will remain set. If it doesn’t, try
again, but this time go faster or change the types of dishes
or the way you pull the cloth.
If you don’t have a suitable tablecloth, or any
dishes you care to risk, there are many similar experiments you can try. Put several coins on a sheet of paper
and whisk that sheet out from under them. Or stack several books on a table and use a stiff ruler to knock out
the bottom one. Especially impressive is balancing a

short eraserless pencil on top of a wooden embroidery
hoop that is itself balanced on the open mouth of a
glass bottle. If you yank the ring away quickly enough,
the pencil will be left behind and will drop right into
the bottle.
The purpose of this experiment is addressed in a simple question: Why do the dishes stay put as you remove
the tablecloth? We’ll return to that question at the end of
this chapter. In the meantime, we’ll explore some of the
physics concepts that allow us to answer it.

Chapter Itinerary
To examine these concepts, we’ll look carefully at three kinds of
everyday activities and objects: (1) skating, (2) falling balls, and
(3) ramps. In Skating, we see how objects move when nothing
pushes on them. In Falling Balls, we find out how that movement
can be influenced by gravity. In Ramps, we explore mechanical
advantage and how gradual inclines make it possible to lift heavy
objects without pushing very hard. For a more complete preview of
what we examine in this chapter, flip ahead to the Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations at the end of the chapter.

These activities may seem mundane, but understanding
them in terms of basic physical laws requires considerable
thought. These two introductory chapters will be like climbing
up the edge of a high plateau: the ascent won’t be easy, and our
destination will be hidden from view. However, once we arrive at
the top, with the language and basic concepts of physics in
place, we’ll be able to explain a broad variety of objects with
only a small amount of additional effort. And so we begin the
ascent.

Skating

S E C TIO N 1 . 1

understand the first few laws of motion. We’ll leave sloping
surfaces for the section on ramps and won’t have time to teach
you how to do spins or win a race. Nonetheless, our exploration
of skating will get us well on the way to an understanding of the
fundamental principles that govern all movement and thereby
prepare us for many of the objects we’ll examine in the rest of
this book.

Tongue

Inner boot
Upper shell

Backstay

Buckle

Questions to Think About: What do we mean by “movement”?
What makes skaters move, and once they’re moving, what
keeps them in motion? What does it take to stop a moving
skater or turn that skater in another direction?

Lace
Boot
Boot
Heel
Sole
Axle
Truck

Heel stop

Stanchion

Toe pick

Wheel
Blade

Edge

Like many sports, skating is trickier than it appears. If you’re a
first-time skater, you’re likely to find yourself getting up repeatedly from the ground or ice, and it will take some practice
before you can glide smoothly forward or come gracefully to a
stop. But whether you’re wearing ice skates or roller skates, the
physics of your motion is surprisingly simple. When you’re on a
level surface with your skates pointing forward, you coast!
Coasting is one of the most basic concepts in physics and
our starting point in this book. Joining it in this section will be
starting, stopping, and turning, which together will help us

Experiments to Do: A visit to the ice or roller rink would be
ideal, but even a skateboard or a chair with wheels will suffice.
Get yourself moving forward on a level surface and then let
yourself coast. Why do you keep moving? Is anything pushing
you forward? Does your direction ever reverse as you coast?
How could you describe the details of your motion to someone
on your cell phone? How would you measure your speed?
Before you run into a wall or tree, slow yourself to a
stop. What was it that slowed you down? Were you still coasting as you stopped? Did anything push on you as you slowed
yourself?
Get yourself moving again. What caused you to speed up?
How quickly can you pick up speed, and what do you do differently to speed up quickly? Now turn to one side or the other.
Did anything push on you as you turned? What happened to
your speed? What happened to your direction of travel?

Skating

Gliding Forward: Inertia and Coasting
While you’re putting on your skates, let’s take a moment to think about what happens to a
person who has nothing pushing on her at all. When she’s completely free of outside influences (Fig. 1.1.1), free of pushes and pulls, does she stand still? Does she move? Does she
speed up? Does she slow down? In short, what does she do?
The correct answer to that apparently simple question eluded people for thousands of
years; even Aristotle, perhaps the most learned philosopher of the classical world, was
mistaken about it (see 1 ). What makes this question so tricky is that objects on Earth are
never truly free of outside influences; instead, they all push on, rub against, or interact with
one another in some way.
As a result, it took the remarkable Italian astronomer, mathematician, and physicist
Galileo Galilei many years of careful observation and logical analysis to answer that
question 2 . The solution he came up with, like the question itself, is simple: if the person
is stationary, she will remain stationary; if she is moving in some particular direction, she
will continue moving in that direction at a steady pace, following a straight-line path.
This property of steady motion in the absence of any outside influence is called inertia
(Fig 1.1.2).

INERTIA
A body in motion tends to remain in motion; a body at rest tends to remain at rest.

The main reason that Aristotle failed to discover inertia, and why we often overlook
inertia ourselves, is friction. When you slide across the floor in your shoes, friction quickly
slows you to a stop and masks your inertia. To make inertia more obvious, we must get rid
of friction. That’s why you’re wearing skates.
Skates almost completely eliminate friction, at least in one direction, so that you can
glide effortlessly across the ice or roller rink and experience your own inertia. For simplicity,
imagine that your skates are perfect and experience no friction at all as you glide. Also, for
this and the next couple of sections, let’s forget not only about friction but also about air
resistance. Since the air is calm and you’re not moving too fast, air resistance isn’t all that
important to skating anyway.
Now that you’re ready to skate, we’ll begin to examine five important physical quantities relating to motion and look at their relationships to one another. These quantities are
position, velocity, mass, acceleration, and force.
Let’s start by describing where you are. At any particular moment, you’re located at
a position—that is, at a specific point in space. Whenever we report your position, it’s
always as a distance and direction from some reference point, how many meters north
of the refreshment stand or how many kilometers west of Cleveland. For our discussion
of skating, we’ll choose as our reference point the bench you used while putting on your
skates.
Position is an example of a vector quantity. A vector quantity consists of both a magnitude and a direction; the magnitude tells you how much of the quantity there is, while
the direction tells you which way the quantity is pointing. Vector quantities are common in
nature. When you encounter one, pay attention to the direction part; if you’re looking for
buried treasure 30 paces from the old tree but forget that it’s due east of that tree, you’ll
have a lot of digging ahead of you.
You’re on your feet and beginning to skate. Once you’re moving, your position is
changing, which brings us to our second vector quantity—velocity. Velocity measures the

3

Courtesy of Lou Bloomfield

Fig. 1.1.1 This skater
glides without any horizontal
influences. If she’s
stationary, she’ll tend to
remain stationary; if she’s
moving, she’ll tend to
continue moving.
1 Aristotle (Greek
philosopher, 384–322 bc)
theorized that objects’
velocities were proportional
to the forces exerted on
them. While this theory
correctly predicted the
behavior of a sliding object,
it incorrectly predicted that
heavier objects should fall
faster than lighter objects.
Nonetheless, Aristotle’s
theory was respected for a
long time, in part because
finding the simpler and
more complete theory was
hard and in part because the
scientific method of
relating theory and observation took time to develop.
2 While a professor
in Pisa, Galileo Galilei
(Italian scientist,
1564–1642) was obliged to
teach the natural philosophy of Aristotle.
Troubled with the conflict
between Aristotle’s theory
and observations of the
world around him, Galileo
devised experiments that
measured the speeds at
which objects fall and
determined that all falling
objects fall at the same rate.

4

CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion

rate at which your position is changing with time. Its magnitude is your speed, the distance
you travel in a certain amount of time,
speed =

Fig. 1.1.2 These
baseballs are in deep
space and free from
outside influences. Each
ball moves according to
inertia alone, following
a straight-line path at a
steady pace.

3 In 1664, while Sir Isaac
Newton (English scientist
and mathematician,
1642–1727) was a student
at Cambridge University,
the university was forced
to close for 18 months
because of the plague.
Newton retreated to the
country, where he
discovered the laws of
motion and gravitation
and invented the
mathematical basis
of calculus. These
discoveries, along with his
observation that celestial
objects such as the moon
obey the same simple
physical laws as terrestrial
objects such as an apple (a
new idea for the time), are
recorded in his Philosophiæ
Naturalis Principia
Mathematica, first
published in 1687. This
book is perhaps the most
important and influential
scientific and mathematical
work of all time.

distance
,
time

and its direction is the direction in which you’re heading.
For example, if you move 2 meters (6.6 feet) west in 1 second, then your velocity is 2
meters per second (6.6 feet per second) toward the west. If you maintain that velocity, your
position moves 20 meters west in 10 seconds, 200 meters west in 100 seconds, and so on.
Even when you’re motionless, you still have a velocity—zero. A velocity of zero is special,
however, because it has no direction.
When you’re gliding freely, however, with nothing pushing you horizontally, your
velocity is particularly easy to describe. Since you travel at a steady speed along a straightline path, your velocity is constant—it never changes. In a word, you coast. And if you
happen to be at rest with nothing pushing you horizontally, you remain at rest. Your velocity is constantly zero.
Thanks to your skates, we can now restate the previous description of inertia in terms
of velocity: an object that is not subject to any outside influences moves at a constant velocity, covering equal distances in equal times along a straight-line path. This statement is
frequently identified as Newton’s first law of motion, after its discoverer, the English
mathematician and physicist Sir Isaac Newton 3 . The outside influences referred to in this
law are called forces, a technical term for pushes and pulls. An object that moves in accordance with Newton’s first law is said to be inertial.

NEWTON’S FIRST LAW OF MOTION
An object that is not subject to any outside forces moves at a constant velocity, covering
equal distances in equal times along a straight-line path.

INTUITION AL ERT: Coasting
Intuition says that when nothing pushes on an object, that object slows to a stop; you must push
it to keep it going.
Physics says that when nothing pushes on an object, that object coasts at constant velocity.
Resolution: Objects usually experience hidden forces, such as friction or air resistance, that tend
to slow them down. Eliminating those hidden forces is difficult, so that you rarely see the full
coasting behavior of force-free objects.

Check Your Understanding #1: A Puck on Ice
Why does a moving hockey puck continue to slide across an ice rink even though no one is pushing
on it?
Answer: The puck coasts across the ice because it has inertia.
Why: A hockey puck resting on the surface of wet ice is almost completely free of horizontal influences. If someone pushes on the puck, so that it begins to travel with a horizontal velocity across the
ice, inertia will ensure that the puck continues to slide at constant velocity.

Skating

The Alternative to Coasting: Acceleration
As you glide forward with nothing pushing you horizontally, what prevents your speed and direction from changing? The answer is your mass. Mass is the measure of your inertia, your resistance to changes in velocity. Almost everything in the universe has mass. Mass has no direction,
so it’s not a vector quantity. It is a scalar quantity—that is, a quantity that has only an amount.
Because you have mass, your velocity will change only if something pushes on you—
that is, only if you experience a force. You’ll keep moving steadily in a straight path until
something exerts a force on you to stop you or send you in another direction. Force is our
third vector quantity, having both a magnitude and a direction. After all, a push to the right
is different from a push to the left.
When something pushes on you, your velocity changes; in other words, you accelerate. Acceleration, our fourth vector quantity, measures the rate at which your velocity is
changing with time (Fig. 1.1.3). Any change in your velocity is acceleration, whether you’re
speeding up, slowing down, or turning. If either your speed or direction of travel is changing, you’re accelerating!
Like any vector quantity, acceleration has a magnitude and a direction. To see how
these two parts of acceleration work, imagine that you’re at the starting line of a speedskating race, waiting for it to begin. The starting buzzer sounds, and you’re off! You dig your
skates into the surface beneath you and begin to accelerate—your speed increases and you
cover ground more and more quickly. The magnitude of your acceleration depends on how
hard the skating surface pushes you forward. If it’s a long race and you’re not in a hurry,
you take your time getting up to full speed. The surface pushes you forward gently and the
magnitude of your acceleration is small. Your velocity changes slowly. However, if the race
is a sprint and you need to reach top speed as quickly as possible, you spring forward hard
and the surface exerts an enormous forward force on you. The magnitude of your acceleration is large, and your velocity changes rapidly. In this case, you can actually feel your
inertia opposing your efforts to pick up speed.
Acceleration has more than just a magnitude, though. When you start the race, you also
select a direction for your acceleration—the direction toward which your velocity is shifting
with time. This acceleration is in the same direction as the force causing it. If you obtain a forward force from the surface, you’ll accelerate forward—your velocity will shift more and more
forward. If you obtain a sideways force from the surface, the other racers will have to jump out
of your way as you careen into the wall. They’ll laugh all the way to the finish line at your failure
to recognize the importance of direction in the definitions of force and acceleration.
Once you’re going fast enough, you can stop fighting inertia and begin to glide. You
coast forward at a constant velocity. Now inertia is helping you; it keeps you moving

Fig. 1.1.3 A rightward force is causing
this baseball to accelerate toward the
right. Its velocity is increasing toward
the right so that it travels farther with
each passing second.

5

6

CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion

steadily along even though nothing is pushing you forward. (Recall that we’re neglecting
friction and air resistance. In reality, those effects push you backward and gradually slow
you down as you glide.)
Even when you’re not trying to speed up or slow down, you can still accelerate. As you
steer your skates or go over a bump, you experience sideways or up–down forces that
change your direction of travel and thus cause you to accelerate.
Finally the race is over, and you skid to a stop. You’re accelerating again, but this time
in the backward direction—opposite your forward velocity. Although we often call this
process deceleration, it’s just a special type of acceleration. Your forward velocity gradually diminishes until you come to rest.
To help you recognize acceleration, here are some accelerating objects:
1. A runner who’s leaping forward at the start of a race—the runner’s velocity is
changing from zero to forward, so the runner is accelerating forward.
2. A bicycle that’s stopping at a crosswalk—its velocity is changing from forward to
zero, so it’s accelerating backward (that is, it’s decelerating).
3. An elevator that’s just starting upward from the first floor to the fifth floor—its
velocity is changing from zero to upward, so it’s accelerating upward.
4. An elevator that’s stopping at the fifth floor after coming from the first floor—its
velocity is changing from upward to zero, so it’s accelerating downward.
5. A car that’s beginning to shift left to pass another car—its velocity is changing
from forward to left-forward, so it’s accelerating mostly leftward.
6. An airplane that’s just beginning its descent—its velocity is changing from levelforward to descending-forward, so it’s accelerating almost directly downward.
7. Children riding a carousel around in a circle—while their speeds are constant,
their directions of travel are always changing. We’ll discuss the directions in
which they’re accelerating in Section 3.3.
Here are some objects that are not accelerating:
1. A parked car—its velocity is always zero.
2. A car traveling straight forward on a level road at a steady speed—there is no
change in its speed or direction of travel.
3. A bicycle that’s climbing up a smooth, straight hill at a steady speed—there is no
change in its speed or direction of travel.
4. An elevator that’s moving straight upward at a steady pace, halfway between the
first floor and the fifth floor—there is no change in its speed or direction of travel.
Seeing acceleration isn’t as easy as seeing position or velocity. You can determine a
skater’s position in a single glance and her velocity by comparing her positions in two
separate glances. To observe her acceleration, however, you need at least three glances
because you are looking for how her velocity is changing with time. If her speed isn’t
steady or her path isn’t straight, then she’s accelerating.
Check Your Understanding #2: Changing Trains
Trains spend much of their time coasting along at constant velocity. When does a train accelerate
forward? backward? leftward? downward?
Answer: The train accelerates forward when it starts out from a station, backward when it arrives at
the next station, to the left when it turns left, and downward when it begins its descent out of the
mountains.
Why: Whenever the train changes its speed or its direction of travel, it is accelerating. When it speeds
up on leaving a station, it is accelerating forward (more forward-directed speed). When it slows down
at the next station, it is accelerating backward (more backward-directed speed or, equivalently, less
forward-directed speed). When it turns left, it is accelerating to the left (more leftward-directed
speed). When it begins to descend, it is accelerating downward (more downward-directed speed).

Skating

7

How Forces Affect Skaters
Your friends skate over to congratulate you after the race, patting you on the back and giving you high-fives. They’re exerting forces on you, so you accelerate—but how much do
you accelerate and in which direction?
First, although each of your friends is exerting a separate force on you, you can’t accelerate in response to each force individually. After all, you have only one acceleration.
Instead, you accelerate in response to the net force you experience—the sum of all the
individual forces being exerted on you. Drawing this distinction between individual forces
and net force is important whenever an object is experiencing several forces at once. For
simplicity now, however, let’s wait until you have only one friend left on the ice. When that
friend finally pats you on the back, you experience only that one force, so it is the net force
on you and it causes you to accelerate.
Your acceleration depends on the strength of that net force: the stronger the net force,
the more you accelerate. However, your acceleration also depends on your mass: the more
massive you are, the less you accelerate. For example, it’s easier to change your velocity
before you eat Thanksgiving dinner than afterward.
There is a simple relationship among the net force exerted on you, your mass, and your
acceleration. Your acceleration is equal to the net force exerted on you divided by your
mass or, as a word equation,
acceleration =

net force
.
mass

© Kent C. Horner/Getty Images, Inc.

(1.1.1)

Your acceleration, as we’ve seen, is in the same direction as the net force on you.
This relationship was deduced by Newton from his observations of motion and is
referred to as Newton’s second law of motion. Structuring the relationship this way sensibly distinguishes the causes (net force and mass) from their effect (acceleration). However, it has become customary to rearrange this equation to eliminate the division. The
relationship then takes its traditional form, which can be written in a word equation:
net force = mass · acceleration

(1.1.2)

in symbols:

and in everyday language:
Throwing a baseball is much easier than throwing a bowling ball (Fig. 1.1.4).
Remember that in Eq. 1.1.2 the direction of the acceleration is the same as the direction of
the net force.
NEWTON’S SECOND LAW OF MOTION
The net force exerted on an object is equal to that object’s mass times its acceleration.
The acceleration is in the same direction as the net force.

Because it’s an equation, the two sides of Eq. 1.1.1 are equal. Your acceleration equals
the net force on you divided by your mass. Since your mass is constant unless you visit the
snack bar, Eq. 1.1.1 indicates that an increase in the net force on you is accompanied by a

© Asia Images Group/Getty Images, Inc.

Fnet = m · a,

Fig. 1.1.4 A baseball
accelerates easily because
of its small mass. A
bowling ball has a large
mass and is harder to
accelerate.

8

CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion

corresponding increase in your acceleration. That way, as the right side of the equation
increases, the left side increases to keep the two sides equal. Thus the harder your friend
pushes on you, the more rapidly your velocity changes in the direction of that push.
We can also compare the effects of equal forces on two different masses, for example,
you and the former sumo wrestler to your left. I’ll assume, for the sake of argument, that
you’re the less massive of the two. Equation 1.1.1 indicates that an increase in mass must
be accompanied by a corresponding decrease in acceleration. Sure enough, your velocity
changes more rapidly than the velocity of the sumo wrestler when the two of you are subjected to identical forces (Fig. 1.1.5).
So far we’ve explored five principles:
1. Your position indicates exactly where you’re located.
2. Your velocity measures the rate at which your position is changing with time.
3. Your acceleration measures the rate at which your velocity is changing with time.
4. To accelerate, you must experience a net force.
5. The greater your mass, the less acceleration you experience for a given net force.
We’ve also encountered five important physical quantities—mass, force, acceleration,
velocity, and position—as well as some of the rules that relate them to one another. Much
of the groundwork of physics rests on these five quantities and on their interrelationships.
Skating certainly depends on these quantities. We can now see that, in the absence of
any horizontal forces, you either remain stationary or coast along at a constant velocity. To
start, stop, or turn, something must push you horizontally and that something is the ice or
pavement. We haven’t talked about how you obtain horizontal forces from the ice or pavement, and we’ll leave that problem for later sections. As you skate, however, you should be
aware of these forces and notice how they change your speed, direction of travel, or both.
Learn to watch yourself accelerate.
Check Your Understanding #3: Hard to Stop
It’s much easier to stop a bicycle traveling toward you at 5 kilometers per hour (3 miles per hour)
than an automobile traveling toward you at the same velocity. What accounts for this difference?
Answer: An automobile has a much greater mass than a bicycle.
Why: To stop a moving vehicle, you must exert a force on it in the direction opposite its velocity. The
vehicle will then accelerate backward so that it eventually comes to rest. If the vehicle is heading
toward you, you must push it away from you. The more mass the vehicle has, the less it will accelerate in response to a certain force and the longer you will have to push on it to stop it completely.
Although it’s easy to stop a bicycle by hand, stopping even a slowly moving automobile by hand
requires a large force exerted for a substantial amount of time.

Fig. 1.1.5 A baseball, bowling ball, and file
cabinet have different masses and accelerate quite
differently in response to equal rightward forces.
Arrows representing the accelerations and velocities
of the bowling ball and file cabinet are magnified to
make them visible.

Skating

9

Check Your Figures #1: At the Bowling Alley
Bowling balls come in various masses. Suppose that you try bowling with two different balls, one with
twice the mass of the other. If you push on them with equal forces, which one will accelerate faster
and how much faster?
Answer: The less massive ball will accelerate twice as rapidly.
Why: Equation 1.1.1 shows that an object’s acceleration is inversely proportional to its mass:
acceleration =

force
.
mass

If you push on both bowling balls with equal forces, then their accelerations will depend only on their
masses. Doubling the mass on the right side of this equation halves the acceleration on the left side.
That means that the more massive ball will accelerate only half as quickly as the other ball.

Several Skaters: Frames of Reference
While skating alone is peaceful, it’s usually more fun with other skaters around. That way,
you have people to talk to and an audience for your athleticism and artistry.
However, with several skaters coasting on the ice at once, there’s a question of perspective. As you glide steadily past a friend, the two of you see the world somewhat differently. From your perspective, you are motionless and your friend is moving. From your
friend’s perspective, though, your friend is motionless and you are moving. Who is right?
It turns out that you’re both right and that physics has a way of accommodating this
apparent paradox. Each of you is observing the world from a different inertial frame of
reference, the viewpoint of an inertial object—an object that is not accelerating and that
moves according to Newton’s first law. One of the remarkable discoveries of Galileo and
Newton is that the laws of physics work perfectly in any inertial frame of reference (Fig. 1.1.6).
From an inertial frame, everything you see in the world around you obeys the laws of
motion that we’re in the process of exploring. Although you may find it odd to think of
scenery as moving, your inertial frame of reference is as good as any and in your frame you
are at rest amid the moving landscape.

Fig. 1.1.6 Two skaters
who are moving relative
to one another, but
not accelerating, have
different inertial frames of
reference. Although each
skater will have a different
coordinate system in
which to measure physical
quantities, the laws of
physics will correctly
describe what that skater
observes from his own
inertial frame of reference.

10

CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion

Since both you and your friend are coasting, each of you views the world from an
inertial frame of reference and sees the surrounding objects moving in perfect accordance
with the laws of motion. Some objects travel at constant velocity, while others accelerate in
response to forces. However, because the two of you are observing those objects from different inertial frames, you will disagree on the particular values of some of the physical
quantities you might measure.
In the present case, you see yourself as motionless because you view the world from
your own inertial frame. In that frame, your friend is coasting westward at 2 meters per second (2 m/s, which is roughly 6.6 feet per second, or 6.6 ft/s). However, your friend sees things
differently. In your friend’s inertial frame, your friend is motionless and you are coasting
eastward at 2 m/s. As long as the two of you don’t try to compare the positions or velocities
of the objects you observe, or certain physical quantities derived from those values, there will
be no disagreements and no inconsistencies. However, if you forget to watch where you’re
going and crash into a wall, don’t expect your friend to sympathize when you claim that you
were motionless and that the moving wall ran into you. That’s not how your friend saw it.
Each time we examine an object in this book, we’ll pick a specific inertial frame of
reference from which to view that object. We’ll normally select an inertial frame that makes
the object and its motions appear as simple as possible and then stick with that frame consistently. The best choice of inertial frame will usually be so obvious that we’ll adopt it
without even a moment’s thought. On occasion, however, we’ll have to pick the frame
carefully and deliberately. Finally, although there are formal methods for working with two
or more inertial frames at once, I’ll leave that for another book.
Check Your Understanding #4: Two Views
You are standing on the sidewalk, watching a train coast eastward at constant velocity. Your friend is
riding in that train. In her inertial frame of reference, the sweater in her lap is motionless. Describe
the sweater’s motion in your inertial frame of reference.
Answer: The sweater is coasting eastward at constant velocity.
Why: Although both of you agree that the sweater is not accelerating and that it is moving according
to Newton’s first law, you disagree on its specific velocity. She sees the sweater at rest, while you see
it coasting eastward at constant velocity. Your viewpoints are equally valid.

Measure for Measure: The Importance of Units
If you went to the grocery store and asked for “6 of sugar,” the clerk wouldn’t know how
much sugar to give you. The number 6 wouldn’t be enough information; you need to specify which units—cups, pounds, cubes, or tons—you have in mind. This need to specify
units applies to almost all physical quantities—velocity, force, mass, and so on—and has
led our society to develop units that everyone agrees on, also known as standard units.
For example, when you say that a skater’s speed is 20 miles per hour, you have chosen
miles per hour as the standard unit of speed and you’re asserting that the skater is moving
20 times that fast. You can report the skater’s speed as a multiple of any standard unit of
speed—feet per second, yards per day, or inches per century, to name only a few—and you
can always find a simple relationship to convert from one unit of speed to another. For
example, to convert the skater’s speed from miles per hour to kilometers per hour, you
multiply it by 1.609 kilometers/mile:
20

mi 1.609 km
km
·
= 32.2 .
h
1 mi
h

Many of the common units in the United States come from the old English system of
units, which most of the world has abandoned in favor of SI units (Systéme Internationale

Skating

d’Unités). The continued use of English units in the United States often makes life difficult.
If you have to triple a cake recipe that calls for ¾ cup of milk, you must work hard to calculate that you need 2¼ cups. Then you go to buy 2¼ cups of milk, which is slightly more
than half a quart, but end up buying 2 pints instead. You now have 14 ounces of milk more
than you need—but is that 14 fluid ounces or 14 ounces of weight? And so it goes.
The SI system has two important characteristics that distinguish it from the English
system and make it easier to use. In the SI system:
1. Different units for the same physical quantity are related by factors of 10.
2. Most of the units are constructed out of a few basic units: the meter, the kilogram,
and the second.
Let’s start with the first characteristic: different units for the same physical quantity are
related by factors of 10. When measuring volume, 1000 milliliters is exactly 1 liter and 1000
liters is exactly 1 cubic meter (1 meter3). When measuring mass, 1000 grams is exactly
1 kilogram and 1000 kilograms is exactly 1 metric ton. Because of this consistent relationship, enlarging a recipe that’s based on the SI system is as simple as multiplying a few
numbers. You never have to think about converting pints into quarts, teaspoons into tablespoons, or ounces into pounds. Instead, if you want to triple a recipe that calls for 500 milliliters of sugar, you just multiply the recipe by 3 to obtain 1500 milliliters of sugar. Since
1000 milliliters is 1 liter, you’ll need 1.5 liters of sugar. Converting milliliters to liters is as
simple as multiplying by 0.001 liter/milliliter. (See Appendix B, online, for more
conversion factors.)
SI units remain somewhat mysterious to many U.S. residents, even though some of the
basic units are slowly appearing on our grocery shelves and highways. As a result, although
the SI system really is more sensible than the old English system, developing a feel for
some SI units is still difficult. How many of us know our heights in meters (the SI unit of
length) or our masses in kilograms (the SI unit of mass)? If your car is traveling 200 kilometers per hour and you pass a police car, are you in trouble? Yes, because 200 kilometers
per hour is about 125 miles per hour. Actually, the hour is not an SI unit—the SI unit of
time is the second—but the hour remains customary for describing long periods of time.
Thus the kilometer per hour is a unit that is half SI (the kilometer part) and half customary
(the hour part).
The second characteristic of the SI system is its relatively small number of basic units.
So far, we’ve noted the SI units of mass (the kilogram, abbreviated kg), length (the meter,
abbreviated m), and time (the second, abbreviated s). One kilogram is about the mass of a
liter of water; 1 meter is about the length of a long stride; 1 second is about the time it takes
to say “one banana.” From these three basic units, we can create several others, such as the
SI units of velocity (the meter per second, abbreviated m/s) and acceleration (the meter
per second squared, abbreviated m/s2). One meter per second is a healthy walking speed;
1 meter per second2 is about the acceleration of an elevator after the door closes and it
begins to move upward. This conviction that many units are best constructed out of other,
more basic units dramatically simplifies the SI system; the English system doesn’t usually
suffer from such sensibility.
The SI unit of force is also constructed out of the basic units of mass, length, and time.
If we choose a 1-kilogram object and ask just how much force is needed to make that object
accelerate at 1 meter per second2, we define a specific amount of force. Since 1 kilogram is
the SI unit of mass and 1 meter per second2 is the SI unit of acceleration, it’s only reasonable to let the force that causes this acceleration be the SI unit of force, the kilogram-meter
per second2. Since this composite unit sounds unwieldy but is very important, it has been
given its own name: the newton (abbreviated N)—after, of course, Sir Isaac, whose second
law defines the relationship among mass, length, and time that the unit expresses. Conveniently,
1 newton is about the weight of a small apple; that is, if you hold that apple steady in your
hand, you’ll feel a downward force of about 1 newton.

11

12

CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion

Because a complete transition to the SI system will take generations, this book uses
both unit systems whenever possible. Although I will emphasize the SI system, English and
customary units may give you a better intuitive feel for a particular physical quantity. A
bullet train traveling “67 meters per second” doesn’t mean much to most of us, whereas one
moving “150 miles per hour” (150 mph) or “240 kilometers per hour” (240 km/h) should
elicit our well-deserved respect.

Quantity

SI Unit

English Unit

SI → English

Position

meter (m)

foot (ft)

1m

Velocity

meter per second (m/s)

foot per second (ft/s)

1 m/s = 3.2808 ft/s

1 ft/s = 0.30480 m/s

Acceleration

meter per second2 (m/s2)

foot per second2 (ft/s2)

1 m/s2 = 3.2808 ft/s2

1 ft/s2 = 0.30480 m/s2

Force

newton (N)

pound-force (lbf)†

1N

= 0.22481 lbf

1 lbf = 4.4482 N

Mass

kilogram (kg)

pound-mass (lbm)†

1 kg

= 2.2046 lbm

1 lbm = 0.45359 kg

= 3.2808 ft

English → SI
1 ft

= 0.30480 m

†

The English units of force and mass are both called the pound. To distinguish these two units, it has become standard practice to identify them
explicitly as pound-mass and pound-force.

Check Your Understanding #5: Going for a Walk
If you’re walking at a pace of 1 m per second, how many miles will you travel in an hour?
Answer: About 2.24 miles.
Why: There are many different units in this example, so we must do some converting. First, an hour
is 3600 s, so in an hour of walking at 1 m per second you will have walked 3600 m. Second, a mile
is about 1609 m, so each time you travel 1609 m you have traveled 1 mile. By walking 3600 m, you
have completed 2 miles and are about one-quarter of the way into your third mile.

SE C TIO N 1 . 2

Falling Balls
we’ll start simply by exploring gravity and its effects on motion
in the context of falling objects.

Questions to Think About: What do we mean by “falling,”
and why do balls fall? Which falls faster, a heavy ball or a light
ball? Can a ball that’s heading upward still be falling? How
does gravity affect a ball that’s thrown sideways?
Experiments to Do: A few seconds with a baseball will help

We’ve all dropped balls from our hands or seen them arc gracefully through the air after being thrown. These motions are simplicity itself and, not surprisingly, they’re governed by only a
few universal rules. We encountered several of those rules in
the previous section, but we’re about to examine our first
important type of force—gravity. Like Newton, who reportedly
began his investigations after seeing an apple fall from a tree,

you see some of the behaviors that we’ll be exploring. Toss the
ball into the air to various heights, catching it in your hand as
it returns. Have a friend time the flight of the ball. As you toss
the ball higher, how much more time does it spend in the air?
How does it feel coming back to your hands? Is there any difference in the impact it makes? Which takes the ball longer:
rising from your hand to its peak height or returning from its
peak height back to your hand?
Now drop two different balls—a baseball, say, and a golf
ball. If you drop them simultaneously, without pushing either
one up or down, does one ball strike the ground first or do they
arrive together? Now throw one ball horizontally while dropping
the second. If they both leave your hands at the same time and
the first one’s initial motion is truly horizontal, which one
reaches the ground first?

Falling Balls

13

Weight and Gravity
Like everything else around us, a ball has a weight. For example, a golf ball weighs about
0.45 N (0.10 lbf)—but what is weight? Evidently it’s a force, since both the newton (N) and
the pound-force (lbf) are units of force. To understand what weight is, however—and, in
particular, where it comes from—we need to look at gravity.
Gravity is a physical phenomenon that produces attractive forces between every pair
of objects in the universe. In our daily lives, however, the only object massive enough and
near enough to have obvious gravitational effects on us is our planet, Earth. Gravity weakens with distance; the moon and sun are so far away that we notice their gravities only
through such subtle effects as the ocean tides.
Earth’s gravity exerts a downward force on any object near its surface. That object is
attracted directly toward the center of Earth with a force we call the object’s weight (Fig. 1.2.1).
Remarkably enough, this weight is exactly proportional to the object’s mass—if one ball has
twice the mass of another ball, it also has twice the weight. Such a relationship between weight
and mass is astonishing because weight and mass are very different attributes: weight is how
hard gravity pulls on a ball, and mass is how difficult that ball is to accelerate. Because of this
proportionality, a ball that’s heavy is also hard to shake back and forth!
An object’s weight is also proportional to the local strength of gravity, which is measured by a downward vector called the acceleration due to gravity—an odd name that I’ll
explain shortly. At the surface of Earth, the acceleration due to gravity is about 9.8 N/kg
(1.0 lbf/lbm). That value means that a mass of 1 kilogram has a weight of 9.8 newtons and
that a mass of 1 pound-mass has a weight of 1 pound-force.
More generally, an object’s weight is equal to its mass times the acceleration due to
gravity, which can be written as a word equation:
weight = mass · acceleration due to gravity,

(1.2.1)

in symbols:
w = m · g,
and in everyday language:
You can lose weight either by reducing your mass or by going someplace, like a
small planet, where the gravity is weaker.
But why acceleration due to gravity? What acceleration do we mean? To answer that
question, let’s consider what happens to a ball when you drop it.
If the only force on the ball is its weight, the ball accelerates downward; in other words,
it falls. Although a ball moving through Earth’s atmosphere encounters additional forces due
to the air, let’s ignore those forces for the time being. Doing so costs us only a little in terms
of accuracy—the air’s forces on the ball are negligible as long as the ball is dense and its
speed relatively small—and allows us to focus exclusively on the effects of gravity.
How much does the falling ball accelerate? According to Eq. 1.1.1, the ball’s acceleration is equal to the net force exerted on it divided by its mass. Because the ball is falling,
however, the only force on it is its own weight. That weight, according to Eq. 1.2.1, is equal
to the ball’s mass times the acceleration due to gravity. Using a little algebra, we get
falling ball’s acceleration =
=

ball’s weight
ball’s mass
ball’s mass · acceleration due to gravity
ball’s mass

= acceleration due to gravity.

Fig. 1.2.1 A dropped
baseball experiences only
its weight—the force due
to gravity. It accelerates
downward.

14

CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion

As you can see, the falling ball’s acceleration is equal to the acceleration due to gravity.
Thus, acceleration due to gravity really is an acceleration after all: it’s the acceleration of a
freely falling object. Moreover, the units of acceleration due to gravity can be transformed
easily from those relating weight to mass, 9.8 N/kg (1.0 lbf/lbm), into those describing the
acceleration of free fall, 9.8 m/s2 (32 ft/s2).
Thus a ball falling near Earth’s surface experiences a downward acceleration of
9.8 m/s2 (32 ft/s2), regardless of its mass (Fig. 1.2.2). This downward acceleration is substantially more than that of an elevator starting its descent. When you drop a ball, it picks
up speed very quickly in the downward direction.
Because all falling objects at Earth’s surface accelerate downward at exactly the same
rate, a billiard ball and a bowling ball dropped simultaneously from the same height will
reach the ground together. (Remember that we’re not considering forces due to the air yet.)
Although the bowling ball weighs more than the billiard ball, it also has more mass; so
while the bowling ball experiences a larger downward force, its larger mass ensures that its
downward acceleration is equal to that of the lighter and less massive billiard ball.
Check Your Understanding #1: Weight and Mass
Out in deep space, far from any celestial object that exerts significant gravity, would an astronaut
weigh anything? Would that astronaut have a mass?
Answer: The astronaut would have zero weight but would still have a normal mass.
Why: Weight is a measure of the force exerted on the astronaut by gravity. Far from Earth or any other
large object, the astronaut would experience virtually no gravitational force and would have zero
weight. But mass is a measure of inertia and doesn’t depend at all on gravity. Even in deep space, it
would be much harder to accelerate a school bus than to accelerate a baseball because the school
bus has more mass than the baseball.

Check Your Figures #1: Weighing In on the Moon
You’re in your spacecraft on the surface of the moon. Before getting into your suit, you weigh yourself
and find that your moon weight is almost exactly one-sixth your Earth weight. What is the moon’s
acceleration due to gravity?
Answer: It is about 1.6 m/s2 (5.3 ft/s2).
Why: You can rearrange Eq. 1.2.1 to show that the acceleration due to gravity is proportional to an
object’s weight:
acceleration due to gravity =

weight
.
mass

Your mass doesn’t change in going to the moon, so any change in your weight must be due to a
change in the acceleration due to gravity. Since your moon weight is one-sixth of your Earth weight,
the moon’s acceleration due to gravity must be one-sixth that of Earth, or about 1.6 m/s2.

Fig. 1.2.2 A baseball (left) and a golf ball (right)
both accelerate downward at the acceleration due to
gravity. Their differences in weight and mass perfectly
compensate for one another.

Falling Balls

The Velocity of a Falling Ball
We’re now ready to examine the motion of a falling ball near Earth’s surface. A falling
ball is one that has only its weight, the force due to gravity, acting on it and gravity, as
we’ve seen, causes any falling object to accelerate downward at a constant rate. However, we’re usually less interested in the falling object’s acceleration than we are in its
position and velocity. Where will the object be in 3 s, and what will its velocity be
then? When you’re trying to summon up the courage to jump off the high dive, you
want to know how long it’ll take you to reach the water and how fast you’ll be going
when you hit.
The first step in answering these questions is to look at how a ball’s velocity is related
to the time you’ve been watching it fall. To do that, you’ll need to know the ball’s initial
velocity—that is, its speed and direction at the moment you start watching it. If you drop
the ball from rest, its initial velocity is zero.
You can then describe the ball’s present velocity in terms of its initial velocity, its
acceleration, and the time that has passed since you started watching it. Because a constant
acceleration causes the ball’s velocity to change by the same amount each second, the ball’s
present velocity differs from its initial velocity by the acceleration times the time that
you’ve been watching it. We can relate these quantities as a word equation:
present velocity = initial velocity + acceleration · time,

(1.2.2)

in symbols:
vf = vi + a · t,
and in everyday language:
A stone dropped from rest descends faster with each passing second, but you can
give it a boost by throwing it downward instead of just letting go.
For a ball falling from rest, the initial velocity is zero, the acceleration is downward at
9.8 m/s2 (32 ft/s2), and the time you’ve been watching it is simply the time since it started
to drop (Fig. 1.2.3). After 1 s, the ball has a downward velocity of 9.8 m/s (32 ft/s). After
2 s, the ball has a downward velocity of 19.6 m/s (64 ft/s). After 3 s, its downward velocity
is 29.4 m/s (96 ft/s), and so on.
Because a ball falls in a three-dimensional world, Eq. 1.2.2 is a relationship among
vector quantities. When a ball is dropped from rest, however, its motion is strictly vertical
and all of those vector quantities point either up or down. In that special case of motion
along a vertical line, we can represent vector quantities that point up by ordinary positive
values and vector quantities that point down by ordinary negative values. The acceleration
due to gravity is then −9.8 m/s2, and a ball that has been falling from rest for 2 s has a
velocity of −19.6 m/s. As we’ll see later in this section, those simplified values are actually
the upward components of the ball’s acceleration and velocity.

Check Your Understanding #2: Half a Fall
You drop a marble from rest, and after 1 s, its velocity is 9.8 m/s (32 ft/s) in the downward direction.
What was its velocity after only 0.5 s of falling?
Answer: 4.9 m/s (16 ft/s) in the downward direction.
Why: A freely falling object accelerates downward at a steady rate. Its velocity changes by 9.8 m/s
(16 ft/s) in the downward direction each and every second. In half a second, the marble’s velocity
changes by only half that amount, or 4.9 m/s (16 ft/s).

15

16

CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion

Fig. 1.2.3 The moment you let go of a ball that was resting in your hand, it begins to fall. Its
weight causes it to accelerate downward. After 1 s, it has fallen 4.9 m and has a velocity of 9.8 m/s
downward. After 2 s, it has fallen 19.6 m and has a velocity of 19.6 m/s downward, and so on. As the
ball continues to accelerate downward, its velocity continues to increase downward. Negative values for
the position and velocity are meant to indicate downward movement caused by a negative or downward
acceleration.

Check Your Figures #2: The High Dive
If it takes you about 1.4 s to reach the water from the 10-m (32-ft) diving platform, how fast are you
going just before you enter the water?
Answer: About 14 m/s (45 ft/s, 50 km/h, or 31 mph).
Why: The downward acceleration due to gravity is 9.8 m/s2 (32 ft/s2). You fall for 1.4 s, during which
time your velocity increases steadily in the downward direction. Since you start with zero velocity,
Eq. 1.2.2 gives a final velocity of
final velocity = 9.8 m/s2 · 1.4 s = 13.72 m/s.
Since the time of the fall is given only to two digits of accuracy (1.4 s could really be 1.403 s or
1.385 s), we shouldn’t claim that our calculated final velocity is accurate to four digits. We should
round the value to 14 m/s (45 ft/s).

The Position of a Falling Ball
The ball’s velocity continues to increase as it falls, but where exactly is the ball located? To
answer that question, you need to know the ball’s initial position—that is, where it was
when you started to watch it fall. If you dropped the ball from rest, the initial position was
your hand and you can define that spot as 0.
You can then describe the ball’s present position in terms of its initial position, its
initial velocity, its acceleration, and the time that has passed since you started watching it.
However, because the ball’s velocity is changing, you can’t simply multiply its present
velocity by the time that it’s been falling to determine how much the ball’s present position
differs from its initial position. Instead, you must use the ball’s average velocity during the
whole period you’ve been watching it. Since the ball’s velocity has been changing uniformly from its initial velocity to its present velocity, the ball’s average velocity is exactly
halfway in between the two individual velocities:
average velocity = initial velocity + 12 · acceleration · time.

Falling Balls

17

The ball’s present position differs from its initial position by this average velocity times the
time that you’ve been watching it. We can relate these quantities as a word equation:
present position= initial position +initial velocity · time+ 12 · acceleration· time2, (1.2.3)
in symbols:
xf = xi + vi · t + 12 · a · t2,
and in everyday language:
The longer a stone has been falling, the more its height diminishes with each
passing second. However, it won’t overtake a stone that was dropped next to it at
an earlier time or dropped from beneath it at the same time.
For a ball falling from rest, the initial velocity is zero, the acceleration is downward at
9.8 m/s2 (32 ft/s2), and the time you’ve been watching it is simply the time since it started
to drop (Fig. 1.2.3). After 1 s, the ball has fallen 4.9 m (16 ft). After 2 s, it has fallen a total
of 19.6 m (64 ft). After 3 s, it has fallen a total of 44.1 m (145 ft), and so on.
Equations 1.2.2 and 1.2.3 depend on the definition of acceleration as the measure of
how quickly velocity changes and the definition of velocity as the measure of how quickly
position changes. Because the acceleration of a falling ball doesn’t change with time, the
two equations can be derived using algebra. In more complicated situations, however,
where an object’s acceleration changes with time, predicting position and velocity usually
requires the use of calculus. Calculus is the mathematics of change, invented by Newton to
address just these sorts of problems.
We’ve been discussing what happens to a falling ball, but we could have chosen
another object instead. Everything falls the same way; heavy or light, large or small, all
objects take the same amount of time to fall a given distance, as long as they’re dense
enough to be unaffected by the air. If there were no air, this statement would be exactly true
for any object; a feather and a lead brick would plummet downward together if you dropped
them simultaneously.
Now that we’ve explored acceleration due to gravity, we can see why a ball dropped
from a tall ladder is more dangerous than the same ball dropped from a short stool. The
farther the ball has to fall, the longer it takes to reach the ground and the more time it has
to accelerate. During its long fall from the tall ladder, the ball acquires a large downward
velocity and becomes very hard to stop. If you try to catch it, you’ll have to exert a very
large upward force on it to accelerate it upward and bring it to rest quickly. Exerting that
large upward force may hurt your hand.
The same notion holds if you’re the falling object. If you leap off a tall ladder, a substantial amount of time will pass before you reach the ground. By the time you arrive,
you’ll have acquired considerable downward velocity. The ground will then accelerate you
upward and bring you to rest with a very large and unpleasant upward force. (For an interesting and less painful application of long falls, see 4 .)

Check Your Understanding #3: Half a Fall Again
You drop a marble from rest, and after 1 s, it has fallen downward a distance of 4.9 m (16 ft). How
far had it fallen after only 0.5 s?
Answer: It had fallen about 1.2 m (4 ft).
Why: While a freely falling object’s velocity changes steadily in the downward direction, its change in
height is more complicated. When you drop the marble from rest, it starts its descent slowly but picks
up speed and covers the downward distance faster and faster. In the first 0.5 s, it travels only a
quarter of the distance it travels in the first 1 s, or about 1.2 m (4 ft).

4 In 1782, William
Watts, a plumber from
Bristol, England, patented
a technique for forming
perfectly spherical,
seamless lead shot for use
in guns. His idea was to
pour molten lead through
a sieve suspended high
above a pool of water. The
lead droplets cool in the
air as they fall, solidifying
into perfect spheres before
reaching the water. Shot
towers based on this idea
soon appeared throughout
Europe and eventually in
the United States.
Nowadays, iron shot has
all but replaced environmentally dangerous lead
shot. Iron shot is cast,
rather than dropped,
because the longer cooling
time needed to solidify
molten iron would require
impractically tall shot
towers.

18

CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion

Check Your Figures #3: Extreme Physics
You’re planning to construct a bungee-jumping amusement at the local shopping center. If you want
your customers to have a 5-s free-fall experience, how tall will you need to build the tower from which
they’ll jump? (Don’t worry about the extra height needed to stop people after the bungee pulls taut.)
Answer: The tower should be about 122 m (402 ft or as high as a 40-story building).
Why: As they fall, the jumpers will travel downward at ever increasing speeds. Since the jumpers start
from rest and fall downward for 5 s, we can use Eq. 1.2.3 to determine how far they will fall:
final height = initial height − 12 · 9.8 m/s2 · (5 s) 2
= initial height − 122.5 m.
The downward acceleration is indicated here by the negative change in height. At the end of 5 s, the
jumpers will have fallen more than 122 m (402 ft) and will be traveling downward at about 50 m/s
(160 ft/s). The tower will need additional height to slow the jumpers down and begin bouncing them
back upward. Clearly, a 5-s free fall is pretty unrealistic. Try for a 2- or 3-s free fall instead.

Tossing the Ball Upward
If the only force acting on an object is its weight, then the object is falling. So far, we’ve
explored this principle only as it pertains to balls dropped from rest. However, a thrown ball
is falling, too; once it leaves your hand, it’s subject only to its weight and it accelerates
downward at 9.8 m/s2 (32 ft/s2).
Equation 1.2.2 still describes how the ball’s velocity depends on the fall time, but now the
initial velocity isn’t zero. If you toss the ball straight up in the air, it leaves your hand with a
large upward velocity (Fig. 1.2.4). As soon as you let go of the ball, it begins to accelerate
downward. If the ball’s initial upward velocity is 29.4 m/s (96 ft/s), then after 1 s its upward
velocity is 19.6 m/s (64 ft/s). After another second, its upward velocity is only 9.8 m/s (32 ft/s).
After a third second, the ball momentarily comes to a complete stop with a velocity of zero. It
then descends from this peak height, falling just as it did when you dropped it from rest.
The ball’s flight before and after its peak is symmetrical. It travels upward quickly at
first, since it has a large upward velocity. As its upward velocity diminishes, it travels more
and more slowly until it comes to a stop. It then begins to descend, slowly at first and then
faster and faster as it continues its constant downward acceleration. The time the ball takes
to rise from its initial position in your hand to its peak height is exactly equal to the time it
takes to descend back down from that peak to your hand. Equation 1.2.3 indicates how the
position of the ball depends on the fall time, with the initial velocity being the upward
velocity of the ball as it leaves your hand.

Fig. 1.2.4 The moment you let go of a ball
thrown straight upward, it begins to accelerate
downward at 9.8 m/s2. The ball rises but its
upward velocity diminishes steadily until it
momentarily comes to a stop. It then descends
with its downward velocity increasing steadily. In
this example, the ball rises for 3 s and comes to
rest. It then descends for 3 s before returning to
your hand in a very symmetrical flight.

Falling Balls

19

The larger the initial upward velocity of the ball, the longer it rises and the higher it
goes before its velocity is reduced to zero. It then descends for the same amount of time it
spent rising. The higher the ball goes before it begins to descend, the longer it takes to
return to the ground and the faster it’s traveling when it arrives. That’s why catching a high
fly ball with your bare hands stings so much: the ball is traveling very, very fast when it hits
your hands, and a large force is required to bring the ball to rest quickly.

Check Your Understanding #4: A Toss-Up
You toss a coin straight up, and it rises well above your head. At the moment the coin reaches its
peak height, what is its velocity? Is that velocity constant or changing with time? Is the coin’s acceleration constant or changing with time?
Answer: The coin’s velocity is momentarily zero at its peak, but that velocity is changing with time.
The coin’s acceleration, however, is constant—the acceleration due to gravity.
Why: Once the coin leaves your hand, it’s a falling object and constantly accelerates downward at the
acceleration due to gravity. Because it begins its fall traveling upward, it rises at a gradually decreasing speed, is momentarily motionless at its peak, and then descends at a gradually increasing speed.

How a Thrown Ball Moves: Projectile Motion
What happens if you don’t toss the ball exactly straight up? Suppose you throw the ball
upward at some angle. The ball still rises to a peak height and then descends, but it also
travels away from you horizontally so that it strikes the ground at some distance from
your feet. How much does this horizontal travel complicate the motion of a falling ball?
The answer is not very much. One of the beautiful simplifications of physics is that
you can often treat an object’s vertical motion independently of its horizontal motion. This
technique involves separating the vector quantities—acceleration, velocity, and position—
into components, those portions of the quantities that lie along specific directions (Fig. 1.2.5).
For example, the upward component of an object’s position is that object’s altitude.
A ball’s altitude, however, is only part of its position; you still need to know where it
is in relation to your right or left and to your front or back. In fact, you can specify its position (or any other vector quantity) in terms of three components along three directions that
are perpendicular to one another. This means that you can completely specify the ball’s
position by its distance to your right, its distance in front of you, and its altitude above you.
If it’s to your left, behind you, or below you, the corresponding components have negative
values. For example, the ball might be 3 m to your right, −3 m in front of you (which is
3 m behind you), and 2 m above you.
When you drop the ball from rest or toss it straight up, its motion is entirely vertical and
only the upward components of its position, velocity, and acceleration are important. When
the falling ball is also moving horizontally, however, you’ll need to pay attention to the
rightward and forward components of those vector quantities. Throwing the ball forward
helps because it eliminates any rightward components of the motion. The ball then arcs
forward with a position specified at each moment by its altitude (its upward component) and
its distance downfield (its forward component).
Although Eqs. 1.2.2 and 1.2.3 were introduced to describe a ball’s vertical motion, they
also describe its horizontal motion. More generally, they relate three vector quantities—
the ball’s position, velocity, and constant acceleration—to one another and describe how
the ball’s position and velocity change with time when that ball undergoes constant acceleration in any direction. Of course, since we’re concerned now with falling balls, the relevant constant acceleration is the downward acceleration due to gravity.
These equations also apply to the components of the ball’s position, velocity, and constant acceleration. If you add the words upward component of in front of each vector quantity

Fig. 1.2.5 Even if the
ball has a velocity that
is neither purely vertical
nor purely horizontal, its
velocity may nonetheless
be viewed as having an
upward component and a
downfield component. Part
of its total velocity acts to
move this ball upward, and
part of its total velocity acts
to move this ball downfield.

20

CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion

Fig. 1.2.6 This golf ball
drifts steadily to the right
after being thrown because
gravity affects only the
ball’s upward component
of velocity.

Fig. 1.2.7 If you throw a
ball upward, at an angle, part
of the initial velocity will be
in the upward direction and
part will be in the downfield
direction. The vertical and
horizontal motions will take
place independently of one
another. The ball will rise
and fall just as it did in Figs.
1.2.3 and 1.2.4; at the
same time, however, it will
move downfield. Because
there is no horizontal
component of acceleration
(gravity acts only in the
vertical direction), the
downfield component of
velocity remains constant
during the ball’s 6-s trip.

in Eqs. 1.2.2 and 1.2.3, the equations correctly describe the ball’s vertical motion. Now it’s
time to add the words forward component of to those equations so that they describe the ball’s
horizontal motion.
Once you’ve thrown the ball forward and are no longer touching it, its motion can be
broken into two parts: its upward motion and its forward motion (Fig. 1.2.5). Part of the
ball’s initial velocity is in the upward direction, and that upward component of velocity
determines the object’s ascent and descent. Part of the ball’s initial velocity is in the forward
direction, and that forward component of velocity determines the ball’s progress downfield.
Because the ball is accelerating straight downward, the forward component of its
acceleration is zero and the forward component of its velocity thus remains constant. The
ball travels downfield at a steady rate throughout its flight (Fig. 1.2.6). Overall, the upward
component of the ball’s initial velocity determines how high the ball goes and how long it
stays aloft before striking the ground, while the forward component of the initial velocity
determines how quickly the ball travels downfield during its time aloft (Fig. 1.2.7).
Just before the ball hits the ground it still has its original forward component of
velocity, but its upward component of velocity is now negative—the ball is moving
downward. The total velocity of the ball is composed of these two components. The ball
starts with its velocity directed up and forward, and finishes with its velocity directed
down and forward.
If you want a ball or shot put to hit the ground as far from your feet as possible, you
should keep it aloft for a long time and give it a sizable forward component of velocity; in
other words, you must achieve a good balance between the upward and forward components
of velocity (Fig. 1.2.8). These components of velocity together determine the ball’s flight
path, its trajectory. If you throw the ball straight up, it will stay aloft for a long time but will
not travel downfield at all (and you will need to wear a helmet). If you throw the ball directly
forward, it will travel downfield quickly but hit the ground almost immediately.
Neglecting air resistance and the altitude difference between your throwing arm and
the ground that the ball will eventually hit, your best choice is to throw the ball forward
at an angle of 45° above horizontal. At that angle, the initial upward component of velocity will be the same as the initial forward component of velocity. The ball will stay aloft
for a reasonably long time and will make good use of that time to move downfield. Other
angles won’t make such good use of the initial speed to move the ball downfield.
(A discussion of how to determine the upward and forward components of velocity
appears in Appendix A, online.)

Height (m)

Ramps

© Richard Megna/Fundamental
Photographs

60
40
45°

20
0

21

0

50
100
150
Distance downfield (m)

200

Fig. 1.2.8 If you want the ball to hit the ground as far
from your feet as possible, given a certain initial speed,
throw the ball at 45° above horizontal. Halfway between
horizontal and vertical, such a throw gives the ball equal
initial upward and downfield components of velocity. The
ball then stays aloft for a relatively long time and makes
good use of that flight time to travel downfield.

These same ideas apply to two baseballs, one dropped from a cliff and the other thrown
directly forward from that same cliff. If both leave your hands at the same time, they will
both hit the ground below at the same time (Fig. 1.2.9). The fact that the second ball has an
initial forward velocity doesn’t affect the time it takes to descend to the ground because the
horizontal and vertical motions are independent. Of course, the ball thrown directly forward will strike the ground far from the base of the cliff, while the dropped ball will land
directly below your hand.
Check Your Understanding #5: Aim High
Why must a sharpshooter or an archer aim somewhat above her target? Why can’t she simply aim
directly at the bull’s-eye to hit it?
Answer: The bullet or arrow will fall in flight, so she must compensate for its loss of height.

Fig. 1.2.9 When these
two balls were dropped,
they accelerated downward
at the constant rate of
9.8 m/s2 and their
velocities increased
steadily in the downward
direction. Even though
one of them was initially
moving to the right, they
descended together.

Why: To hit the bull’s-eye, the sharpshooter or archer must aim above the bull’s-eye because the
projectile will fall in flight. Even if the target is higher or lower than the sharpshooter, the projectile
will fall below the point at which she is aiming. The longer the bullet or arrow is in flight, the more it
will fall and the higher she must aim. As the distance to the target increases, the flight time increases
and her aim must move upward.

S EC TIO N 1 . 3

Ramps
In the previous section, we looked at what happens to an
object experiencing only a single force, its weight. But what
happens to objects that experience two or more forces at the
same time? Imagine, for example, an object resting on the
floor. That object experiences both its downward weight and
an upward force from the floor. If the floor is level, the object
doesn’t accelerate; but if the floor is tilted, so that it forms a
ramp, the object accelerates downhill. In this section, we’ll
examine the motion of objects traveling along ramps. In addition to making sports such as skateboarding and skiing more
fun, ramps are common tools that help us lift and move heavy
objects.

Hand
truck

Questions to Think About: How does a ramp make it

Ramp

possible for one person to lift a very heavy object? Why is
lowering a heavy object so much easier than raising it?
What changes about that object as you raise it? Why is a
steep hill so much scarier to ski or sled down than a more
gradual slope? Why is the steeper hill so much harder to
bicycle up?

22

CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion

Experiments to Do: Place an unbreakable water bottle on a
level table or board. Hold the bottle steady for a second and
then let go of it without pushing on it. Why does the bottle
remain motionless?
Now, equip yourself with a pencil. Have a friend tilt the
surface of the table or board slightly so that the bottle begins
to roll downhill. Can you stop the bottle by pushing on it with
the pencil? Place the bottle back on the table and have your
friend tilt the table more sharply. Does the tilt of the table

affect your ability to stop the bottle from rolling downhill? Now
try to push the bottle uphill with the pencil (1) when the table
is slightly tilted and (2) when it is more sharply tilted. Which
task requires more force? Why?
Evidently a gentle push is all that may be needed to
raise a relatively heavy object if you use a ramp to help you.
To understand why this feat is possible, we need to explore
a handful of physical concepts and a few basic laws of
motion.

A Piano on the Sidewalk

© SSPL via/Getty Images, Inc.

Imagine that you have a friend who’s a talented but undiscovered pianist. She’s renting a
new apartment, and because she can’t afford professional movers (Fig. 1.3.1), she’s asked
you to help her move her baby grand. Fortunately, her new apartment is only on the second
floor. The two of you still face a difficult challenge, however: how do you get that heavy
piano up there? More important, how do you keep it from falling on you during the move?
The problem is that you can’t push upward hard enough to lift the entire piano at once.
One solution to this problem, of course, would be to break the piano into pieces and carry
them up one by one. This method has obvious drawbacks—your friend isn’t expecting a
firewood delivery. A better solution would be to find something else to help you push
upward, and one of your best choices is the simple machine known as a ramp.
Throughout the ages, ramps, also known as inclined planes, have made tasks like
piano-moving possible. Because ramps can exert the enormous upward forces needed to lift
stone and steel, they’ve been essential building equipment since the days of the pyramids. To
see how ramps provide these lifting forces, we’ll continue to explore the example of the
piano, looking first at the force that the piano experiences when it touches a surface. For the
time being, we’ll continue to ignore friction and forces due to the air; they will needlessly
complicate our discussion. Besides, as long as the piano is on wheels, friction is negligible.
With the piano resting on the sidewalk outside the apartment, you make a startling
discovery: the piano is not falling. Has gravity disappeared? The answer to that question
would be painfully obvious if your foot were underneath one of the piano’s wheels. No, the
piano’s weight is still all there. But something is happening at the surface of the sidewalk
to keep the piano from falling. Let’s take a careful look at the situation.
To begin with, the piano is clearly pushing down hard on the sidewalk. That’s why
you’re keeping your toes out of the way. But the presence of a new downward force on the
sidewalk doesn’t explain why the piano isn’t falling. Instead, we must look at the sidewalk’s
response to the piano’s downward push: the sidewalk pushes upward on the piano! You can
feel this response by leaning over and pushing down on the sidewalk with your hand—the
sidewalk will push back. Those two forces, your downward push on the sidewalk and its
upward push on your hand, are exactly equal in magnitude but opposite in direction.
This observation—that two things exert equal but opposite forces on one another, isn’t
unique to sidewalks, pianos, or hands; in fact, it’s always true. If you push on any object,
that object will push back on you with an equal amount of force in exactly the opposite
direction. This rule—often expressed as “for every action, there is an equal but opposite
reaction”—is known as Newton’s third law of motion, the last of his three laws.

NEWTON’S THIRD LAW OF MOTION
Fig. 1.3.1 A ramp would
make this move much
easier.

For every force that one object exerts on a second object, there is an equal but oppositely directed force that the second object exerts on the first object.

Ramps

The universality of this law is astounding. Whether an object is large or small, hard or
soft, stationary or faster than a rocket, if you can push on it, it will push back on you with
an equal but oppositely directed force.
In the present case, the sidewalk and piano push on one another with equal but oppositely directed forces. Of this pair of equal-but-opposite forces, only one force acts on the
piano: the sidewalk’s upward push. This upward push on the piano is what keeps the piano
from falling. We’ve solved the mystery.

INTUITION ALERT: Action and Reaction
Intuition says that, when you push an object that’s moving away from you, it pushes back more
gently on you than you push on it and that, when you push an object that’s moving toward you, it
pushes back harder on you than you push on it.
Physics says that when you push on an object, it always pushes back on you exactly as hard as
you push on it.
Resolution: It’s difficult to push on an object that’s moving away from you, so you naturally push
on it more gently than you expect. The gentle force it exerts on you is simply an equal but oppositely directed response to your gentle force on it. In contrast, it’s difficult not to push strongly on
an object that’s moving toward you, so you naturally push on it harder than you expect. The strong
force it exerts on you is again an equal but oppositely direct response to your strong force on it.

SUMMARY OF NEWTON’S LAWS OF MOTION
1. An object that is not subject to any outside forces moves at a constant velocity,
covering equal distances in equal times along a straight-line path.
2. The net force exerted on an object is equal to that object’s mass times its acceleration. The acceleration is in the same direction as the force.
3. For every force that one object exerts on a second object, there is an equal but
oppositely directed force that the second object exerts on the first object.

Check Your Understanding #1: Swinging
You are pushing a child on a playground swing. If you exert a 50-N (11-lbf) force on him as he is
swinging away from you, how much force will he exert back on you?
Answer: He will exert 50 N (11 lbf) on you.
Why: Whenever you exert a 50-N force on an object, whether it’s moving or stationary, it will exert a
50-N force back on you. There are no exceptions. If that object is a friend, it doesn’t matter whether
she is stationary or moving or wearing roller skates or even sound asleep; she will push back with
50 N of force. She has no choice in the matter. Similarly, if someone pushes on you, you will feel
yourself pushing back. That’s how Newton’s third law works.

Looking for Support and Adding Up the Forces
Although we’ve figured out why the piano isn’t falling, we still don’t know what type of
force the sidewalk is using to hold it up or why that upward force so perfectly balances the
piano’s downward weight.
Let’s begin with the type of force. Since two objects can’t occupy the same space at the
same time, their surfaces push apart whenever they’re in contact. They exert support forces

23

24

CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion

Fig. 1.3.2 A piano
resting on the sidewalk.
The sidewalk exerts an
upward support force that
exactly balances the piano’s
downward weight. The net
force on the piano is zero, so
the piano doesn’t accelerate.
5 Forces that are directed
exactly away from
surfaces are called
normal forces, since the
term normal is used by
mathematicians to
describe something that
points exactly away from
a surface—at a right angle
or perpendicular to that
surface.

on one another, each pushing the other directly away from its surface—the direction normal or perpendicular to its surface (see 5 ). Since the sidewalk is horizontal, the support
force it exerts on the piano is vertical—straight up (Fig. 1.3.2).
How large is that support force? To answer this question, suppose the sidewalk’s support force were strong enough to make the piano accelerate upward. The piano would soon
lift off the sidewalk, and as their surfaces stopped touching, the sidewalk’s support force on
the piano would grow weaker. Alternatively, suppose the sidewalk’s support force was
weak enough to let the piano accelerate downward. The piano would soon drop into the
sidewalk, and as their surfaces overlapped more, the sidewalk’s support force on the piano
would grow stronger.
Because of these behaviors, the sidewalk’s upward support force on the piano adjusts
automatically until it exactly balances the piano’s downward weight and the piano accelerates neither up nor down. When you sit on the piano during a break, the sidewalk’s upward
support force quickly readjusts to balance your weight as well.
Another way to state that the upward support force on the piano exactly balances the
piano’s downward weight is to say that the net force on the piano is zero, meaning that the
sum of all the forces on the piano is zero. Objects often experience more than one force at
a time, and it’s the net force, together with the object’s mass, that determines how it accelerates. When you and your friend push the piano in the same direction, your forces add up,
assisting one another so that the piano accelerates in that direction (Fig. 1.3.3a). When the
two of you push the piano in opposite directions, your forces oppose and at least partially
cancel one another (Fig. 1.3.3b).
When the two of you push the piano at an angle with respect to one another, the net
force points somewhere in between. For example, if you push the piano eastward while
your friend pushes it northward, the net force will point to the northeast and the piano will
accelerate in that direction (Fig. 1.3.3c). The precise angle of the net force and the piano’s
subsequent acceleration depend on exactly how hard each person pushes. For most of the
following discussion, we’ll need only a rough estimate of the net force’s magnitude and
direction, and we’ll obtain that estimate using common sense.
Apart from direction, there’s one crucial difference between the force that gravity
exerts on the piano and the support force that the sidewalk exerts on it. While the piano’s
weight is dispersed throughout the piano, the sidewalk’s upward support force acts only on
the piano’s wheels. Even when the net force on the piano is zero, having individual forces
act on it at different locations can lead to considerable stress within the piano. If it weren’t
built so well, the piano might lose a leg or two during the move.

(a)

(b)

Force 1

(c)

Force 1

Force 2
Force 1

Force 2
Net force
Force 1

Force 2
Net force

Net force
Force 1

Force 2

Net force

Force 2

Net force
Net force

Force 2

Force 1

Fig. 1.3.3 When several forces act simultaneously on an object, the object responds to the sum of the
forces. This sum is called the net force, and it has both a magnitude and a direction. Here, as elsewhere
in this book, the length of each force arrow indicates its magnitude. You can sum the forces graphically by
arranging the force arrows in sequence, head to tail. The net force arrow then points from the tail of the first
arrow to the head of the last arrow. Some of the force arrows are shown displaced slightly for clarity, a shift
that doesn’t affect the summing process.

Ramps

COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS: Newton’s Third Law and Balanced Forces
Misconception: When you push on an object and it pushes back on you, those two equal-butopposite forces somehow cancel one another perfectly and therefore have no effect on either you
or the object.
Resolution: The two forces described by Newton’s third law always act on two different things.
Your push acts on the object, while the object’s push acts on you. Since the object accelerates in
response to the net force it experiences—the sum of all the individual forces acting on it—it is
affected only by your force on it, not by its force on you. If you are the only thing pushing on it, it
will accelerate. If the object is the only thing pushing on you, you’ll accelerate, too!

Check Your Understanding #2: Riding the Elevator
As you ride upward in an elevator at a constant velocity, what two forces act on your body and what
is the net force on you?
Answer: The two forces are your downward weight and an upward support force from the floor. They
balance, so that the net force on you is zero.
Why: Whenever anything is moving with constant velocity, it’s not accelerating and thus has zero net
force on it. Although the elevator is moving upward, the fact that you are not accelerating means that
the car must exert an upward support force on you that exactly balances your weight. You experience
zero net force.

What the Piano Needs: Energy
As you approach the task of lifting your friend’s piano into her apartment, you might begin
to worry about safety. There is clearly a difference between the piano resting on the sidewalk and the piano suspended on a board just outside the second-floor apartment. After all,
which one would you rather be sitting beneath? The elevated piano has something that the
piano on the sidewalk doesn’t have: the ability to do things—to break the board, to produce
motion, and to squash whatever is beneath it. This capacity to make things happen is called
energy, and the process of making them happen is called work.
Energy and work are both important physical quantities, meaning that both are measurable. For example, you can measure the amount of energy in the suspended piano and
the amount of work the piano does when the board breaks and it falls to the sidewalk. As
you may suspect, the physical definitions of energy and work are somewhat different from
those of common English. Physical energy isn’t the exuberance of a child at the amusement park or what’s contained in a so-called “energy drink”; instead, it’s defined as the
capacity to do work. Similarly, physical work doesn’t refer to activities at the office or in
the yard; instead, it refers to the process of transferring energy.
Energy is what’s transferred, and work does the transferring. The most important characteristic of energy is that it’s conserved. In physics, a conserved quantity is one that can’t
be created or destroyed but that can be transferred between objects or, in the case of energy,
be converted from one form to another. Conserved quantities are very special in physics;
there are only a few of them. An object that has energy can’t simply make that energy disappear; it can only get rid of energy by giving it to another object, and it makes this transfer
by doing work on that object.
The relationship between energy and work is analogous to the relationship between
money and spending: money is what is transferred, and spending does the transferring.
Sensible, law-abiding citizens don’t create or destroy money; instead, they transfer it
among themselves through spending. Just as the most interesting aspect of money is spending it, so the most interesting aspect of energy is doing work with it. We can define money
as the capacity to spend, just as we define energy as the capacity to do work.

25

26

CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion

So far we’ve been using a circular definition: work is the transfer of energy, and energy
is the capacity to do work. But what is involved in doing work on an object? You do work
on an object by exerting a force on it as it moves in the direction of that force. As you throw
a ball, exerting a forward force on the ball as the ball moves forward, you do work on the
ball; as you lift a rock, pushing the rock upward as it moves upward, you do work on the
rock. In both cases, you transfer energy from yourself to an object by doing work on it.
This transferred energy is often apparent in the object. When you throw a ball, it
picks up speed and undergoes an increase in kinetic energy, energy of motion that allows
the ball to do work on whatever it hits. When you lift a rock, it shifts farther from Earth
and undergoes an increase in gravitational potential energy, energy stored in the gravitational forces between the rock and Earth that allows the rock to do work on whatever
it falls on. In general, potential energy is energy stored in the forces between or within
objects.
Returning to the task at hand, it’s now apparent that raising the piano to the second-floor
apartment is going to increase the piano’s gravitational potential energy by a substantial
amount. Since energy is a conserved quantity, this additional energy must come from
something else. Unfortunately, that something is you! To deliver the piano, you are going
to have to provide it with the gravitational potential energy it needs by doing exactly that
amount of work on it. As we’ll see, you can do that work the hard way by carrying it up a
ladder or the easy way by pushing it up a ramp.

Check Your Understanding #3: No Shortage of Energy
Do any of these objects have energy they can spare: a compressed spring, an inflated toy balloon, a
stick of dynamite, and a falling ball?
Answer: Yes, they all do.
Why: Each of these four objects can easily do work on you and thereby give you some of its spare
energy. It does this work by pushing on you as you move in the direction of that push.

Lifting the Piano: Doing Work
To do work on an object, you must push on it while it moves in the direction of your push.
The work you do on it is the force you exert on it times the distance it travels along the
direction of your force. We can express this relationship as a word equation:
work = force · distance,

(1.3.1)

in symbols:
W = F · d,
and in everyday language:
If you’re not pushing or it’s not moving, then you’re not working.
This simple relationship assumes that your force is constant while you’re doing the work.
If your force varies, the calculation of work will have to recognize that variation and may
require the use of calculus.
Calculating the work you do is easy if the object moves exactly in the direction of
your constant push; you simply multiply your force times the distance the object travels.
However, if the object doesn’t move in the direction of your push, you must multiply your

Ramps

force times the component of the object’s motion that lies along the direction of your
force.
As long as the angle between your force and the object’s motion is small, you can often
ignore this complication. However, as the angle becomes larger, the work you do on the
object decreases. When the object moves at right angles to your force, the work you do on
it drops to zero—it’s not moving along the direction of your force at all. And for angles
larger than 90°, the object moves opposite your force and the work you do on it actually
becomes negative!
Recalling that forces always come in equal but oppositely directed pairs, we can now
explain why energy is conserved: whenever you do work on an object, that object simultaneously does an equal amount of negative work on you! After all, if you push an object
and it moves along the direction of your force, then it pushes back on you and you move
along the direction opposite its force. You do positive work on it, and it does negative
work on you.
For example, when you lift the piano to judge its weight, you push it up as it moves up
and thus do work on it. At the same time, the piano pushes your hand down but your hand
moves up, so it does negative work on your hand. Overall, the piano’s energy increases by
exactly the same amount that your energy decreases—a perfect transfer! The energy that
you’re losing is mostly food energy, a form of chemical potential energy, and the energy the
piano is gaining is mostly gravitational potential energy.
When you lower the piano after realizing that it’s too heavy to carry up a ladder, the
process is reversed and the piano transfers energy back to you. Now the piano does work
on you, and you do an equal amount of negative work on the piano. The piano is losing
mostly gravitational potential energy, and you are gaining mostly thermal energy—a disordered form of energy that we’ll examine in Section 2.2. Unlike a rubber band, your body
just isn’t good at storing work done on it, so it simply gets hotter. Nonetheless, it’s usually
easier to have work done on you than to do work on something else. That’s why it’s easier
to lower objects than to lift them.
Finally, when you hold the piano motionless above the pavement, while waiting for
your friend to reinstall the wheel that fell off, you and the piano do no work on one another.
You are simply converting chemical potential energy from your last meal into thermal
energy in your muscles and getting overheated, probably in more ways than one.

CONSERVED QUANTITY: ENERGY

TRANSFERRED BY: WORK

Energy: The capacity to do work. Energy has no direction. It can be hidden as potential
energy.
Kinetic energy: The form of energy contained in an object’s motion.
Potential energy: The form of energy stored in the forces between or within objects.
Work: The mechanical means for transferring energy; work = force · distance.

Check Your Understanding #4: Pitching
When you throw a baseball horizontally, you’re not pushing against gravity. Are you doing any work on
the baseball?
Answer: Yes.
Why: Any time you exert a force on an object and the object moves in the direction of that force, you
are doing work on the object. Since gravity doesn’t affect horizontal motion, the work you do on the
baseball as you throw it ends up in the baseball as kinetic energy (energy of motion). As anyone who
has been hit by a pitch can attest, a moving baseball has more energy than a stationary baseball.

27

28

CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion

Check Your Figures #1: Light Work, Heavy Work
You are moving books to a new shelf, 1.20 m (3.94 ft) above the old shelf. The books weigh 10.0 N
(2.25 lbf) each, and you have 10 of them to move. How much work must you do on them as you move
them? Does it matter how many you move at once?
Answer: It takes 120 N · m (88.6 ft · lbf), no matter how many you lift at once.
Why: To keep each book from accelerating downward, you must support its weight with an upward
force of 10.0 N. You must then move it upward 1.20 m. The work you do pushing upward on the book
as it moves upward is given by Eq. 1.3.1:
work = force · distance = 10.0 N · 1.20 m = 12.0 N · m.
It takes 12.0 N · m of work to lift each book, whether you lift it together with other books or all by
itself. The total work you must do on all 10 books is 120 N · m.

Gravitational Potential Energy
How much work would you do on the piano while lifting it straight up a ladder to the apartment?
Apart from a little extra shove to get the piano moving upward, lifting it would entail supporting
the piano’s weight while it coasted upward at constant velocity from the sidewalk to the second
floor. Since you would be pushing upward on the piano with a force equal in amount to its
weight, the work you would do on it would be its weight times the distance you lifted it.
As the piano rises in this scenario, its gravitational potential energy increases by an
amount equal to the work you do on it. If we agree that the piano has zero gravitational
potential energy when it rests on the sidewalk, then the suspended piano’s gravitational
potential energy is simply its weight times its height above the sidewalk. Since the piano’s
weight is equal to its mass times the acceleration due to gravity, its gravitational potential
energy is its mass times the acceleration due to gravity times its height above the sidewalk.
These ideas aren’t limited to pianos. You can determine the gravitational potential
energy of any object by multiplying its mass times the acceleration due to gravity times its
height above the level at which its gravitational potential energy is zero. This relationship
can be expressed as a word equation:
gravitational potential energy = mass · acceleration due to gravity · height,

(1.3.2)

in symbols:
U = m · g · h,
and in common language:
The higher it was, the harder it hit.
Of course, if you know the object’s weight, you can use it in place of the object’s mass
times the acceleration due to gravity.
So what is the piano’s gravitational potential energy when it reaches the second floor?
If it weighs 2000 N (450 lbf) and the second floor is 5 m (16 ft) above the sidewalk, you
will have done 10,000 N · m (about 7200 ft · lbf) of work in lifting it up there, and the
piano’s gravitational potential energy will thus be 10,000 N · m. The newton-meter is the
SI unit of energy and work; it’s so important that it has its own name, the joule (abbreviated J).
At the second floor, the piano’s gravitational potential energy is 10,000 J.
A few everyday examples should give you a feeling for how much energy a joule is.
Lifting a liter bottle of water 10 centimeters (4 inches) upward requires about 1 J of work.

Ramps

29

A 1500-watt hairdryer needs 1500 J every second to operate. Your body is able to extract
about 2,000,000 J from a slice of cherry pie. When you’re bicycling or rowing hard, your
body can do about 1000 J of work each second. A typical flashlight battery has about
10,000 J of stored energy.
Quantity

SI Unit

English Unit

SI → English

English → SI

Energy

joule (J) = newton-meter (N · m)

foot-pound (ft · lbf)

1 J = 0.73757 ft · lbf

1 ft-lbf = 1.3558 J

Check Your Understanding #5: Mountain Biking
Bicycling to the top of a mountain is much harder than rolling back down to the bottom. At which
place do you have the most gravitational potential energy?
Answer: You have the most at the top of the mountain.
Why: Bicycling up the mountain is hard because you must do work against the force of gravity. This
work is stored as an increasing gravitational potential energy on your way uphill. Gravity then does
work on you as you roll downhill and your gravitational potential energy decreases.

Check Your Figures #2: Watch Out Below
If you carry a U.S. penny (0.0025 kg) to the top of the Empire State Building (443.2 m, or 1453.7 ft),
how much gravitational potential energy will it have?
Answer: About 11 J.
Why: The penny’s gravitational potential energy is given by Eq. 1.3.2:
gravitational potential energy = 0.0025 kg · 9.8 N/kg · 443.2 m
= 11 N · m = 11 J.
This 11-J increase in energy would be quite evident if you were to drop the penny. In principle, the
penny could accelerate to very high speed (up to 340 km/h or 210 mph) and do lots of damage when
it hit the ground. Fortunately, a falling penny actually tumbles through the air, which slows it to about
40 km/h or 25 mph.

Lifting the Piano with a Ramp
Unfortunately, you probably can’t carry a grand piano up a ladder by yourself. You need a
ramp, both to help you support the piano and to make it easier for you to raise the piano to
the second floor.
Like the sidewalk, a ramp exerts a support force on the piano to prevent the piano from
passing through its surface. However, since the ramp isn’t exactly horizontal, that support
force isn’t exactly vertical (Fig. 1.3.4). The piano’s weight still points straight down, but
since the ramp’s support force doesn’t point straight up, the two forces can’t balance one
another. There is a nonzero net force on the piano.
This net force can’t point into or out of the ramp. If it did, the piano would accelerate
into or out of the ramp and the two objects would soon either lose contact or travel through
one another. Instead, the net force points exactly along the surface of the ramp—a direction
tangent or parallel to the surface. More specifically, it points directly downhill, so the piano
accelerates down the ramp!
However, because this net force is much smaller than the piano’s weight, the piano’s
acceleration down the ramp is slower than if it were falling freely. This effect is familiar to
anyone who has bicycled downhill or watched a cup slip slowly off a tilted table. Although
gravity is still responsible, these objects accelerate more slowly than they would if falling
and in the direction of the downward slope.

Fig. 1.3.4 When a piano is
on a ramp, its weight and the
ramp’s support force don’t
cancel. Instead, they sum
to a downhill ramp force. If
no other forces act on the
piano, the ramp force is its
net force and it accelerates
downhill.

30

CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion

(a)
5m
2000 N

(b)

200 N

50 m

5m

Fig. 1.3.5 To lift a piano
weighing 2000 N, you can
either (a) push it straight up
or (b) push it along a ramp.
To keep the piano moving
at a constant velocity,
you must make sure it
experiences a net force of
zero. If you lift it straight up
the ladder in (a), you must
exert an upward lifting force
of 2000 N to balance the
piano’s downward weight.
If you push it up the ramp
shown in (b), you will only
have to push the piano
uphill with a force of 200 N
to give the piano a net force
of zero.

Therein lies the beauty of the ramp. By putting the piano on a ramp, you let the ramp
support most of the piano’s weight. The piano experiences only a small residual force,
which I call a ramp force, pushing it downhill along the ramp. If you now push uphill on
the piano with a force that exactly balances that downhill ramp force, the net force on the
piano drops to zero and the piano stops accelerating. If you push uphill a little harder, the
piano will accelerate up the ramp!
How does the ramp change the job of moving the piano? Suppose that you build a ramp
50 m (164 ft) long that extends from the sidewalk to the apartment’s balcony, 5 m (16.4 ft)
above the pavement. This ramp is sloped so that traveling 50 m uphill along its surface lifts
the piano only 5 m upward (Fig. 1.3.5). Because of the ramp’s 10 to 1 ratio between distance
traveled along its surface and altitude change, you can push the 2000-N (450-lbf) piano up
it at constant velocity with a force of only 200 N (45 lbf). Most people can push that hard,
so the moving job is now realistic. To reach the apartment, you must push the piano 50 m
along this ramp with a force of 200 N so that you will do a total of 10,000 J of work.
By pushing the piano up the ramp, you’ve used physical principles to help you perform
a task that would otherwise have been nearly impossible. You didn’t get something for
nothing, however. The ramp is much longer than the ladder, and you have had to push the
piano for a longer distance to raise it to the second floor. Of course, you have had to push
with less force.
Remarkably, the amount of work you do in either case is 10,000 J. When you carry
the piano up the ladder, the force you exert is large but the distance the piano travels in the
direction of that force is small. When you push the piano up the ramp, the force is small
but the distance is large. Either way, the final result is the same: the piano ends up on the
second floor with an additional 10,000 J of gravitational potential energy and you have
done 10,000 J of work. Expressed graphically in an equation, this relationship appears as:
work = large force · small distance = small force · large distance.
In the absence of friction, the amount of work you do on the piano to get it to the second floor doesn’t depend on how you raise it. No matter how you move that piano up to the
second floor, its gravitational potential energy will increase by 10,000 J, so you’ll have to
do 10,000 J of work on it. Even if you disassemble the piano into parts, carry them individually up the stairs, and reconstruct the piano in your friend’s living room, you will have
done 10,000 J of work lifting the piano.
Unless you’re an experienced piano tuner, you’ll probably be better off sticking with
the ramp. It offers an easy method for one person to lift a baby grand piano. The ramp
provides mechanical advantage, the process whereby a mechanical device redistributes
the amounts of force and distance that go into performing a specific amount of mechanical
work. In moving the piano with the help of the ramp, you’ve performed a task that would
normally require a large force over a small distance by supplying a small force over a large
distance. You might wonder whether the ramp itself does any work on the piano; it doesn’t.
Although the ramp exerts a support force on the piano and the piano moves along the
ramp’s surface, this force and the distance traveled are at right angles to one another. The
ramp does no work on the piano.
Mechanical advantage occurs in many situations involving ramps. For example, it
appears when you ride a bicycle up a hill. Climbing a gradual hill takes far less uphill force
than climbing a steep hill of the same height. Since your pedaling ultimately provides the
uphill force, it’s much easier to climb the gradual hill than the steep one. Of course, you
must travel a longer distance along the road as you climb the gradual hill than you do on
the steep hill, so the work you do is the same in either case.
Ramps and inclined planes show up in many devices, where they reduce the forces
needed to perform otherwise difficult tasks. They also change the character of certain activities. Skiing wouldn’t be very much fun if the only slopes available were horizontal or
vertical. By choosing ski slopes of various grades, you can select the ramp forces that set

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations

you in motion. Gentle slopes leave only small ramp forces and small accelerations; steep
slopes produce large ramp forces and large accelerations.
Finally, our observation about mechanical advantage is this: mechanical advantage
allows you to do the same work, but you must make a trade-off—you must choose whether
you want a large force or a large distance. The product of the two parts, force times distance, remains the same.
Check Your Understanding #6: Access Ramps
Ramps for handicap entrances to buildings are often quite long and may even involve several sharp
turns. A shorter, straighter ramp would seem much more convenient. What consideration leads the
engineers designing these ramps to make them so long?
Answer: The engineers must limit the amount of force needed to propel a wheelchair steadily up the
ramp. The steeper the ramp, the more force is required.
Why: A person traveling in a wheelchair on a level surface experiences little horizontal force and can
move at constant velocity with very little effort. However, climbing a ramp at constant velocity requires
a substantial uphill force equal in magnitude to the downhill force from gravity. The steeper the ramp,
the more uphill force is needed to maintain constant velocity. A 12 to 1 grade (12 meter of ramp
surface for each meter of rise in height) is the accepted limit to how steep such a long ramp can be.

Epilogue for Chapter 1
In this chapter we have examined three everyday things and explored the basic physical
laws that govern their behaviors. In Skating, we looked at the concept of inertia and
observed that objects accelerate only in response to forces. In Falling Balls, we introduced
an important type of force—weight—and saw how weight causes unsupported objects to
fall with equal downward accelerations.
In Ramps, we encountered another type of force—support force. We also saw how the
work done in changing an object’s altitude doesn’t depend on how you raise the object,
since work is actually the mechanical means for transferring energy from one object to
another. Energy, we noted, is one of the conserved physical quantities that govern the
motion of objects in our universe. The particular type of energy we studied in Ramps was
gravitational potential energy, the potential energy associated with the force of gravity.

Explanation: Removing a Tablecloth from a Table
The dishes remain in place because of their inertia. As we’ve seen, an object in motion
tends to remain in motion, while an object at rest tends to remain at rest.
Before you pull on the tablecloth, the dishes sit motionless on its surface, and they tend
to remain that way. By sliding the tablecloth off the table as quickly and smoothly as possible, you ensure that whatever force the tablecloth exerts on each dish occurs only for a
very short time. As a result, the dishes undergo only the tiniest changes in velocity and
remain essentially stationary on the tabletop.

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Skating Works: When you’re gliding forward on frictionless skates, you experience no
horizontal forces and move at a constant velocity. Inertia alone carries you forward. To change
your velocity—to accelerate—something must exert a horizontal force on you. A forward force
speeds you up, while a backward force slows you down. Since sideways forces change your
direction of travel, they, too, make you accelerate.

31

32

CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion

How Falling Balls Work: Any ball that’s subject only to its weight—the force due to gravity—
is a falling ball. It accelerates downward at a steady rate. Gravity affects only the ball’s vertical motion, causing the ball’s vertical component of velocity to increase steadily in the
downward direction. If the ball were initially moving horizontally, it would continue that
horizontal motion and drift steadily downfield as it falls.
A falling ball that’s initially rising soon stops rising and begins to descend. The larger its
initial upward component of velocity, the longer the ball rises and the greater its peak height.
When the ball then begins to descend, the peak height determines how long it takes for the
ball to reach the ground.
When you throw a ball, the vertical component of initial velocity determines how long the
ball remains aloft. The horizontal component of initial velocity determines how quickly the
ball moves downfield. A thrower intuitively chooses an initial speed and direction for a ball so
that it moves just the right distance downfield by the time it descends to the desired height.
How Ramps Work: An object at rest on level ground experiences two forces: its downward
weight and an upward support force from the ground that exactly balances that weight. The
net force on the object is thus zero. If the ground is replaced with a ramp, however, the support force is no longer directly upward and the net force on the object isn’t zero. Instead, the
net force points downhill along the ramp and is a ramp force that’s equal to the weight of the
object multiplied by the ratio of the ramp’s rise to the ramp’s length. If a 10-m-long ramp
rises 1 m in height, then this ratio is 1 m divided by 10 m, or 0.10. The ramp force downhill
along this ramp is thus only 10% of the object’s weight.
To stop an object from accelerating down a ramp, you must balance the downhill ramp
force by pushing equally hard uphill. In fact, if you exert more force up the ramp than it experiences down the ramp, the object will begin to accelerate up the ramp.
It takes less force to push an object up a ramp than to lift it directly upward, but you must
push that object a longer distance along the ramp. Overall, the work you do in raising the
object from one height to another is the same, whether or not you use the ramp. However, the
ramp gives you a mechanical advantage, allowing you to do work that would require an unrealistically large force by instead exerting a smaller force for a longer distance.

1. Newton’s first law of motion: An object that is free from all

outside forces travels at a constant velocity, covering equal distances in equal times along a straight-line path.
2. Newton’s second law of motion: An object’s acceleration is

equal to the net force exerted on that object divided by the object’s mass, or
net force = mass · acceleration.

(1.1.2)

3. Relationship between mass and weight: An object’s weight is
equal to its mass times the acceleration due to gravity, or

weight = mass · acceleration due to gravity.

(1.2.1)

4. Velocity of an object experiencing constant acceleration: The

object’s present velocity differs from its initial velocity by its
acceleration times the time since it was at that initial velocity, or
present velocity = initial velocity
+ acceleration · time.

(1.2.2)

5. Position of an object experiencing constant acceleration: The

object’s present position differs from its initial position by its

average velocity since it was at that initial position times the
time since it was at that initial position, or
present position = initial position + initial velocity · time
+ 12 · acceleration · time2.

(1.2.3)

6. Newton’s third law of motion: For every force that one object

exerts on a second object, there is an equal but oppositely directed
force that the second object exerts on the first object.
7. Definition of work: The work done on an object is equal to the

force exerted on that object times the distance that object travels
in the direction of the force, or
work = force · distance.

(1.3.1)

8. Gravitational potential energy: An object’s gravitational potential energy is its mass times the acceleration due to gravity
times its height above a zero level, or

gravitational potential energy = mass · acceleration
due to gravity · height. (1.3.2)

2

The Laws of Motion
PART 2

n the previous chapter, we saw how things move from place to place and encountered energy, an
important conserved quantity. But motion doesn’t always involve a change of position, and energy
isn’t nature’s only conserved quantity. In this chapter, we’ll take a look at a second type of
motion—rotation—and at two other conserved quantities—momentum and angular momentum.
Spinning objects are quite common, and we’ll do well to explore their laws of motion before proceeding much further. With those additional concepts under our belts, we’ll be ready to explore the
physics behind a broad assortment of mechanical objects.

I 

ACTIVE LEARNING
EXPERIMENTS

A Spinning Pie Dish
it’s upside down? Now give the dish a gentle spin. What
sort of influence do you have to exert on the dish to start
it rotating? If the dish doesn’t wobble and the pencil
remains stationary, the dish should spin for a while before
coming to a stop. Once you’re no longer touching the
dish, what keeps it turning? On the other hand, why
doesn’t it keep turning forever?
Now flip the pencil over so that its sharp point projects upward. What will happen when you place the dish
on that point? Will the dish still balance? When you spin
the dish, will it turn for a longer or shorter time than on
the bare eraser? If the dish is soft and the point digs into
it, protect the dish’s bottom by taping a coin to it. How
does this improved pivot affect the dish’s rotation? Can
you prolong the spin by taping weights around the outer
edge of the dish? Is there a way to get the dish spinning
just by blowing on it? Can you relate this motion to that
of a spinning skater or a bicycle wheel?

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Spinning a dish on the top of a narrow post seems like a
simple activity. But don’t let its uncomplicated appearance deceive you: there are lots of physics involved in
keeping the dish turning, in gradually slowing it down,
and in preventing it from falling off the post.
An easy way to experiment with a spinning dish is to
tape a pencil vertically to the edge of a table or chair so that
its eraser projects several inches upward into the air. To avoid
wobbling problems, the tape should hold the pencil rigidly in
place, and the table or chair should be sturdy and stable.
Now prepare to balance a metal pie dish on the eraser
before giving it a twist. If you don’t have a pie dish, you can
use a Frisbee, a deep plastic plate, or a shallow plastic bowl
instead. Be creative. You probably have something that will
work; just don’t use Grandma’s heirloom porcelain unless
you’re willing to face the possible consequences.
The first thing you’ll need to do is to balance the dish
on the eraser. Why is it easiest to balance the dish when

33

34

CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion

Chapter Itinerary
We’re going to explore the laws of rotational motion and two
new conserved quantities in the context of three everyday
objects: (1) seesaws, (2) wheels, and (3) bumper cars. In Seesaws, we look at twists and turns, and see how two children
manage to rock a seesaw back and forth. In Wheels, we examine how friction affects motion and learn how wheels make a

S E C TIO N 2 . 1

vehicle more mobile. In Bumper Cars, we learn the physics
behind collisions and uncover some of the simple rules that
govern what initially appear to be complicated motions. For a
more complete preview of what we examine in this chapter,
flip ahead to the Chapter Summary and Important Laws and
Equations at the end of the chapter.

Seesaws
mean by a balanced seesaw? Why does it matter just where the
children sit on the seesaw? What must the children do to start
the seesaw turning? To keep it turning? Who is doing work on
whom as they rock back and forth?

Handle

Seesaw

Pivot

Seat

The ramp that we examined in Section 1.3 is only one tool that
provides mechanical advantage. In this section, we’ll look at
another such device: the type of lever known as a seesaw.
Although seesaws move, their motion differs from that of the
objects in Chapter 1. Seesaws don’t go anywhere; they rotate.
In this section, we’ll revisit many of the laws of motion that we
encountered previously, but this time we’ll see these laws in a
new context—rotational motion.
Questions to Think About: A playground seesaw balances only
when the children riding it are properly situated. What do we

Experiments to Do: To get a feel for how rotating objects work,
find a rigid ruler with a hole in its center—the kind that can be
clipped into a three-ring binder. If you support the ruler by
putting the tip of an upright pencil into the central hole, you’ll
find that the ruler exhibits rotational inertia; that is, it either
remains stationary, at whatever orientation you choose, or
rotates steadily about the central hole. (Eventually, the ruler
comes to rest because of friction, a detail that we’ll continue
to ignore for now.) Now, push on one end of the ruler. What
happens? Try pushing the ruler’s end toward its central hole.
What happens then? What is the most effective way to make
the ruler spin?
Now lay the pencil on a table and place the ruler flat on
top of it so that the pencil and the ruler are at right angles, or
perpendicular, to each other. If you center the ruler on the
pencil, the ruler will balance. How is this balanced ruler similar
to the freely turning, inertial ruler of the previous paragraph?
What role does gravity play in balancing the ruler? Load the two
ends of the ruler with coins or other small weights, trying as
you do so to keep the ruler balanced. Try placing the coins at
different positions relative to the pencil. Is there any way you
can balance a light weight on one end with a heavy weight on
the other end?

The Seesaw
Any child who has played on a seesaw with friends of different sizes knows that the toy
works best for two children of roughly the same weight (Fig. 2.1.1a). Evenly matched
riders balance each other, and this balance allows them to rock back and forth easily. In
contrast, when a light child tries to play seesaw with a heavy child, the heavy child’s side
of the seesaw drops rapidly and hits the ground with a thud (Fig. 2.1.1b). The light child is
tossed into the air.

Seesaws

There are several solutions to the heavy child-light child problem. Of course, two light
children could try to balance one heavy child. But most children eventually figure out that
if the heavy child sits closer to the seesaw’s pivot, the seesaw will balance (Fig. 2.1.1c).
The children can then make the seesaw tip back and forth easily, just as it does when two
evenly matched children ride at its ends. This is a pretty useful trick, and we’ll explore it
later in this section. First, though, we’ll need to look carefully at the nature of rotational
motion.
For simplicity, let’s ignore the mass and weight of the seesaw itself. There are then
only three forces acting on the occupied seesaw shown in Fig. 2.1.1: two downward forces
(the weights of the two children) and one upward force (the support force of the central
pivot). Seeing those three forces, we may immediately think about net forces and begin to
look for some overall acceleration of this toy and its riders. But we know that the seesaw
remains where it is in the playground and isn’t likely to head off for Kalamazoo or the
center of Earth anytime soon. Because the seesaw’s fixed pivot always provides just enough
upward and sideways force to keep the seesaw from accelerating as a whole, the seesaw
always experiences zero net force and never leaves the playground. Overall movement of
an object from one place to another is called translational motion. Although the seesaw
never experiences translational motion, it can turn around the pivot, and thus it experiences
a different kind of motion. Motion around a fixed point (which prevents translation) is
called rotational motion.
Rotational motion is what makes a seesaw interesting—the whole point of a seesaw is
that it can rotate so that one child rises and the other descends. (You may not think of going
up and down as rotating, but if the ground weren’t there, the seesaw would be able to rotate
in a big circle.) But what causes the seesaw to rotate, and what observations can we make
about the process of rotation?
To answer those questions, we’ll need to examine several new physical quantities
associated with rotation and explore the laws of rotational motion that relate them to one
another. We’ll do these things both by studying the workings of seesaws and other rotating objects and by looking for analogies between translational motion and rotational
motion.
Imagine holding onto the seesaw in Fig. 2.1.1a to keep it level for a moment while the
child on the left climbs off the seesaw. Now imagine letting go of the seesaw. As soon as
you let go, the seesaw begins to rotate clockwise, and the child on the right descends
toward the ground. The seesaw’s motion is fairly slow at first, but it moves more and more
quickly until that child strikes the ground with a teeth-rattling thump. We could describe
the seesaw being twisted from rest in the following way:
“The seesaw starts out not rotating at all. When we release the seesaw, it
begins to rotate clockwise. The seesaw’s rate of rotation increases continuously
in the clockwise direction until the seesaw strikes the ground.”
This description sounds a lot like the description of a falling ball released from rest:
“The ball starts out not moving at all. When we release the ball, it begins
to move downward. The ball’s rate of translation increases steadily in the
downward direction until the ball strikes the ground.”
The statement about the seesaw involves rotational motion, while the statement about
the ball involves translational motion. Their similarity isn’t a coincidence; the concepts and
laws of rotational motion have many analogies in the concepts and laws of translational
motion. The familiarity that we’ve acquired with translational motion will help us examine
rotational motion.

(a)

35

Force from
the pivot

Weight
Weight
(b)

Force from
the pivot

Weight

Weight
(c)

Force from
the pivot

Weight
Weight
Fig. 2.1.1 (a) When two
children of equal weight
sit at opposite ends of a
seesaw, it balances.
(b) When their weights
are not equal, the heavy
child descends. (c) If the
heavy child moves closer to
the pivot, the seesaw can
balance.

36

CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion

Check Your Understanding #1: Wheel of Fortune Cookies
The guests at a large table in a Chinese restaurant use a revolving tray, a lazy Susan, to share
the food dishes. How does the motion of the lazy Susan differ from that of the passing dessert
cart?
Answer: The lazy Susan undergoes rotational motion, while the dessert cart undergoes translational
motion.
Why: The lazy Susan has a fixed pivot at its center. This pivot never goes anywhere, no matter
how you rotate the lazy Susan. In contrast, the dessert cart moves about the room and has no
fixed point. The server can rotate the dessert cart when necessary, but its principal motion is
translational.

The Motion of a Dangling Seesaw

Fig. 2.1.2 A seesaw
that’s dangling from a
rope at its middle. Since
nothing twists it, the
seesaw rotates steadily
about a fixed line in space.

Angle
of
rotation

Axis of
rotation

Fig. 2.1.3 You can
specify this seesaw’s
angular position, relative
to its horizontal reference
orientation, as the axis
about which it was rotated
to reach its new orientation
and the angle through
which it was rotated.

In the previous chapter we looked at the concept of translational inertia, which holds that a
body in motion tends to stay in motion and a body at rest tends to stay at rest. This concept
led us to Newton’s first law of translational motion. Inserting the word translational here is
a useful revision because we’re about to encounter the corresponding concepts associated
with rotational motion. We’ll begin that encounter by observing a seesaw that’s free of
outside rotational influences. We’ll then examine how the seesaw responds to outside influences such as its pivot or a handful of young riders. Because of the similarities between
rotational and translational motions, this section closely parallels our earlier examinations
of skating and falling balls.
Let’s suppose that your local playground is installing a new seesaw and that this seesaw is presently dangling from a rope (Fig. 2.1.2). The rope is attached to the middle of the
seesaw, where it supports the seesaw’s weight but exerts no other influences on the seesaw.
Most important, let’s suppose that the dangling seesaw can spin and pivot with complete
freedom—nothing pushes on it or twists it—and that the rope doesn’t get tangled or in the
way. This dangling seesaw is free to turn in any direction, even completely upside down.
You, the observer, are standing motionless near the seesaw. When you look over at the
seesaw, what does it do?
If the seesaw is stationary, then it will remain stationary. However, if it’s rotating, it
will continue rotating at a steady pace about a fixed line in space. What keeps the seesaw
rotating? Its rotational inertia. A body that’s rotating tends to remain rotating; a body
that’s not rotating tends to remain not rotating. That’s how our universe works.
To describe the seesaw’s rotational inertia and rotational motion more accurately, we’ll
need to identify several physical quantities associated with rotational motion. The first is
the seesaw’s orientation. At any particular moment, the seesaw is oriented in a certain
way—that is, it has an angular position. Angular position describes the seesaw’s orientation relative to some reference orientation; it can be specified by determining how far the
seesaw has rotated away from its reference orientation and the axis or line about which that
rotation has occurred. The seesaw’s angular position is a vector quantity, pointing along the
rotation axis with a magnitude equal to the rotation angle (Fig. 2.1.3). Because changes in
orientation are usually more interesting than orientation itself, angular position is a relatively little-used physical quantity.
The SI unit of angular position is the radian, the natural unit for angles. It’s a natural
unit because it follows directly from geometry, not from an arbitrary human choice or convention the way most units do. Geometry tells us that a circle of radius 1 has a circumference of 2π. By letting arc lengths around that circle’s circumference specify angles, we are
using radians. For example, there are 2π radians (or 360°) in a full circle and π/2 radians
(or 90°) in a right angle. Since the radian is a natural unit, it is often omitted from calculations and derived units.

Seesaws

If the seesaw is rotating, then its angular position is changing; this brings us to our first
important vector quantity of rotational motion—angular velocity. Angular velocity measures the rate at which the seesaw’s angular position is changing with time. Its magnitude
is the seesaw’s angular speed, the angle through which the seesaw turns in a certain
amount of time,
angular speed =

change in angle
time

and its direction is the axis about which that rotation proceeds. The SI unit of angular
velocity is the radian per second (abbreviated 1/s).
The seesaw’s axis of rotation is the line in space about which the seesaw is rotating.
However, just knowing that line isn’t quite enough: Is the seesaw rotating clockwise or
counterclockwise?
To resolve this ambiguity, we take advantage of the fact that any line has two directions to it. Once we have identified the line about which the seesaw is rotating, we can
look down that line at the seesaw from both directions. From one, the seesaw appears to
be rotating clockwise; from the other, counterclockwise. By convention, we choose to
view the seesaw from the direction in which it appears to be rotating clockwise and say
that the seesaw’s rotation axis points away from our eye toward the seesaw. This convention is called the right-hand rule because if the fingers of your right hand are curling
around the axis in the way the seesaw is rotating, then your thumb is pointing along the
seesaw’s rotation axis (Fig. 2.1.4). (Even if you’re left-handed, this rule still requires your
right hand, Fig. 2.1.5).
Remembering this convention isn’t as important as understanding why you must specify the direction when reporting a rotating object’s angular velocity. Just as translational
velocity consists of a translational speed and a direction in which the translational motion
occurs, so angular velocity consists of a rotational speed and a direction about which the
rotational motion occurs.
We’re now prepared to describe the rotational motion of the dangling seesaw. Because
of its freedom from outside influences and its rotational inertia, its angular velocity is constant. If the seesaw is rotating, it keeps on rotating, always at the same angular speed,
always about the same axis of rotation. If it is not rotating, however, its angular velocity is
zero and remains zero.
As you might suspect, this observation isn’t unique to seesaws. It is Newton’s first
law of rotational motion, which states that a rigid object that is not wobbling and is not
subject to any outside influences rotates at a constant angular velocity, turning equal
amounts in equal times about a fixed axis of rotation. The outside influences referred to in
this law are called torques—a technical term for twists and spins. When you twist off the
lid of a jar or spin a top with your fingers, you’re exerting a torque.
This law excludes objects that wobble or can change shape as they rotate because
those objects have more complicated motions. They are covered instead by a more
general principle—the conservation of angular momentum—that we’ll meet up with in
Section 2.3.

NEWTON’S FIRST LAW OF ROTATIONAL MOTION
A rigid object that is not wobbling and is not subject to any outside torques rotates at
a constant angular velocity, turning equal amounts in equal times about a fixed axis of
rotation.

37

Angular
velocity

Fig. 2.1.4 This seesaw is
spinning about the rotation
axis shown. The direction
of the seesaw’s angular
velocity is defined by the
right-hand rule.

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Fig. 2.1.5 Right-hand
rules were created to
help us remember several
physics conventions,
such as the agreed-on
direction of angular
velocity. These rules start
with a convention that
we all find extremely
familiar, specifically which
hand is your right hand,
and use it to specify the
conventions associated
with physical laws. Even
if you are left-handed, you
still know which hand to
call your right hand and
therefore understand this
convention.

38

CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion

Check Your Understanding #2: Going for a Spin
A rubber basketball floats in a swimming pool. It experiences zero torque, no matter which end of it
is up. If you spin the basketball and then let go, how will it move?
Answer: It will continue to spin at a steady pace about a fixed rotational axis (although friction with
the water will gradually slow the ball’s rotation).
Why: Because the basketball is free of torques, the outside influences that affect rotational motion,
it has a constant angular velocity. If you spin the basketball, it will continue to spin about whatever
axis you chose. If you don’t spin the basketball, its angular velocity will be zero and it will remain
stationary.

The Seesaw’s Center of Mass

Rotation

Center
of mass

Fig. 2.1.6 This club spins
about its center of mass,
which remains stationary.

Center
of
mass

Fig. 2.1.7 A juggler’s
club that is traveling
through space rotates
about its center of mass as
its center of mass travels in
the simple arc associated
with a falling object.

Even without visiting the playground, you can find many objects that are nearly free from
torques: a baton thrown overhead by a baton twirler, for example, or a juggler’s club whirling through the air between two clowns. These motions, however, are complicated because
those freely moving objects rotate and translate at the same time. The spinning baton travels up and down, the turning club arcs through the air, and if the rope breaks, your seesaw
will fall as it spins. How can we distinguish their translational motions from their rotational
motions?
Once again, we can make use of a wonderful simplification of physics. There’s a
special point in or near a free object about which all of its mass is evenly distributed and
about which it naturally spins—its center of mass. The axis of rotation passes right
through this point so that, as the free object rotates, the center of mass doesn’t move
unless the object has an overall translational velocity. The center of mass of a typical ball
is at its geometrical center, while the center of mass of a less symmetrical object depends
on how the mass of that object is distributed. You can begin to find a small object’s center
of mass by spinning it on a smooth table and looking for the fixed point about which it
spins (Fig. 2.1.6).
Center of mass allows us to separate an object’s translational motion from its rotational
motion. As a juggler’s club arcs through space, its center of mass follows the simple path
we discussed in Section 1.2 on falling balls (Fig. 2.1.7). At the same time, the club’s rotational motion about its center of mass is that of an object that’s free of outside torques: if
it’s not wobbling, it rotates with a constant angular velocity.
Many of the objects we’ll examine in this book translate and rotate simultaneously,
and it’s worth remembering that we can often separate these two motions by paying attention to an object’s center of mass. For example, your seesaw has been designed with its
center of mass located exactly where the pivot will go. As a result, the pivot will prevent
any translational motion of the installed seesaw while permitting nearly free rotational
motion of the seesaw, at least about one axis.
When examining rotational motion, we need to choose the pivot point or center of
rotation, the point around which all the physical quantities of rotation are defined. For a
free object, the natural pivot point is its center of mass. For a constrained object, the best
pivot point may be determined by the constraints—a door, for example, pivots about its
hinges. Since your installed seesaw will continue to pivot about its center of mass, that
point will remain the best choice for the center of rotation.
Once we’ve chosen the pivot, however, we must calculate all the physical quantities of
rotation about that pivot. Because it’s tedious to write about its hinges or about its center
of mass every time I mention a physical quantity of rotation, I will often omit those phrases
when the pivot point is obvious or already identified.

Seesaws

39

Check Your Understanding #3: Tracking the High Dive
When a diver does a rigid, open somersault off a high diving board, his motion appears quite complicated. Can this motion be described simply? How?
Answer: Yes. His center of mass falls smoothly, obeying the rules governing falling objects. As he
falls, his body rotates at constant angular velocity about his center of mass.
Why: Like a thrown football or tossed baton, the diver is a rigid, rotating object. His motion can be
separated into translational motion of his center of mass (it falls) and rotational motion about his
center of mass (he rotates about it at constant angular velocity). While the diver may never think of
his motion in these terms, he is aware intuitively of the need to handle both his rotational and translational motions carefully. Hitting the water with his chest because he mishandled his rotation isn’t
much more fun than hitting the board because he mishandled his translation.

How the Seesaw Responds to Torques
The workers are eating lunch, so the seesaw is still hanging from the rope. Why can’t this
dangling seesaw change its rotational speed or axis of rotation? Because it has rotational
mass 1 . Rotational mass is the measure of an object’s rotational inertia, its resistance to
changes in its angular velocity. An object’s rotational mass depends both on its ordinary
mass and on how that mass is distributed within the object. The SI unit of rotational mass
is the kilogram-meter2 (abbreviated kg · m2). Because the seesaw has rotational mass, its
angular velocity will change only if something twists it or spins it. In other words, it must
experience a torque.
Torque—our second important vector quantity of rotational motion—has both a magnitude and a direction. The more torque you exert on the seesaw, the more rapidly its angular velocity changes. Depending on the direction of the torque, you can make the seesaw
turn more rapidly or less rapidly or even make it rotate about a different axis. How do you
determine the direction of a particular torque? One way is to imagine exerting this torque
on a stationary ball floating in water (Fig. 2.1.8a,b). The ball will begin to rotate, acquiring
a nonzero angular velocity (Fig. 2.1.8c). The direction of this angular velocity is that of the
torque. The SI unit of torque is the newton-meter (abbreviated N · m).
The larger an object’s rotational mass, the more slowly its angular velocity changes in
response to a specific torque (Fig. 2.1.9). You can easily spin a basketball with the tips of
your fingers, but it’s much harder to spin a bowling ball. The bowling ball’s larger rotational
mass comes about primarily because it has a greater ordinary mass than the basketball.
However, rotational mass also depends on an object’s shape, particularly on how far
each portion of its ordinary mass is from the axis of rotation. The farther a portion of mass
is from that axis, the more rapidly it must accelerate as the entire object undergoes angular
acceleration and the more leverage it has with which to oppose that acceleration. We’ll
examine levers shortly, but the consequence of these two effects of distance from the rotation axis is that each portion of mass contributes to the object’s rotational mass in proportion to the square of its distance from that axis. That’s why an object that has most of its
mass located near the axis of rotation will have a much smaller rotational mass than an
object of the same mass that has most of its mass located far from that axis. Thus a ball of
pizza dough has a smaller rotational mass than the finished pizza. The bigger the pizza gets,
the harder it is to start or stop spinning.
Because an object’s rotational mass depends on how far its mass is from the axis of
rotation, its rotational mass may change when its axis of rotation changes, even if it’s
rotating about its center of mass. For example, less torque is required to spin a tennis
racket about its handle (Fig. 2.1.10a) than to flip the racket head-over-handle (Fig.
2.1.10b). When you spin the tennis racket about its handle, the axis of rotation runs right
through the handle so that most of the racket’s mass is fairly close to the axis and the

1 For clarity and
simplicity, this book refers
to the measure of an
object’s rotational inertia
as rotational mass.
However, this quantity is
known more formally as
moment of inertia.

(a)

(b)

Torque

(c)

Angular
velocity
Fig. 2.1.8 If you start
with a ball that’s not
spinning (a) and twist it
with a torque (b), the ball
will acquire an angular
velocity (c) that’s in the
same direction as that
torque.

40

CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion

Fig. 2.1.9 Spinning a merry-goround is difficult because of its
large rotational mass. Despite
the large torque exerted by this
boy, the merry-go-round’s angular
velocity increases slowly.

Axis of
rotation

© Chris Harvey/Stone/Getty Images

(a)

Center
of mass

(b)
Axis of
rotation
Center
of mass

(c)

Center
of mass

Axis of
rotation

Fig. 2.1.10 A tennis
racket’s rotational mass
depends on the axis
about which it rotates. Its
rotational mass is small
(a) when it rotates about its
handle and large (b) when
it rotates head-over-handle.
(c) If you make it rotate
about your shoulder, its
rotational mass becomes
even larger.

rotational mass is small. When you flip the tennis racket head-over-handle, the axis of
rotation runs across the handle so that both the head and the handle are far away from the
axis and the rotational mass is large. The tennis racket’s rotational mass becomes even
larger when you hold it in your hand and make it rotate about your shoulder rather than
about its center of mass (Fig. 2.1.10c).
When something exerts a torque on the dangling seesaw, its angular velocity changes;
in other words, it undergoes angular acceleration, our third important vector quantity of
rotational motion. Angular acceleration measures the rate at which the seesaw’s angular
velocity is changing with time. It’s analogous to acceleration, which measures the rate at
which an object’s translational velocity is changing with time. Just as with acceleration,
angular acceleration involves both a magnitude and a direction. An object undergoes
angular acceleration when its angular speed increases or decreases or when its angular
velocity changes directions. The SI unit of angular acceleration is the radian per second2
(abbreviated 1/s2).
If the seesaw is experiencing several torques at once, it can’t respond to them individually. Instead, it undergoes angular acceleration in response to the net torque it experiences, the sum of all the individual torques being exerted on it.
There is a simple relationship between the net torque exerted on the seesaw, its rotational mass, and its angular acceleration. The seesaw’s angular acceleration is equal to the
net torque exerted on it divided by its rotational mass or, as a word equation,
angular acceleration =

net torque
.
rotational mass

(2.1.1)

Seesaws

The seesaw’s angular acceleration, as we’ve seen, is in the same direction as the net torque
exerted on it.
This relationship is Newton’s second law of rotational motion. Structuring the relationship this way distinguishes the causes (net torque and rotational mass) from their effect (angular
acceleration). Nonetheless, it has become customary to rearrange the relationship to eliminate
the division. In its traditional form, the relationship can be written in a word equation:
net torque = rotational mass · angular acceleration,

(2.1.2)

in symbols:
𝝉net = I · 𝜶,
and in everyday language:
Spinning a marble is much easier than spinning a merry-go-round.
It’s like Newton’s second law of translational motion (net force = mass · acceleration),
except that net torque has replaced net force, rotational mass has replaced mass, and angular acceleration has replaced acceleration. This new law doesn’t apply to nonrigid or wobbling objects, however, because nonrigid objects can change their rotational masses and
wobbling ones are affected by more than one rotational mass simultaneously (see the
earlier discussion of tennis rackets).

NEWTON’S SECOND LAW OF ROTATIONAL MOTION
The net torque exerted on a rigid object that is not wobbling is equal to that object’s
rotational mass times its angular acceleration. The angular acceleration points in the
same direction as the net torque.

Because it’s an equation, the two sides of Eq. 2.1.1 are equal. Any change in the net
torque you exert on the seesaw must be accompanied by a proportional change in its
angular acceleration. As a result, the harder you twist the seesaw, the more rapidly its
angular velocity changes.
We can also compare the effects of a specific torque on two different rotational
masses. Equation 2.1.1 indicates that a decrease in rotational mass must be accompanied
by a corresponding increase in angular acceleration. If we replace the playground seesaw
with one from a dollhouse, the rotational mass will decrease and the angular acceleration
will increase. The angular velocity of the doll’s seesaw thus changes more rapidly than
the angular velocity of a playground seesaw when the two experience identical net
torques.
In summary:
1. Your angular position indicates exactly how you’re oriented.
2. Your angular velocity measures the rate at which your angular position is changing
with time.
3. Your angular acceleration measures the rate at which your angular velocity is
changing with time.
4. For you to undergo angular acceleration, you must experience a net torque.
5. The more rotational mass you have, the less angular acceleration you experience
for a given net torque.

41

42

CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion

This summary of the physical quantities of rotational motion is analogous to the summary
for translational motion in Section 1.1. Take a moment to compare the two.

SI → English

Quantity

SI Unit

English Unit

Angular position

radian (1)

radian (1)

Angular velocity

radian per second (1/s)

radian per second (1/s)

Angular
acceleration

radian per
second2 (1/s2)

radian per
second2 (1/s2)

Torque

newton-meter (N · m)

foot-pound (ft · lbf)

Rotational mass

kilogrammeter2 (kg · m2)

2

English → SI

1 N · m = 0.73757 ft · lbf
2

pound-foot (lbm · ft )

1 ft · lbf = 1.3558 N · m

1 kg · m = 23.730 lbm · ft
2

2

1 lbm · ft2 =
0.042140 kg · m2

Check Your Understanding #4: The Merry-Go-Round
The merry-go-round is a popular playground toy (see Fig. 2.1.9). Already challenging to spin empty,
a merry-go-round is even harder to start or stop when there are lots of children on it. Why is it so
difficult to change a full merry-go-round’s angular velocity?
Answer: The full merry-go-round has a huge rotational mass.
Why: Starting or stopping a merry-go-round involves angular acceleration. As the pusher, you exert a
torque on the merry-go-round, and it undergoes angular acceleration. This angular acceleration
depends on the merry-go-round’s rotational mass, which in turn depends on how much mass it has
and how far that mass is from the axis of rotation. With many children adding to the merry-go-round’s
rotational mass, its angular acceleration tends to be small.

Check Your Figures #1: Hard to Turn

(a)

Torque

Lever arm

Automobile tires are normally hollow and filled with air. If they were made of solid rubber, their rotational masses would be about 10 times as large. With the wheel lifted off the ground, how much more
torque would an automobile have to exert on a solid tire to make it undergo the same angular acceleration as a hollow tire?
Answer: It would need about 10 times as much torque.

Force

(b) No torque

No lever arm

Forces and Torques

Force
(c) No torque

Why: To keep the angular acceleration in Eq. 2.1.1 unchanged while increasing the rotational mass
by a factor of 10, the torque must also increase by a factor of 10. Solid tires are extremely difficult
to spin or to stop from spinning, which is why automobiles use hollow tires.

Lever arm
Force

Fig. 2.1.11 (a) When
you push on the seesaw,
perpendicular to the lever
arm, you produce a torque
on the seesaw. But when
you (b) push at the pivot
or (c) push parallel to the
lever arm, you produce no
torque.

The workers have finally installed the seesaw. Because the pivot supporting the seesaw
passes directly through the seesaw’s center of mass, the seesaw rotates about its own natural pivot. Moreover, the pivot supports the seesaw’s weight in a manner that leaves it free
to obey Newton’s first law of rotational motion. That is, when unoccupied and not influenced by anything else, the seesaw is either motionless or rotates with constant angular
velocity about its pivot.
To change the seesaw’s angular velocity, you have to exert a torque on it. But how
do you actually exert a torque? To find out, you put your hand on one end of the seesaw
and push that end down (Fig. 2.1.11a). If the seesaw was motionless, it starts turning. If
it was already turning, its rate of rotation changes. You have indeed exerted a torque on
the seesaw.

Seesaws

43

You started by exerting a force on the seesaw—you pushed on it—so forces and
torques must be related somehow. Sure enough, a force can produce a torque and a torque
can produce a force. To help us explore their relationship, let’s think of all the ways not to
produce a torque by pushing on the seesaw.
What happens if you push on the seesaw exactly where the pivot passes through it
(Fig. 2.1.11b)? Nothing happens—there is no angular acceleration. If you move a little
away from the pivot, you can get the seesaw rotating, but you have to push hard. You do
much better if you push on the end of the seesaw, where even a small force can start the
seesaw rotating. The shortest distance and direction from the pivot to the place where you
push on the seesaw is a vector quantity called the lever arm; in general, the longer the lever
arm, the less force it takes to cause a particular angular acceleration. Our first observation
about producing a torque with a force is this: you obtain more torque by exerting that force
farther from the pivot or axis of rotation. In other words, the torque is proportional to the
length of the lever arm.
Another ineffective way to start the seesaw rotating is to push its end directly toward
or away from the pivot (Fig. 2.1.11c). When your force is directed parallel to the lever
arm, as it is in this case, it produces no torque on the seesaw. Our second observation
about producing a torque with a force is that your force must have a component that is
perpendicular to the lever arm and only that perpendicular component contributes to the
torque.
We can summarize these two observations as follows: the torque produced by a force
is equal to the lever arm times that force, where we include only the component of the
force that is perpendicular to the lever arm. This relationship can be written as a word
equation:
torque = lever arm · force perpendicular to lever arm,

(2.1.3)

in symbols:
𝜏 = r · F⊥,
and in everyday language:
When twisting an unyielding object, it helps to use a long wrench.
The directions of the force and lever arm also determine the direction of the torque.
The three directions follow another right-hand rule (Fig. 2.1.12). If you point your right
index finger in the direction of the lever arm and your bent middle figure in the direction of
the force, then your thumb will point in the direction of the torque. Thus in Fig. 2.1.12a, the
lever arm points to the right, the force points downward, and the resulting torque points into
the page so that the seesaw undergoes angular acceleration in the clockwise direction. In
Fig. 2.1.12b, the lever arm has reversed directions and so has the torque.

Check Your Understanding #5: Cutting Up Cardboard
When you cut cardboard with a pair of scissors, it’s best to move the cardboard as close as possible
to the scissors’ pivot. Explain.
Answer: The closer the cardboard is to the pivot, the more force it must exert on the scissors to
produce enough torque to keep the scissors from rotating closed. When the cardboard is unable to
produce enough torque, the scissors cut through it.
Why: When you place paper close to the pivot of a pair of scissors, you are requiring that paper to
exert enormous forces on the scissors to keep them from rotating closed. Rotations are started and
stopped by torques, and forces exerted close to the pivot exert relatively small torques.

(a)

Torque

Lever arm

Force

(b)

Force

Lever arm

Torque

Fig. 2.1.12 The torque
on a seesaw obeys a righthand rule: if your index
finger points along the
lever arm and your middle
finger points along the
force, your thumb points
along the torque.

44

CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion

Check Your Figures #2: A Few Loose Screws
You’re trying to remove some rusty screws from your refrigerator, using an adjustable wrench with a
0.2-m (20-cm) handle. Although you push as hard as you can on the handle, you can’t produce
enough torque to loosen one of the screws. You have a 1.0-m (100-cm) pipe that you can slip over
the handle of the wrench to make the wrench effectively 1 m long. How much more torque will you
then be able to exert on the screw?
Answer: Five times as much torque as before.
Why: The pipe increases the wrench’s lever arm by a factor of 5, from 0.2-m to 1.0 m. According to
Eq. 2.1.3, the same force exerted five times as far from the pivot will produce five times as much
torque about that pivot. Extending the handle of a lever-like tool is a common technique to increase
the available torque, although it can be hazardous for both the tool and its user. Some tools that are
designed for such extreme use come with removable handle extensions.

Balancing and Unbalancing the Seesaw
When a child sits on one end of your seesaw, the child’s weight produces a torque on the
seesaw about its pivot. Gravity is ultimately responsible for that torque, so we’ll call it a
gravitational torque. Because it depends on the lever arm (the vector from the pivot to the
child), moving the child to the other end of the seesaw reverses the torque’s direction.
What happens when two children are sitting on opposite ends of the seesaw? Each
child’s weight produces a gravitational torque on the seesaw about its pivot, but those two
torques have opposite directions and thus at least partially cancel. If the two children have
equal weights and sit at equal distances from the pivot, the two gravitational torques cancel
exactly—they sum to zero. The seesaw then experiences no overall gravitational torque
about its pivot and it balances.
A balanced seesaw experiences no overall gravitational torque about its pivot. If
nothing twists it, the balanced seesaw is inertial—the net torque on it is zero. When the
children aren’t fidgeting, the seesaw is rigid and wobble-free, so it rotates at constant
angular velocity, in accordance with Newton’s first law of rotational motion. If it’s
motionless, it stays motionless. If it’s turning, it continues turning at a steady pace.

COMMON M ISCON CE P T I ON S : A Balanced Object Is Motionless
Misconception: A balanced object is perfectly vertical or horizontal and doesn’t move.
Resolution: A balanced object is experiencing zero gravitational torque about its pivot, but it may
well be tilted or even rotating. In fact, if it is free of other torques, Newton’s first law of rotational
motion may apply to it. Only when an object’s balance is easily disturbed (for example, a pencil
standing upright on its point or a pendulum hanging directly below its pivot) are orientation and
motionlessness important and then only because any small rotation will give rise to a gravitational
torque about its pivot and consequently to the loss of balance.

Two children with different weights can also balance the seesaw, but they must sit at
different distances from the pivot. According to Eq. 2.1.3, the gravitational torque a child
exerts on the seesaw is proportional to that child’s distance from the pivot times that child’s
weight. A heavier child must therefore sit closer to the pivot to balance a lighter child on
the other end of the seesaw.
With two children riding it, the balanced seesaw has a considerable weight, yet that
weight produces no torque on the seesaw about its pivot. That’s because the seesaw’s
center of gravity, the effective location of the seesaw’s overall weight, is located at the
pivot. Although gravity gives the children and the board their own individual weights, there

Seesaws

is a unique point—the seesaw’s center of gravity—about which all those individual weights
are balanced and at which gravity effectively pulls down on the entire seesaw. With the
seesaw’s center of gravity located at the pivot, gravity has no lever arm with which to
produce a torque on the seesaw about the pivot.
Any object or system of objects has a center of gravity—the effective location of its
overall weight. Although center of gravity (a gravitational concept) is different from center
of mass (an inertial concept), the two conveniently coincide; the seesaw’s center of gravity
and its center of mass are located at the same point. That coincidence stems from the proportionality between an object’s weight and its mass near Earth’s surface (see Section 1.2).

COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS: Center of Mass Is Center of Gravity
Misconception: Center of mass and center of gravity are the same idea and can be used interchangeably.
Resolution: Center of mass is an inertial concept: the effective location of an object’s mass as it
translates and the natural pivot as it rotates. Center of gravity is a gravitational concept: the effective location of the object’s weight. Although these two centers coincide for objects near Earth’s
surface, interchanging the terms is as incorrect as confusing mass and weight.

As two children ride the balanced seesaw, they’re inertial much of the time—
they’re either motionless or turning steadily in one direction or the other. But motionlessness is tedious, and a turning seesaw eventually touches the ground. Therefore, the
children deliberately cause the seesaw to undergo angular acceleration so that it rocks
back and forth.
They can cause this angular acceleration in two different ways. First, a boy can push
on the ground with his feet so that the ground pushes back and thereby produces an additional torque on the seesaw. Although the seesaw remains balanced, that extra torque
from the ground causes it to undergo angular acceleration. When the boy stops pushing
on the ground, the ground’s torque vanishes and the seesaw resumes a constant angular
velocity.
Second, they can change their lever arms and thereby unbalance the seesaw. For example,
if one girl leans closer to the pivot, that girl’s lever arm decreases and so does her gravitational torque. Since the children’s gravitational torques no longer sum to zero, the seesaw
isn’t balanced—it experiences an overall torque due to gravity—and it undergoes angular
acceleration. When the girl stops leaning so that the seesaw balances, its angular velocity
becomes constant again.

Check Your Understanding #6: Rocking the Boat
Loading a large container ship requires some care in balancing the cargo and fastening it down
firmly. The effective pivot about which the ship can rotate in the water is located roughly along the
centerline of the ship, from its bow to its stern. Why is improperly fastened-down cargo so dangerous
on such a ship, possibly causing it to capsize during a storm?
Answer: A substantial shift in the cargo’s position during a storm can unbalance the ship, giving rise
to a gravitational torque that may cause the ship to rotate about the effective pivot. The ship may
then capsize.
Why: Although most boats can compensate for some amount of cargo imbalance, shifting cargo can
easily flip even a fairly stable boat. It happens frequently in real life, often with fatal consequences.
Some boats, particularly canoes and racing shells, are notoriously sensitive to unbalanced loading
and are easily flipped by careless or moving occupants.

45

46

CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion

(a)
1m
1m

2m

2m
200 N

200 N
(b)
0.5 m

1m

1m

2m
200 N

400 N

Fig. 2.1.13 When two
children ride a balanced
seesaw, the work the
descending child does on
the board is equal to the
work the board does on
the rising child. (a) When
their weights are equal,
those two works involve
equal forces exerted over
equal distance. (b) When
one child is heavier than
the other, those two works
involve different forces
exerted over different
distances.

Levers and Mechanical Advantage
While discussing how to balance a seesaw, it was helpful to view the board and its riders as
a single rotating seesaw, subject to various gravitational and other torques, and undergoing
angular acceleration when those torques don’t sum to zero. But we can also view the
seesaw board individually as a lever that allows two children to do work on one another as
it rotates. Most interestingly, that lever provides the mechanical advantage (see Section 1.3)
necessary for a light child sitting far from the pivot to do the work of lifting a heavy child
sitting near the pivot.
When two children sit on a motionless horizontal seesaw board (Fig. 2.1.13), each
child pushes down on the board with a force equal to that child’s weight. The force is
directed perpendicular to the lever arm from the pivot to the force, so it produces a torque
on the board about the pivot. If the children are properly situated on opposite sides of the
board, their torques cancel and the seesaw board experiences zero net torque. The seesaw
is balanced.
If the board is rotating steadily near horizontal, the forces and angles get a little complicated but the basic story doesn’t change. Both children still push down on the board and
their torques still sum to zero. Now, however, the descending child does work on the board
by pushing it downward as it moves downward, and the board does work on the rising child
by pushing that child upward as the child moves upward. Because the seesaw is balanced,
the work done on the board by the descending child is equal to the work done by the board
on the rising child. In effect, the board transfers energy perfectly from the descending child
to the rising child.
To see this effect, suppose two 5-year-olds, each weighing 200-N (45 lbf), are sitting at
opposite ends of the seesaw (Fig. 2.1.13a). By exerting a 200-N downward force on the
seesaw board, 2 m (6.6 ft) from its pivot, each child produces a torque of 400 N · m (300 ft · lbf)
on the board (200 N · 2 m = 400 N · m). Since those torques are in opposite directions, they
sum to zero.
Now suppose the seesaw rotates clockwise, so that the girl rises 1 m and the boy
descends 1 m. Since the boy exerted a 200-N downward force on the board as the board
moved downward 1 m, he did 200-N · 1 m = 200 J of work on the board. Simultaneously,
the board exerted a 200-N upward force on the girl as the girl moved upward 1 m, so the
board did 200 J of work on the girl. Overall, the board has transferred 200 J of energy from
the boy to the girl.
Now let’s replace the 5-year-old girl with a 400-N (90-lbf) teenager (Fig. 2.1.13b). To
balance the seesaw, she must sit halfway to the pivot. She exerts a 400-N downward
force on the board, 1 m (3.3 ft) from its pivot, leaving the torque unchanged (400 N · 1 m =
400 N · m). As before, the children’s torques are in opposite directions and sum to zero.
This effect explains how a small boy at the end of the seesaw can balance a large girl nearer
the pivot.
Again, the seesaw rotates clockwise, but now the girl rises only 0.5 m when the boy
descends 1 m. As before, the boy did 200 J of work on the board. The board exerted a 400-N
upward force on the girl as the girl moved upward 0.5 m, so the board did 400 N · 0.5 m = 200 J
of work on the girl. Once again, the board has transferred 200 J of energy from the boy to
the girl, even though the girl weighs more than the boy.
The seesaw’s mechanical advantage allows even the tiniest child sitting at its end to lift
the heaviest adult sitting near its pivot. Because the child travels much farther than the
adult, the child’s work on the seesaw equals the seesaw’s work on the adult. This effect—a
small force exerted for a long distance on one part of a rotating system producing a large
force exerted for a short distance elsewhere in that system—is an example of the mechanical
advantage associated with levers.

Seesaws

Check Your Understanding #7: Pulling Nails
Some hammers have a special claw designed to remove nails from wood. When you slide the claw
under the nail’s head and rotate the hammer by pulling on its handle, the claw pulls the nail out of
the wood. The hammer’s head contacts the wood to form a pivot that’s about 10 times closer to the
nail than to the handle. The torque you exert on the hammer twists it in one direction, while the
torque that the nail exerts on the hammer twists it in the opposite direction. The hammer isn’t
undergoing any significant angular acceleration, so the torques must nearly balance. If you’re exerting a force of 100 N (22 lbf) on the hammer’s handle, how much force is the nail exerting on the
hammer’s claw?
Answer: The nail is exerting about 1000 N (220 lbf).
Why: Since the nail is 10 times closer to the pivot, the nail must exert 10 times the force on the
hammer to create the same magnitude of torque as you do pulling on the handle. As the nail pulls
on the hammer, the hammer pulls on the nail. Although the wood exerts frictional forces on the nail
to keep it from moving, the extracting force overwhelms this friction and the nail slides slowly out of
the wood.

Children Support Each Other
While we’re thinking about the two children on a balanced seesaw as individual objects,
using the seesaw board to exchange energy, we may notice something else about those
children: they’re using the seesaw board to support one another. In other words, each child
is using the board to exert a torque on the other child about the pivot, and that torque cancels
the other child’s gravitational torque. For example, the boy in Fig. 2.1.13a experiences a
clockwise torque due to gravity and a counterclockwise torque from the girl on the other
end of the seesaw. Since those two torques sum to zero, the boy rotates at constant angular
velocity about the pivot. Likewise, the boy exerts a torque on the girl so that she, too,
rotates at constant angular velocity.
Since the girl is exerting a torque on the boy and the boy is exerting a torque on the girl,
you might wonder if those two torques are related. It should come as no great surprise that
they are equal in amount but oppositely directed. Just as there is a Newton’s third law for
translational motion, so there is a Newton’s third law of rotational motion: if one object
exerts a torque on a second object, then the second object will exert an equal but oppositely
directed torque on the first object. The girl’s torque on the boy and the boy’s torque on the
girl are a Newton’s third law pair.

NEWTON’S THIRD LAW OF ROTATIONAL MOTION
For every torque that one object exerts on a second object, there is an equal but oppositely
directed torque that the second object exerts on the first object.

It’s worth noting that not all equal but oppositely directed torques are Newton’s third
law pairs. On a balanced seesaw, each child experiences two torques that happen to be
equal but oppositely directed: a torque due to gravity and a torque due to the other child.
Those two torques form a matched pair because the seesaw is balanced, not because of
Newton’s third law. In fact, if the seesaw weren’t balanced, those two torques would not
be equal but oppositely directed and the children would both be undergoing angular
acceleration.

47

48

CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion

COMMON MISCON CE P T I ON S : Newton’s Third Law or Not?
Misconception: Every pair of equal but oppositely directed forces or torques is associated with
Newton’s third law.
Resolution: Newton’s third law applies only to pairs of forces or torques that two objects exert on
one another. In such cases only, the forces or torques must be equal but oppositely directed. Two
forces or torques exerted on the same object are never a Newton’s third law pair and can have any
values, including equal but oppositely directed.

SUMMARY OF NEWTON’S LAWS OF ROTATIONAL MOTION
1. A rigid object that is not wobbling and is not subject to any outside torques rotates
at a constant angular velocity, turning equal amounts in equal times about a fixed
axis of rotation.
2. The net torque exerted on a rigid object that is not wobbling is equal to that object’s
rotational mass times its angular acceleration. The angular acceleration points in
the same direction as the torque.
3. For every torque that one object exerts on a second object, there is an equal but
oppositely directed torque that the second object exerts on the first object.
Note: These laws are the rotational analogs of the translational laws in Section 1.3.

Check Your Understanding #8: Turning on Ice
A light at your skating rink needs replacing, so you stand on the slippery ice and reach up overhead
to unscrew the light. As you twist the light, you begin to rotate. What caused you to rotate?
Answer: The light exerted a torque on you.
Why: To unscrew the light, you must exert a torque on it. In accordance with Newton’s third law of
rotational motion, that light exerts an equal but opposite torque on you. The ice is too slippery to
exert a torque on you, so you undergo angular acceleration and begin to rotate.

S E C TIO N 2 . 2

Wheels

Axle
grease

Axle
Hub
Spoke

Iron rim

Brake

Like ramps and levers, wheels are simple tools that make our
lives easier. But a wheel’s main purpose isn’t mechanical
advantage, it’s overcoming friction. Up until now, we’ve ignored
friction, looking at the laws of motion as they apply only in
idealized situations. However, our real world does have friction,
and most objects in motion tend to slow down and stop because
of it. One of our first tasks in this section will therefore be to
understand friction—though, for the time being, we’ll continue
to neglect air resistance.

Questions to Think About: If objects in motion tend to stay
in motion, why is it so hard to drag a heavy box across the
floor? If objects should accelerate downhill on a ramp, why
won’t a plate slide off a slightly tilted table? What makes the

Wheels

wheels of a cart rotate as you pull the cart forward? How does
spinning its wheels propel a car forward?

Experiments to Do: To observe the importance of wheels in
eliminating friction, try sliding a book along a flat table. Give
the book a push and see how quickly it slows down and stops.
Which way is friction pushing on the book? Does the force that
friction exerts on the book depend on how fast the book is

49

moving? Let the book come to a stop. Is friction still pushing
on the book when it isn’t moving? If you push gently on the
stationary book, what force does friction exert on it?
Lay three or four round pencils on a table, parallel to one
another and a few inches apart. Rest the book on top of the
pencils and give the book a push in the direction that the pencils can roll. Describe how the book now moves. What do you
think has caused the difference?

Moving a File Cabinet: Friction
When we imagined moving your friend’s piano into a new apartment back in Section 1.3,
we neglected a familiar force—friction. Luckily for us, your friend’s piano had wheels on
its legs, and wheels facilitate motion by reducing the effects of friction. We’ll focus on
wheels in this section. First, though, to help us understand the relationship between wheels
and friction, we’ll look at another item that needs to be moved—your friend’s file cabinet.
The file cabinet is resting on a smooth and level hardwood floor; it’s full of sheet music
and weighs about 1000 N (225 lbf). Despite its large mass, you know that it should accelerate in response to a horizontal force, so you give it a gentle push toward the door. Nothing
happens. Of course, the file cabinet accelerates in response to the net force it experiences,
not to each individual force acting on it. Something else must be pushing on the file cabinet
in just the right way to cancel your force and keep it from accelerating. Undaunted, you push
harder and harder until finally, with a tremendous shove, you manage to get the file cabinet
sliding across the floor. However, the cabinet moves slowly even though you continue to
push on it. Something else is pushing on the file cabinet, trying to stop it from moving.
That something else is friction, a phenomenon that opposes the relative motion of two
surfaces in contact with one another. Two surfaces that are in relative motion are traveling
with different velocities so that a person standing still on one surface will observe the other
surface as moving. In opposing relative motion, friction exerts forces on both surfaces in
directions that tend to bring them to a single velocity.
For example, when the file cabinet slides by itself toward the left, the floor exerts a
rightward frictional force on it (Fig. 2.2.1). The frictional force exerted on the file cabinet,
toward the right, is in the direction opposite the file cabinet’s velocity, toward the left.
Since the file cabinet’s acceleration is in the direction opposite its velocity, the file cabinet
slows down and eventually comes to a stop.
According to Newton’s third law of motion, an equal but oppositely directed force
must be exerted by the file cabinet on the floor. Sure enough, the file cabinet does exert a
leftward frictional force on the floor. However, the floor is rigidly attached to Earth, so it
accelerates very little. The file cabinet does almost all the accelerating, and soon the two
objects are traveling at the same velocity.

Fig. 2.2.1 A file cabinet sliding to the left
across a sidewalk experiences a frictional
force from the sidewalk to the right. Since
that sliding frictional force is the net force
on the file cabinet, the cabinet accelerates
opposite its velocity and gradually slows to
a stop.

50

CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion

Frictional forces always oppose relative motion, but they vary in strength according to
(1) how tightly the two surfaces are pressed against one another, (2) how slippery the surfaces are, and (3) whether the surfaces are actually moving relative to one another. First, the
harder you press two surfaces together, the larger the frictional forces they experience. For
example, an empty file cabinet slides more easily than a full one. Second, roughening the
surfaces generally increases friction, while smoothing or lubricating them generally
reduces it. Riding a toboggan down the driveway is much more interesting when the driveway is covered with snow or ice than when the driveway is bare asphalt. We’ll examine the
third issue later on.
Check Your Understanding #1: The One That Got Away
Your table at the restaurant isn’t level, and your water glass begins to slide slowly downhill toward
the edge. Which way is friction exerting a force on it?
Answer: Friction is pushing the glass uphill.
Why: The glass is sliding downhill across the top of the stationary table. Since friction always opposes
relative motion, it pushes the glass uphill, in the direction opposite its motion.

A Microscopic View of Friction

Microscopic
contact points

Fig. 2.2.2 Two surfaces
that are pressed against
one another actually touch
only at specific contact
points. When the surfaces
slide across one another,
these contact points
collide, producing sliding
friction and wear.

As the file cabinet slides by itself across the floor, it experiences a horizontal frictional
force that gradually brings it to a stop. From where does this frictional force come? The
obvious forces on the file cabinet are both vertical, not horizontal; the cabinet’s weight is
downward, and the support force from the floor is upward. How can the floor exert a horizontal force on the file cabinet?
The answer lies in the fact that neither the bottom of the file cabinet nor the top of the
floor is perfectly smooth. They both have microscopic hills and valleys of various sizes. The
file cabinet is actually supported by thousands of tiny contact points, where the file cabinet
directly touches the floor (Fig. 2.2.2). As the file cabinet slides, the microscopic projections
on the bottom of the file cabinet pass through similar projections on the top of the floor. Each
time two projections collide, they experience horizontal forces. These tiny forces oppose the
relative motion and give rise to the overall frictional forces experienced by the file cabinet
and floor. Because even an apparently smooth surface still has some microscopic surface
structure, all surfaces experience friction as they rub across one another.
Increasing the size or number of these microscopic projections by roughening the
surfaces generally leads to more friction. If you put sandpaper on the bottom of the file
cabinet, it would experience larger frictional forces as it slides across the floor. On the other
hand, a microscopically smoother “nonstick” surface, like that used in modern cookware,
would let the file cabinet slide more easily.
Increasing the number of contact points by squeezing the two surfaces more tightly
together also leads to more friction. The microscopic projections simply collide more
often. That’s why adding more sheet music to the file cabinet would make it harder to slide.
Doubling the file cabinet’s weight would roughly double the number of contact points and
make it about twice as hard to move across the floor. A useful rule of thumb is that the
frictional forces between two firm surfaces are proportional to the forces pressing those
two surfaces together.
Friction also causes wear when the colliding contact points break one another off. With
time, this wear can remove large amounts of material so that even seemingly indestructible
stone steps are gradually worn away by foot traffic. The best way to reduce wear between
two surfaces (other than to insert a lubricant between them) is to polish them so that they
are extremely smooth. The smooth surfaces will still touch at contact points and experience
friction as they slide across one another, but their contact points will be broad and round
and will rarely break one another off during a collision.

Wheels

Check Your Understanding #2: Weight and Friction
How much harder is it to slide a stack of two identical books across a table than it is to slide just one
of those books?
Answer: About twice as hard.
Why: The frictional forces between the table and books are roughly proportional to the forces pressing
them together. The book’s weight is what pushes them together. When you effectively double the
book’s weight, by stacking a second book on top of it, you double the frictional forces between the
table and the books.

Static Friction, Sliding Friction, and Traction
There are really two kinds of friction: sliding and static. When two surfaces are moving
across one another, sliding friction acts to stop them from sliding. But even when those
surfaces have the same velocity, static friction may act to keep them from starting to slide
across one another in the first place.
You find it particularly hard to start the file cabinet sliding across the floor. Contact
points between the cabinet and floor have settled into one another, so a small push does
nothing. Static friction always exerts a frictional force that exactly balances your push.
Since the net force on the file cabinet is zero, it doesn’t accelerate.
However, the force that static friction can exert is limited. To get the file cabinet moving,
you need to give it a mighty shove and thereby exert more horizontal force on it than static
friction can exert in the other direction. The net force on the file cabinet is then no longer
zero, and the file cabinet accelerates.
Once the file cabinet is moving, static friction is replaced by sliding friction. Because
sliding friction acts to bring the file cabinet back to rest, you must push on the cabinet to
keep it moving. With the file cabinet sliding across the floor, however, the contact points
between the surfaces no longer have time to settle into one another, and they consequently
experience weaker horizontal forces. That’s why the force of sliding friction is generally
weaker than that of static friction and why it’s easier to keep the file cabinet moving than it
is to get it started.
Both forms of friction are incorporated in the concept of traction, the largest amount
of frictional force that the file cabinet can obtain from the floor at any given moment. When
the cabinet is stationary, its traction is equal to the maximum amount of force that static
friction can exert on it. Once it begins to slide across the floor, however, its traction reduces
to the amount of force that sliding friction exerts.
While the file cabinet’s traction is a nuisance that you must overcome, the traction of
your shoes on the floor is crucial. Unless you can push against the wall, your shoes are
going to need enough traction to provide the horizontal force required to move the file
cabinet. Let’s hope you’re wearing your basketball shoes!
There is another difference between static and sliding friction—sliding friction wastes
energy. It converts useful, ordered energy, work or energy that can easily do work, into
relatively useless thermal energy, a disordered energy that’s associated with temperature.
Sliding friction makes things hotter by turning work into thermal energy.
We can observe work becoming thermal energy as you slide the file cabinet across the
floor at constant velocity. Since the cabinet isn’t accelerating, you and the floor are pushing
the cabinet equally hard in opposite directions. Because you’re pushing the cabinet forward
as it moves forward, you’re doing (positive) work on the cabinet. Sliding friction from the
floor, however, is pushing the cabinet backward as it moves forward, so sliding friction is
doing negative work on the cabinet. Overall, sliding friction is removing energy from the
cabinet just as fast as you’re adding it.
Where is your work going? The cabinet isn’t transferring your work to the floor
because the floor can’t move and therefore can’t have work done on it. Alas, sliding friction

51

52

CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion

is grinding your work up into tiny fragments by way of countless collisions between the
contact points on the two sliding surfaces. The fragments of your energy are distributed
randomly among particles that make up those surfaces and thereby become thermal energy.
The cabinet and floor are both becoming hotter.
In contrast, static friction doesn’t waste energy as thermal energy; it simply enables
objects to do work on one another. For example, your efforts have made you thirsty, so you
drink a glass of water. As you grip the sides of the glass with your fingers and lift it upward,
each finger is exerting an upward static friction force on the glass. Since the glass moves
upward as your fingers push it upward, your fingers are doing (positive) work on the glass.
At the same time, the glass is exerting a downward static friction force on each of your
fingers. Because each finger moves upward as the glass pushes it downward, the glass is
doing negative work on your fingers. In this manner, static friction is transferring energy
from you to the glass without wasting any of it as thermal energy.

Check Your Understanding #3: Skidding to a Stop
Antilock brakes keep an automobile’s wheels from locking and skidding during a sudden stop. Apart
from issues of steering, what is the advantage of preventing the wheels from skidding (sliding) on the
pavement?
Answer: If the wheels continue to turn, they experience static friction with the pavement. If they lock
and begin to skid, they experience sliding friction. Since the traction provided by static friction is
greater than that provided by sliding friction, the car will decelerate faster if the wheels don’t skid.
Why: For a rapid stop, the car needs the maximum possible force in the direction opposite its velocity. The most effective way to obtain that stopping force from the road is with static friction between
the turning wheels and the pavement. Sliding friction, the result of skidding tires, is less effective at
stopping the car, wears out the tires, and diminishes the driver’s ability to steer the vehicle.

Friction and Energy
We’ve seen that sliding friction converts work into thermal energy, but what exactly is
thermal energy? To answer that question, let’s first reexamine energy in general.
Energy is the capacity to do work, and it is transferred between objects by doing that
work. As noted in Section 1.3, energy is a conserved physical quantity—it cannot be created or destroyed; it can only be transferred between objects or converted from one form
to another. To distinguish energy from two other conserved quantities we’ll encounter in
the next section, you can think of energy as the conserved quantity of doing. With practice,
you’ll be able to follow the flow of energy through a system just as an accountant follows
the flow of money through a company.
Energy’s two basic forms are kinetic (energy contained in the motions of objects) and
potential (energy stored in the forces between or within those objects). Each force has its
own specific form of potential energy, some of which appear in Table 2.2.1.
The individual forms of energy are not conserved quantities; only total energy—the
sum of all the individual forms—is conserved. For example, when you drop a ball from

TABLE 2.2.1 Several Specific Forms and Examples of Potential Energy
Form of Potential Energy

Example

Gravitational potential energy
Elastic potential energy
Electrostatic potential energy
Chemical potential energy
Nuclear potential energy

A bowling ball at the top of a hill
A wound clock spring
A cloud in a thunderstorm
A firecracker
Uranium

Wheels

rest, its gravitational potential energy decreases and its kinetic energy increases, but its
total energy remains unchanged.
We measure energy in many common units: joules (J), calories, food Calories (also
called kilocalories), and kilowatt-hours, to name only a few. All these units measure the
same thing, and they differ from one another only by numerical conversion factors, some
of which can be found in Appendix B. For example, 1 food Calorie is equal to 1000 calories
or 4187 J. A jelly donut with about 250 food Calories thus contains about 1,000,000 J of
energy. Since a joule is the same as a newton-meter, 1,000,000 J is the energy you’d use to
lift your friend’s file cabinet into the second-floor apartment 200 times (1000 N times 5 m
upward equals 5000 J of work per trip). No wonder eating donuts is hard on your physique!
Let’s return now to thermal energy. Thermal energy is actually a mixture of ordinary kinetic and potential energies. But unlike the kinetic energy in a moving ball or the
potential energy in an elevated piano, the kinetic and potential energies in thermal energy
are contained entirely within those objects. Any object has internal energy, energy held
entirely within that object by its individual particles and forces between those particles;
thermal energy is the portion of internal energy that’s associated with temperature. Thermal
energy makes every microscopic particle in the object jiggle randomly and independently;
at any moment, each particle has its own tiny supply of potential and kinetic energies, and
this dispersed and disordered energy is collectively referred to as thermal energy.
As you push the file cabinet across the floor, you do work on it, but it doesn’t pick up
speed. Instead, sliding friction converts your work into thermal energy, and the cabinet and
floor become hotter as the energy you transfer to them disperses among their particles. But
although sliding friction easily turns work into thermal energy, there’s no easy way to turn
thermal energy back into work. Disorder not only makes things harder to use, but it also is
difficult to undo. When you drop your favorite coffee mug on the floor and it shatters into a
thousand pieces, the cup is still all there; however, it’s disordered and thus much less useful.
Just as dropping the pieces on the floor a second time isn’t likely to reassemble your cup,
energy converted into thermal energy can’t easily be reassembled into useful, ordered energy.
Check Your Understanding #4: Burning Rubber
If you push too hard on your car’s accelerator pedal when the traffic light turns green, your wheels
will slip and you’ll leave a black trail of rubber behind. Such a “jackrabbit start” can cause as much
wear on your tires as 50 km (31 miles) of normal driving. Why is skidding so much more damaging
to the tires than normal driving?
Answer: Normal driving involves mostly static friction because the surfaces of the tires don’t slide
across the pavement. Skidding involves sliding friction as the tire surfaces move independently of
the pavement. Because it involves sliding friction, skidding creates thermal energy and damages the tires.
Why: The expression “burning rubber” is an appropriate name for skidding during a jackrabbit start.
Substantial thermal energy is produced, and a trail of hot rubber is left on the pavement behind the
car. At drag races, the frictional heating that results from skidding at the start can be so severe that
the tires actually catch on fire.

Wheels
You’ve wrestled your friend’s file cabinet out the door of the old apartment and are now
dragging it along the sidewalk. You’re doing work against sliding friction the whole way,
producing large amounts of thermal energy in both the bottom of the cabinet and the surface of the sidewalk. You’re also damaging both objects, since sliding friction is wearing
out their surfaces. The four-drawer file cabinet may be down to three drawers by the time
you arrive at the new apartment.
Fortunately, there are mechanical systems that can help you move one object across
another without sliding. The classic example is a roller (Fig. 2.2.3). If you place the file
cabinet on rollers, those rollers will rotate as the file cabinet moves so that their surfaces

53

54

CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion

Fig. 2.2.3 (a) A file
cabinet that’s supported on
turning rollers experiences
no sliding friction.
(b) Since the top surface
of a roller moves forward
with the file cabinet, while
its bottom surface stays
behind with the sidewalk,
the roller moves only half
as fast as the file cabinet.
As a result, the rollers are
soon left behind.

(a)

(b)

never slide across the bottom of the cabinet or the top of the sidewalk. To see how the rollers work, make a fist with one hand and roll it across the palm of your other hand. The skin
of one hand doesn’t slide across the skin of the other hand; since this silent motion doesn’t
convert work into thermal energy, your skin remains cool. Now slide your two open palms
across one another; this time, sliding friction warms your skin.
Although the rollers don’t experience sliding friction, they can experience static friction. The top of each roller is touching the bottom of the cabinet, and the two surfaces move
along together even when the file cabinet is accelerating because of static friction; they grip
one another tightly until the roller’s rotation pulls them apart. A similar process takes place
between the rollers and the top of the sidewalk; static friction can exert torques on the rollers and cause them to rotate in the first place. Again, you can illustrate this behavior with
your hands. Try to drag your fist across your open palm. Just before your fist begins to
slide, you’ll feel a torque on it. Static friction between the skins of your two hands, acting
to prevent sliding, causes your fist to begin rotating just like a roller.
Once you get the file cabinet moving on rollers, you can keep it rolling along the level
sidewalk indefinitely. Without any sliding friction, the cabinet doesn’t lose kinetic energy,
so it continues at constant velocity without your having to push it. However, the rollers
move out from under the file cabinet as it travels, and you frequently have to move a roller
from the back of the cabinet to the front. In fact, you need at least three rollers to ensure
that the file cabinet never falls to the ground when a roller pops out the back. Although the
rollers have eliminated sliding friction, they’ve created another headache—one that makes
the prospect of a long trip unappealing. Is there another device that can reduce sliding friction without requiring constant attention?
One alternative would be a four-wheeled cart. The simplest cart rests on fixed poles or
axles that pass through central holes or hubs in the four wheels (Fig. 2.2.4). The ground
exerts upward support forces on the wheels, the wheels exert upward support forces on the
axles, and the axles support the cart and its contents. As the cart moves forward, its wheels

Cart’s velocity

Sliding friction
between axle and hub

i on

n

Static friction
between rim and ground

Rotat

Cart’s acceleration

Rotat
io

Fig. 2.2.4 As this
cart accelerates toward
the left, its wheels roll
counterclockwise. Although
the wheel rims experience
only static friction with the
ground, the wheel hubs
slide around the axles and
convert the cart’s kinetic
energy into thermal energy.
To reduce this wasted
energy, the cart has narrow
axles that are lubricated
with axle grease.

Wheels

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2.2.6 (a) When my assistant pushes a cart forward and it accelerates forward, static friction from
the ground pushes the wheel bottoms backward to prevent them from skidding. That same frictional
force causes the wheels to roll forward. (b) When the engine of a go‐cart twists its wheels forward,
static friction from the ground pushes the wheel bottoms forward to prevent them from skidding. That
same frictional force causes the vehicle to accelerate forward.

Rotating
hub

Rotation

roll. Their bottom surfaces don’t slide or skid across the ground; instead, each wheel lowers
a portion of its surface onto the sidewalk, leaves it there briefly so that it may experience
static friction, and then raises it back off the sidewalk, with a new portion of wheel surface
taking its place. Because of the touch-and-release character of rolling, there is no sliding
friction between the cart’s wheels and the ground.
Unfortunately, as each wheel rotates, its hub slides across the stationary axle at its
center. This sliding friction wastes energy and causes wear to both hub and axle. However,
the narrow hub moves relatively slowly across the axle so that the work and wear done each
second are small. Still, this sliding friction is undesirable and can be reduced significantly
by lubricating the hub and axle with axle grease.
A better solution is to insert rollers between the hub and axle (Fig. 2.2.5). The result is a
roller bearing, a mechanical device that eliminates sliding friction between a hub and an axle.
A complete bearing consists of two rings separated by rollers that keep those rings from rubbing against one another. In this case, the bearing’s inner ring is attached to the stationary
axle, while its outer ring is attached to the spinning wheel hub. The nondriven wheels of
an automobile are supported by roller bearings on essentially stationary axles. The nondriven wheels of lighter vehicles, such as bicycles and wagons, are similarly supported on
stationary axles, but their bearings use balls instead of rollers—ball bearings. When a vehicle
with free wheels starts forward, static friction from the ground pushes backward on the bottoms of those free wheels to keep them from skidding forward. Those frictional forces also
produce torques that cause the wheels to begin turning and they roll forward (Fig. 2.2.6a).
A car’s engine-powered or driven wheels are also supported by roller bearings, but these
bearings act somewhat differently. Because the engine must be able to exert a torque on each
driven wheel, those wheels are rigidly connected to their axles. As the engine spins these axles,
the axles spin their wheels (Fig. 2.2.6b). A bearing prevents each spinning axle from rubbing
against the car’s frame. This bearing’s outer ring is attached to the stationary car frame while
its inner ring is attached to the spinning axle. When a vehicle begins to spin its driven wheels,
static friction from the ground pushes forward on the bottoms of those driven wheels to keep
them from skidding backward. Since those forward frictional forces are the only horizontal
forces on the vehicle, the vehicle accelerates forward and the driven wheels roll forward.
Recognizing a good idea when you think of it, you load the file cabinet into the passenger
seat of your red convertible sports car and start the engine. The car isn’t quite as responsive
as usual because of the added mass, but it’s still able to accelerate respectably. In a few seconds, you’re cruising down the road toward the new apartment and a very grateful friend.

55

Fixed
axle

Rotating
rollers

Fig. 2.2.5 In a roller
bearing, the hub of the
wheel doesn’t touch the
axle directly. Instead, the
two are separated by a set
of rollers that turn with
the hub. The bottom few
rollers bear most of the
load since the hub pushes
up on them and they push
up on the axle. As the
wheel turns, the rollers
recirculate, traveling up to
the right and over the top
of the axle before returning
down to the left to bear
the load once again.
The rollers, wheel, and
axle can experience only
static friction, not sliding
friction. In a ball bearing,
the cylindrical rollers are
replaced by spherical balls.

56

CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion

Check Your Understanding #5: Jewel Movements
Many antique mechanical watches and clocks proudly proclaim that they have “jewel movements.”
Gears in these timepieces turn on axles that are pointed at either end and are supported at those
ends by very hard, polished gemstones. What is the advantage of having needlelike ends on an axle
and supporting those needles with smooth, hard jewels?
Answer: Because all the supporting forces are very close to the axis of rotation, the jewels exert
almost zero torque on the axle. The axle turns remarkably freely.
Why: Mechanical timepieces need almost ideal motion to keep accurate time. One of the best ways
to allow a rotating object free movement is to support it exactly on the axis of rotation, where the
support can’t exert torque on the object.

Power and Rotational Work
It’s a beautiful afternoon, and you thrill to the power of your car as it drives swiftly up a
steep hill. In this situation, power means more than just a sense of exhilaration and freedom; power is also the physical quantity that measures the rate at which your car’s engine
does work—the amount of work it does in a certain amount of time, or
power =

work
.
time

The SI unit of power is the joule per second, also called the watt (abbreviated W).
Other units of power include Calories per hour and horsepower; like the units for energy,
these units differ only by numerical factors, which are listed in Appendix B online. For
example, 1 horsepower is equal to 745.7 W, so the engine of your 200-horsepower roadster
can supply about 150,000 W of power. With you and the file cabinet on board, the car
weighs about 15,000 N (3400 lbf), so the car engine can lift it about 10 m upward each
second. No wonder it’s climbing the hill so easily!
Up to now, we’ve considered work only in the context of translation motion, where
work involves force and distance. For example, you do work on the file cabinet by exerting
a force on it as it moves a distance in the direction of that force. The car’s engine, however,
does work on each of its powered wheels in the context of rotational motion, where work
involves torque and angle. Specifically, the engine does work on a wheel by exerting a
torque on the wheel as the wheel rotates through an angle in the direction of the torque.
To do work on an object via rotational motion, you must twist it as it rotates through
an angle in the direction of your twist. The work you do on it is equal to the torque you
exert on its times the angle through which it rotates in the direction of your torque, where
that angle is measured in radians, the natural unit of angles. We can express this relationship as a word equation:
work = torque · angle(in radians)

(2.2.1)

in symbols:
W = 𝝉 · 𝜽,
and in everyday language:
If you’re not twisting or it’s not turning, then you’re not working.
This simple relationship assumes that your torque is constant while you’re doing the work.
If your torque varies, the calculation of work will have to recognize that variation and may
require the use of calculus.

Wheels

As the engine does work on its wheels via rotational motion, those wheels do work on
the car via translational motion. Because each wheel grips the pavement with static friction,
its contact point with the ground can’t move. Instead, the rotating wheel pushes the axle and
car forward as they move forward. So energy that flows into the wheels via rotational motion
returns to the car via translational motion and keeps the car climbing steadily up the hill.
Like work itself, power can be supplied by translational motion or rotational motion.
When you’re pushing the file cabinet across the floor, you’re using translational motion to
supply power to it. Since translational work is force times distance (Eq. 1.3.1) and power
is work divided by time, translational power is force times distance divided by time, or
power = force · velocity.
You can thus supply more power to the file cabinet either by pushing it harder or by having
it move faster in the direction of your push.
As your car drives up the hill, the car engine is using rotational motion to supply power
to its wheels. Since rotational work is torque times angle, rotational power is torque times
angle divided by time, or
power = torque · angular velocity.
The car can therefore supply more power to its wheels either by twisting them harder or by
having them rotate faster in the direction of that twist.

Check Your Understanding #6: Going Nowhere One Foot at a Time
You’re pedaling a stationary bicycle when your shoelace comes undone. While you retie the lace, you
can pedal with only one foot and exert half as much torque on the pedals as before. The pedals are
still turning just as quickly, so are you still exercising as hard?
Answer: No.
Why: By halving the torque you exert on the pedals, you halve the work that you do on those pedals
each time they complete a rotation.

Check Your Figures #1: We All Knead Energy
When your kitchen mixer is kneading a loaf of sourdough bread, it exerts a torque of 20 newtonmeters on its mixing blade, and that blade completes 500 rotations. How much energy does the
mixer supply to its blade and the dough?
Answer: It supplies about 63,000 joules.
Why: According to Eq. 2.2.1, the energy that the mixer transfers to its blade is equal to the torque it
exerts on the blade times the angle through which the blade turns. Since there are 2𝜋 radians per
complete rotation, the blade turns approximately 3140 radians. The work that the mixer does is
20 N-m times 3140, or about 63,000 J.

Kinetic Energy
As you near your destination, you begin thinking about the car’s brakes. They’re designed
to stop the car by turning its kinetic energy into thermal energy. They’ll perform their task
by rubbing stationary brake pads against spinning metal discs. Although you’re confident
that those brakes are up to the task, just how much kinetic energy are they going to have to
convert into thermal energy?
One way to determine the car’s kinetic energy is to calculate the work its engine did on
it while bringing it from rest to its current speed. The result of that calculation is that the

57

58

CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion

moving car’s kinetic energy is equal to one-half its mass times the square of its speed. This
relationship can be written as a word equation:
kinetic energy = 12 · mass · speed2,

(2.2.2)

in symbols:
K = 12 · m · v2,
and in everyday language:
Racing around at twice the speed takes four times the energy.
With you and the file cabinet on board, the sports car has a mass of about 1500 kg
(3300 lbm). At a speed of 100 km/h (62 mph), it has over 575,000 J of kinetic energy. That
enormous energy is four times what it would be at 50 km/h (31 mph), so put down your cell
phone and drive carefully. The dramatic increase in kinetic energy that results from a modest
increase in speed explains why high-speed crashes are far deadlier than those at lower
speeds and why that police officer is checking out your car with a radar gun. Red cars get
all the attention.
You’re traveling safely within the speed limit and exchange a polite wave with the officer. However, you soon pass another car that has been stopped for a ticket. The light on the
nearby police car spins round and round, and rotating objects have kinetic energy, too. Like
the kinetic energy of translational motion, the kinetic energy of rotational motion depends
on inertia and speed; however, it’s the rotational inertia and rotational speed that matter. The
light’s kinetic energy of rotational motion is equal to one-half its rotational mass times the
square of its angular speed. This relationship can be written as a word equation:
kinetic energy = 12 · rotational mass · angular speed2,

(2.2.3)

in symbols:
K = 12 · I · ω2,
and in everyday language:
It takes a very energetic person to spin his wheels twice as fast.
With the ticket complete, the police car pulls out into traffic with its light still spinning. The light’s total kinetic energy is now the sum of two parts: translational kinetic
energy and rotational kinetic energy. Its translational kinetic energy depends on the speed
of the light’s center of mass, which is equal to the police car’s speed through traffic. Its
rotational kinetic energy depends on the angular speed at which the light turns about its
center of mass.
As the police car disappears in the distance, it occurs to you that the spinning wheels
of your car also have rotational kinetic energy that adds to the car’s substantial translational
kinetic energy. Still, you trust your brakes. In a few minutes, you arrive at your destination
and brake to a stop. Although you’re aware of the added mass because the car decelerates
less quickly than usual, the brakes successfully transform the car’s kinetic energy into thermal energy. You’ve reached your goal safely and are now a hero.

Bumper Cars

59

Check Your Understanding #7: Throwing a Fastball
A typical grade school pitcher can throw a baseball at 80 km/h (50 mph), but only a few professional
athletes have the extraordinary strength needed to throw a baseball at twice that speed. Why is it so
much harder to throw the baseball only twice as fast?
Answer: Doubling the speed of the baseball requires quadrupling the energy transferred to it by the
pitcher.
Why: To throw a 160-km/h (100-mph) fastball, a major league pitcher must put four times as much
kinetic energy into both the ball and his arm as when pitching an 80-km/h slow ball. He also pitches
the fastball in half the time needed to pitch the slow ball. Overall, he must do four times as much
work throwing a fastball, and he must do that work in one-half the time. That means the pitcher
produces eight times as much power while throwing a fastball as when throwing a slow ball. No
wonder amateurs have trouble duplicating that feat.

Check Your Figures #2: Blowing in the Wind
The air in a hurricane travels at 200 km/h (124 mph). How much more kinetic energy does 1 kg of
this air have than 1 kg of air moving at only 20 km/h?
Answer: It has 100 times as much kinetic energy.
Why: Because kinetic energy is proportional to speed squared, the kilogram of air in the hurricane
moves 10 times as fast but has 100 times as much kinetic energy as the slower moving air. This enormous increase in energy is what makes a hurricane’s wind dangerous. The air’s terrific speed also brings
large quantities of it to you quickly, so that the wind power arriving each second is overwhelming.

Check Your Figures #3: Playing Around at the Playground
When children climb onto a playground merry-go-round, they increase its rotational inertia. If the
children triple the merry-go-round’s rotational mass, how will they alter the kinetic energy it has when
it spins at a certain angular speed?
Answer: The children will triple the merry-go-round’s kinetic energy.
Why: The kinetic energy of a spinning object is proportional to its rotational mass. Since the children
triple the merry-go-round’s rotational mass, they triple its kinetic energy.

Bumper Cars

S EC TIO N 2 . 3

For a few minutes, drivers in this amusement park ride race
madly about an oval track, deliberately crashing their vehicles
into one another and laughing hysterically at the violent
impacts. Jolts, jerks, and spins are half the fun, and it’s a wonder that no one gets whiplash. Hidden in the excitement,
though, are several important physics concepts that influence
everything from tennis to billiards.

Power source grid

Contact
Riser

Shoulder
harness

Steering wheel
Headlight
Bumper
Neutral power return
(the floor)

While car crashes normally aren’t much fun outside of movies
or television, there is one delightful exception—bumper cars.

Questions to Think About: Why does a stationary car begin
rolling forward after being struck by a moving car? What
aspects of motion are passed between cars as they collide?
Why does your car jolt more when the car that hits it contains
two big adults rather than one small child? What would happen if the bumper cars had hard steel bumpers rather than
soft rubber ones? Why is your car often set spinning by collisions, and what keeps it spinning?
Experiments to Do: Place a coin on a smooth table and flick a
second identical coin so that it slides along the table and

60

CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion

strikes the stationary coin squarely. What happens? Try this
experiment again, but now use two coins with different
masses. How is the collision different? Does it matter which
coin you crash into the other?
Now line up several identical coins so that they touch, and
slide another coin into one end of this line. How does the

collision affect the coin that was originally moving? How does
it affect the line of coins? What was transferred among the
coins by the collision?
Now stand a coin on its edge and flick it so that it spins
rapidly. Did you give it something that keeps it spinning? Why
does the coin eventually stop spinning?

Coasting Forward: Linear Momentum
Bumper cars are small, electrically powered vehicles that can turn on a dime and are protected on all sides by rubber bumpers. Each car has only two controls: a pedal that activates
its motor and a steering wheel that controls the direction in which the motor pushes the car.
Since the car itself is so small, its occupants account for much of the car’s total mass and
rotational mass.
Imagine that you have just sat down in one of these cars and put on your safety strap.
The other people also climb into their cars, usually one person per car, and the ride begins.
With your car free to move or turn, you quickly become aware of its translational and
rotational inertias. The car’s translational inertia makes it hard to start or stop, and its rotational inertia makes it difficult to spin or stop from spinning. While we’ve seen these two
types of inertia before, let’s take another look at them and at how they affect your bumper car.
This time, we’ll see that they’re associated with two new conserved quantities: linear momentum and angular momentum. As promised, energy isn’t the only conserved quantity in nature!
When fast-moving bumper cars crash into one another, they exchange more than just
energy. Energy is a scalar rather than vector quantity, so it’s directionless and can’t account
for the fact that these cars seem to be exchanging some physical quantity that incorporates
both speed and direction of travel. For example, if your car is hit squarely by a car speeding
toward the right, then your car’s motion shifts rightward in response. What your car is
receiving from the other car is a rightward-directed dose of a conserved vector quantity
known as linear momentum.
Linear momentum, usually just called momentum, is the measure of an object’s
translational impetus or tenacity—its determination to keep moving the way it’s currently
moving. Roughly speaking, your car’s momentum indicates the effort it took to get the car
moving with its present speed and direction of motion. To distinguish it from energy and
angular momentum, you can think of momentum as the conserved quantity of moving.
The car’s momentum is equal to its mass times its velocity and can be written as a
word equation:
momentum = mass · velocity,

(2.3.1)

in symbols:
p = m · v,
and in everyday language:
It’s hard to stop a fast-moving truck.
Note that momentum is a vector quantity and that it has the same direction as the velocity.
As we might expect, the faster your car is moving or the more mass it has, the more momentum it has in the direction of its velocity. The SI unit of momentum is the kilogram-meter
per second (abbreviated kg · m/s).
To physicists, conserved quantities are rare treasures that make it easier to understand
otherwise complicated motions. Like all conserved quantities, momentum can’t be created
or destroyed. It can only be transferred between objects. Momentum plays a very basic role
in bumper cars; the whole point of crashing them into one another is to enjoy the momentum

Bumper Cars

Momentum
transfer

Momentum
transfer

Momentum
transfer

Westward
momentum

Wall

Child's car

Your car

Overloaded
green car

transfers. During each collision, momentum shifts from one car to the other so that they
abruptly change their speeds or directions or both. As long as these momentum transfers
aren’t too jarring, everyone has a good time.
You’ve stopped your car, so it has zero velocity and zero momentum. To begin moving
again, something must transfer momentum to your car. While you could press the pedal and
let the motor gradually transfer momentum from the ground to your car, that’s not much
fun. Instead, you let two grinning couch potatoes in an overloaded green car slam into you
at breakneck speed (Fig. 2.3.1).
The green car was heading westward, and in a few moments your car is moving westward, too, while the green car has slowed significantly. Before you recover from the jolt,
your car pounds a child’s car westward and your car slows down abruptly. Finally, its
impact with a wall stops the child’s car. Despite disapproving looks from the child’s parents, there’s no harm done. Overall, westward momentum has flowed from the spudmobile
to your car, to the child’s car, and into the wall. No momentum has been created or
destroyed; you’ve all simply enjoyed passing it along from car to car.
Check Your Understanding #1: Stuck on the Ice
Suppose you’re stuck in the middle of a frozen lake, with a surface so slippery that you can’t get any
traction. You take off a shoe and throw it toward the southern shore. You find yourself coasting toward
the northern shore and soon escape from the lake. Why did this scheme work?
Answer: By transferring southward momentum to the shoe, you obtained northward momentum.
Why: Initially, both you and your shoe have zero momentum. But when you throw the shoe southward,
you give it southward momentum. Since the only source of that southward momentum is you, you
must have lost southward momentum. A negative amount of southward momentum is actually northward momentum, and thus you coast northward. Interestingly enough, the total momentum of you
and the shoe hasn’t changed. It’s still zero, as it must be because momentum is conserved. It has
simply been redistributed.

Check Your Figures #1: Follow That Train!
The bad guys are getting away in a four-car train, and you’re trying to catch them. The train has a mass
of 20,000 kg and it’s rolling forward at 22 m/s (80 km/h or 50 mph). What is the train’s momentum?
Answer: The train’s momentum is 4400,000 kg · m/s, in the forward direction.
Why: You can use Eq. 2.3.1 to calculate the train’s momentum from its mass and velocity:
linear momentum = 20,000 kg · 22 m/s
= 440,000 kg · m/s.
That momentum is in the same direction the train is moving, the forward direction.

61

Fig. 2.3.1 Your car is
hit by a fast-moving,
massive car with westward
momentum. Much of that
westward momentum is
transferred to your car.
You crash into a child’s
car, transferring the
westward momentum to
it. It then crashes into
the wall, transferring the
westward momentum to
the wall. Although that wall
doesn’t appear to move,
it and the Earth, to which
it’s attached, actually
accelerate westward a tiny
amount as they receive the
westward momentum.

62

CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion

Exchanging Momentum in a Collision: Impulses
Momentum is transferred to a car by giving it an impulse, a force exerted on it for a certain
amount of time. When the motor and floor push your bumper car forward for a few seconds,
they give your car an impulse and transfer momentum to it. This impulse is the change in
your car’s momentum and is equal to the force exerted on the car times the duration of that
force. This relationship can be written as a word equation:
impulse = force · time,

(2.3.2)

in symbols:
Δp = F · t,
and in everyday language:
The harder and longer you push a bobsled forward at the start of a race, the
more momentum it will have when it starts down the hill.
The more force or the longer that force is exerted, the larger the impulse and the more your
bumper car’s momentum changes. Remember that an impulse, like momentum itself, is a
vector quantity; it points in the same direction as the force. If your aim is off and the misdirected impulse you obtain from the floor sends you crashing into the wall, don’t say you
hadn’t been warned!
Different forces exerted for different amounts of time can transfer the same momentum to a car:
impulse = large force · short time
= small force · long time.

(2.3.3)

Thus you can get your car moving with a certain forward momentum either by letting the
motor and floor push it with a small forward force of long duration or by letting the colliding green car push on it with a large forward force of short duration.
Forces that colliding objects exert on one another as they exchange momentum are
often called impact forces, and they explain why bumper cars have soft rubber bumpers. If
the bumpers were hard steel, the collision between the green car and your car would last
only an instant and would involve enormous impact forces. You’d be in need of a neck
brace and the services of a personal injury lawyer. However, amusement parks don’t like
lawsuits and sensibly limit the impact forces. To do this, they use rubber bumpers and
rather slow-moving cars.
Nonetheless, you can get a pretty good jolt when you collide head-on with another car.
Your two cars then start with oppositely directed momenta, and the collision roughly exchanges
those momenta between cars. In almost no time, you go from heading forward to heading
backward. The impulse that causes this reversal of motion is especially large because it not
only stops your forward motion but also causes you to begin heading backward.
During the collision, you gave the other car more forward momentum than you had
and ended up with less than zero forward momentum. A vector of negative magnitude is a
vector of positive magnitude pointing in the opposite direction. In this case, your deficit of
forward momentum after the collision means that you have backward momentum.
Momentum is conserved because of Newton’s third law of motion. When the green car
exerts a force on your car for a certain amount of time, your car exerts an equal but oppositely
directed force on the green car for exactly the same time. Because of the equal but oppositely
directed nature of the two forces, the cars receive impulses that are equal in amount but opposite in direction. Since the momentum gained by one car is exactly equal to the momentum lost
by the other car, we say that momentum is transferred from one car to the other.

Bumper Cars

The more mass a car has, the less its velocity changes as a consequence of a momentum transfer. That’s why the green car doesn’t stop completely when it crashes into your
car, whereas your car speeds up dramatically. Just a fraction of the green car’s forward
momentum causes a large change in your car’s velocity. Like a bug being hit by an automobile windshield, your bumper car does most of the accelerating.

CONSERVED QUANTITY: MOMENTUM

TRANSFERRED BY: IMPULSE

Momentum: The measure of an object’s translational motion, its tendency to continue
moving in a particular direction. Momentum is a vector quantity, meaning that it has
a direction. It has no potential form and therefore cannot be hidden; momentum =
mass · velocity.
Impulse: The mechanical means for transferring momentum; impulse = force · time.

COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS: Momentum and Force
Misconception: A massive moving object carries a force with it—the “force of its momentum.”
Resolution: Although the impulses that transfer momentum involve forces, momentum itself does
not. A moving object carries only momentum, not force. Most important, a coasting object is free
of any net force. However, when that object hits an obstacle, the two exchange momentum via
impulses, and those impulses do involve forces.

Check Your Understanding #2: Bowling Them Over
When a beanbag hits the wall, it transfers all its forward momentum to the wall and comes to a stop.
When a rubber ball hits the wall, it transfers all its forward momentum, comes to a stop, and then
rebounds. During the rebound, it transfers still more forward momentum to the wall. If you wanted
to knock over a weighted bowling pin at the county fair, which would be the more effective projectile:
the rubber ball or the beanbag, assuming they have identical masses and you throw them with identical
velocities?
Answer: The bouncy rubber ball would be more effective.
Why: Either projectile will transfer all its original momentum to the bowling pin while coming to a
stop. However, the bouncy rubber ball will bounce back and continue to exert a force on the bowling
pin. The impulse (force · time) delivered by the rubber ball will be greater than that delivered by the
beanbag because the ball will exert its forward force for a longer time (during stopping and rebounding).
The ball will rebound with its momentum reversed, having transferred roughly twice its original
momentum to the pin.

Check Your Figures #2: Stop That Train!
The engine of the train you’re chasing (see Check Your Figures #1) has broken down, but it’s still
rolling forward. To stop it, you grab onto the last car and begin to drag your boot heels on the ground.
The backward force on the train is 200 N. How long will it take you to stop the train?
Answer: It will take 2200 s, so kiss your boot heels goodbye!
Why: To stop the train, you must give it a backward impulse that completely cancels its forward momentum. Since its forward momentum is 440,000 kg · m/s, the backward impulse must be 440,000 kg · m/s.
Since 200 N can also be written as 200 kg · m/s2, we can use Eq. 2.3.2 to find the time:
time =

440,000 kg · m/s

200 kg · m/s2
= 2200 s.

63

64

CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion

Spinning in Circles: Angular Momentum
When bumper cars are sent spinning during crashes, they are exchanging yet another conserved quantity. Like momentum, it’s a conserved vector quantity, but now it’s associated
with the angular speed and direction of rotation around a specific pivot. For example, when
your car receives a glancing blow from a car that is circling it rapidly in a clockwise direction, your car acquires more clockwise rotation about its center of mass. What your car is
receiving from the other car is a clockwise-directed dose of a conserved vector quantity
known as angular momentum.
Angular momentum is the measure of an object’s rotational impetus or tenacity, its
determination to keep rotating the way it’s currently rotating. Simply put, your car’s angular momentum indicates the effort it took to get the car rotating with its present angular
speed and axis of rotation. To distinguish it from energy and momentum, you can think of
angular momentum as the conserved quantity of turning.
The car’s angular momentum is equal to its rotational mass times its angular velocity
and can be written as a word equation:
angular momentum = rotational mass · angular velocity,

(2.3.4)

in symbols:
L = I · 𝟂,
and in everyday language:
It’s hard to stop a spinning carousel.
Note that angular momentum is a vector quantity and that it has the same direction as the
angular velocity. The faster your car is spinning or the larger its rotational mass, the more
angular momentum it has in the direction of its angular velocity. The SI unit of angular
momentum is the kilogram-meter2 per second (abbreviated kg · m2/s).
Angular momentum is another conserved quantity; it can’t be created or destroyed,
only transferred between objects. For your car to begin spinning, something must transfer
angular momentum to it, and your car will then continue to spin until it transfers this angular momentum elsewhere. To study angular momentum properly, however, we must pick
the pivot about which all the spinning will occur. In the present situation, a good choice for
this pivot is your car’s initial center of mass.
Your bumper car is stationary again, so it has zero angular velocity and zero angular momentum. Suddenly, a purple car sweeps by and strikes your car a glancing blow
(Fig. 2.3.2). Because the purple car was circling your car counterclockwise, it had counterclockwise angular momentum about the pivot. Its impact transfers some of this angular momentum to your car, which begins spinning counterclockwise itself. Since it has
given up some of its angular momentum, the purple car circles your car less rapidly.
Your car gradually stops spinning as its wheels and friction transfer the angular momentum to the ground and Earth. Overall, no angular momentum was created or destroyed
during the collision. Instead, it was transferred from the purple car to your car to Earth.
Check Your Understanding #3: Many Happy Returns
Satellites are often set spinning during launch to give them added stability. When astronauts visit
these satellites years later, they find them still spinning. Why don’t the satellites stop spinning?
Answer: The satellites are unable to get rid of their angular momentum.
Why: Because of their extreme isolation, orbiting satellites have nothing with which to exchange
angular momentum. The angular momentum given to them at launch stays with them indefinitely, so
they continue to spin for decades.

Purple car

Bumper Cars

Your car

Counterclockwise
angular momentum

Angular momentum
transfer
Pivot
(center of mass)

Fig. 2.3.2 Since the purple car is circling your car counterclockwise, it has counterclockwise angular
momentum. When it hits your car, it transfers some of that angular momentum to your car. Because of
this transfer, the purple car stops circling quickly as your car begins to spin counterclockwise.

Check Your Figures #3: Want to Go for a Spin?
Spinning satellites are particularly stable. Suppose that the astronauts launching a particular satellite decide to increase its angular velocity by a factor of 5. How will that change affect the satellite’s
angular momentum?
Answer: The angular momentum will increase by a factor of 5.
Why: Because the satellite’s angular momentum is proportional to its angular velocity, spinning it five
times faster will increase its angular momentum by that same factor.

Glancing Blows: Angular Impulses
Angular momentum is transferred to a bumper car by giving it an angular impulse, that is,
a torque exerted on it for a certain amount of time. When the purple car hits your car and
exerts a torque on it briefly, it gives your car an angular impulse and transfers angular
momentum to it. This angular impulse is the change in your car’s angular momentum and
is equal to the torque exerted on your car times the duration of that torque. This relationship
can be written as a word equation:
angular impulse = torque · time,

(2.3.5)

in symbols:
ΔL = 𝝉 · t,
and in everyday language:
To get a merry-go-round spinning rapidly, you must twist it hard
and for a long time.
The more torque is exerted or the longer that torque is exerted, the larger the angular
impulse and the more your car’s angular momentum changes. Once again, an angular
impulse is a vector quantity and points in the same direction as the torque. Had the purple
car been circling your car clockwise when it struck the glancing blow, its angular impulse
would have been in the opposite direction and you’d be spinning the other way.

65

66

CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion

Different torques exerted for different amounts of time can transfer the same angular
momentum to a car:
angular impulse = large torque · short time
= small torque · long time.

© Brian Kersey/NewsCom

Thus you can get your car spinning with a certain angular momentum either by letting
the motor and floor twist it with a small torque of long duration or by letting the colliding
purple car twist it with a large torque of short duration. As with linear momentum, sudden
transfers of angular momentum can break things, so the cars are designed to limit their
impact torques to reasonable levels. Even so, you may find yourself reaching for the motion
sickness bag after a few spinning collisions.
Angular momentum is conserved because of Newton’s third law of rotational motion.
When the purple car exerts a torque on your car for a certain amount of time, your car
exerts an equal but oppositely directed torque on the purple car for exactly the same
amount of time. Because of the equal but oppositely directed nature of the two torques, the
cars receive angular impulses that are equal in amount but opposite in direction. Since the
angular momentum gained by one car is exactly equal to the angular momentum lost by
the other car, we say that angular momentum is transferred from one car to the other.
Because a car’s angular momentum depends on its rotational mass, two different cars
may end up rotating at different angular velocities even though they have identical angular
momenta. For example, when the purple car hits the overloaded green car and transfers
angular momentum to it, the green car’s enormous rotational mass makes it spin relatively
slowly. The same sort of behavior occurs with linear momentum, where a car’s mass affects
how fast it travels when it’s given a certain amount of linear momentum. But while a
bumper car can’t change its mass, it can change its rotational mass. If it does so while it’s
spinning, its angular momentum won’t change, but its angular velocity will!
To see this change in angular velocity, consider the overloaded green car. Its two large
occupants are disappointed with the ride because their huge mass and rotational mass
prevent them from experiencing the intense jolts and spins that you’ve been enjoying.
Suddenly they get a wonderful idea. As their car slowly spins, one of them climbs into the
other’s lap and the two sit very close to the car’s center of mass. By rearranging the car’s
mass this way, they have reduced the car’s overall rotational mass and the car actually
begins to spin faster than before.
As the green car’s mass is being redistributed, it’s not a freely turning rigid object covered by Newton’s first law of rotational motion. However, it is freely turning and thus covered
by a more general and equally useful rule: an object that is not subject to any outside torques
has constant angular momentum. As the car’s rotational mass becomes smaller, its angular
velocity must increase to keep its angular momentum constant. That’s just what happens.
This effect of changing one’s rotational mass explains how an ice skater can achieve an enormous angular velocity by pulling herself into a thin, spinning object on ice (Fig. 2.3.3).

CONSERVED QUANTITY:
ANGULAR MOMENTUM
Fig. 2.3.3 When skater
Sarah Hecken pulls in
her arms, she reduces her
rotational mass. Since
she is experiencing zero
net torque, her angular
momentum must remain
constant and she begins to
spin more rapidly.

(2.3.6)

TRANSFERRED BY:
ANGULAR IMPULSE

Angular momentum: The measure of an object’s rotational motion, its tendency to continue
spinning about a particular axis. Angular momentum is a vector quantity, meaning that
it has a direction. It has no potential form and therefore cannot be hidden; angular
momentum = rotational mass · angular velocity.
Angular impulse: The mechanical means for transferring angular momentum; angular
impulse = torque · time.

Bumper Cars

Check Your Understanding #4: Spinning the Merry-Go-Round
A person who is initially motionless starts a merry-go-round spinning and then returns to being
motionless. If angular momentum is truly conserved, what is the source of the angular momentum
that the spinning merry-go-round now has?
Answer: It came from the entire Earth.
Why: Because the person stood on Earth as he started the merry-go-round spinning, he transferred
angular momentum from Earth to the merry-go-round. The merry-go-round spins in one direction,
and Earth’s rotation changes ever so slightly in the other direction. Because Earth is so huge and has
such an enormous rotational mass, its slight change in rotation is undetectable.

Check Your Figures #4: Spin Away!
How much longer will it take the astronauts launching the satellite in Check Your Figures #3 to bring
it to the faster angular velocity, if they use the initially planned torque?
Answer: It will take them five times as long.
Why: To reach the new, faster angular velocity, the astronauts will need an angular impulse that’s five
times as large as originally planned. Since they will be using the same torque, they will have to exert
that torque for five times as long.

The Three Conserved Quantities
As you drive your bumper car around the oval track, its motion is governed in large
part by three conserved quantities: energy, linear momentum, and angular momentum
(Table 2.3.1). While you can exchange those quantities with Earth and the power company
by steering your car or switching on its motor, most of the interesting exchanges involve
collisions.
Each time your car shoves another car forward, your car does work on that other car
and transfers energy to it. Each time your car pushes another car northward, your car gives
a northward impulse to that other car and transfers northward momentum to it. And each
time your car twists another car clockwise about its center of mass, your car gives a clockwise angular impulse to the other car and transfers clockwise angular momentum to it.
These exchanges of energy, momentum, and angular momentum are fast and furious and
make for an exciting ride.

Quantity

SI Unit

English Unit

SI → English

English → SI

Momentum

kilogram-meter per
second (kg · m/s)

pound-foot per second
(lbm · ft/s)

1 kg · m/s =
7.2329 lbm · ft/s

1 lbm · ft/s =
0.13826 kg · m/s

Angular
momentum

kilogram-meter2 per
second (kg · m2/s)

pound-foot2 per second
(lbm · ft2/s)

1 kg · m2/s =
23.730 lbm · ft2/s

1 lbm · ft2/s =
0.042140 kg · m2/s

TABLE 2.3.1 The Three Conserved Quantities of Motion and Their Transfer Mechanisms
Context

Conserved Quantity

Transfer Mechanism

Doing
Moving
Turning

Energy
Linear momentum
Angular momentum

Work
Impulse
Angular impulse

67

68

CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion

Check Your Understanding #5: Hitting the Wall
You’re backing out of a parking space and accidentally hit a concrete wall. The wall doesn’t move,
and your car sustains some damage. Did your car transfer any energy or momentum to the wall?
Answer: Your car transferred momentum but no energy.
Why: To transfer momentum to the wall, your car must give it an impulse: it must push on the wall
for an amount of time. It did so and thus transferred all its backward momentum to the wall. But to
transfer energy to the wall, your car must do work on it: it must push on the wall as the wall moves
in the direction of that push. The wall is immobile, however, so your car couldn’t do work on it.
Instead, the car’s energy stayed in the car, where it caused damage.

Potential Energy, Acceleration, and Force
Shortly before the bumper car ride stops, you notice that the floor is somewhat uneven and
that cars accelerate down whatever slopes they encounter. These accelerations often deflect
cars as they cross depressions or bumps, adding to the craziness of the ride. Depending on its
initial velocity, a car that moves across a slope may change its speed, its direction, or both.
COMMON M ISCON CE P T I ON S : Acceleration and Velocity
Misconception: An object’s acceleration and velocity always point along the same line.
Resolution: Although acceleration measures the rate at which velocity changes with time, those
two quantities are independent at any given moment and may or may not point along the same
line. When they are not aligned, the direction of the object’s velocity will shift over time toward
the direction of its acceleration and the object’s path will bend.

We have seen this tendency to accelerate downhill before with ramps, but now let’s
look at it in terms of potential energy. When a bumper car accelerates downhill, it also
accelerates in the direction that reduces its potential energy as quickly as possible. That’s
not a coincidence; there is a direct relationship between the car’s acceleration and how
the car’s potential energy changes with position. That relationship, which we’re about to
explore, will prove to be quite useful throughout this book.
Before elaborating further, however, I need to introduce a type of vector quantity
known as a gradient. A gradient characterizes how some physical quantity changes gradually with position. It points in the direction of fastest increase in its physical quantity,
and its magnitude is the rate of that increase. To find that rate, take a small step in the
direction of fastest increase and divide the resulting increase by the length of the step.
For example, this
has a redness gradient. That gradient points
toward the right because that’s the direction of fastest redness increase, and its magnitude
is 100% per inch because the redness increases by 100% over a distance of 1 inch to the
right. Similarly, this
has a blueness gradient that points to the left and has a magnitude of 200% per inch.
A ramp has an altitude gradient; that is, the ramp’s altitude increases gradually along
its surface from the bottom of the ramp to the top. That altitude gradient points uphill—in
the direction of quickest altitude increase—and its magnitude is the increase in altitude
caused by a small uphill step divided by the length of that step. The steeper the ramp, the
larger its altitude gradient.
Last, a bumper car riding on a ramp has a potential energy gradient; that is, the car’s
potential energy increases gradually as the car moves along the surface of the ramp from
the bottom of the ramp to the top. This potential energy gradient, or simply potential
gradient, points uphill—in the direction of quickest potential energy increase—and its
magnitude is the increase in the car’s potential energy caused by a small uphill step divided
by the length of that step. The steeper the ramp, the larger the car’s potential gradient.

Bumper Cars

Interestingly, the car’s potential gradient and its acceleration point in exactly opposite
directions. The car’s potential gradient points in the direction that increases its potential
energy as quickly as possible, whereas the bumper car accelerates in the direction that
reduces its potential energy as quickly as possible.
That’s not a coincidence. Potential energies are energies stored in forces and pushing
the bumper car in the direction of the potential gradient stores potential energy in a force
that must be pushing the bumper car in the opposite direction. In fact, the negative of the
car’s uphill potential gradient is the downhill force on the car. We can write this relationship as a word equation:
force = −potential gradient,

(2.3.7)

in symbols:
F = −Gradient (U),
and in everyday language:
An object accelerates in the direction that reduces its potential
energy as quickly as possible,
where the force points in the direction of quickest potential energy decrease.
A similar rule applies for rotational motion and torques. When there are multiple forms
of potential energy, we must remember to sum them to obtain total potential energy, total
potential gradient, and net force. These rules provide a useful way to determine how motion
will proceed: which way a spring will leap, a chair will tip, or a bumper car will roll. We’ll
use them frequently in this book.

POTENTIAL ENERGY AND ACCELERATION
An object accelerates in the direction that reduces its total potential energy as quickly
as possible.

Check Your Understanding #6: Heading Down
When you pull a child back on a playground swing and let go, which way does that child accelerate?
Answer: The child accelerates forward, in the direction that will reduce the child’s potential energy
as quickly as possible.
Why: The child has only one form of potential energy—gravitational potential energy. This gravitational potential energy is lowest when the child is directly below the swing’s supporting bar. The child
accelerates forward because that will put the child below the support as quickly as possible.

Check Your Figures #5: Pumpkin Chucking
You’ve constructed a catapult for a pumpkin-chucking contest. When you let go of the basket holding
the pumpkin, the catapult will swing that basket forward and release 10,000 J of potential energy as
it travels 1 m forward. What force must you exert on the basket to hold it in place prior to letting go?
Answer: You must exert 10,000 N on the basket in the backward direction.
Why: When you let go, the basket will accelerate forward—the direction that reduces its potential
energy as quickly as possible. According to Eq. 2.3.7, since the basket acquires 10,000 J in traveling backward 1 m, the forward force acting on the basket is:
10,000 J
= 10,000 N.
1m
To keep the basket stationary, you must exert a force of 10,000 N in the backward direction.

69

70

CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion

Epilogue for Chapter 2
In this chapter we have looked at rotating and colliding objects and have studied the physical laws that describe their motions. In Seesaws, we examined rotational inertia and saw
how torques cause angular accelerations. We also noticed how useful it can be to separate
an object’s rotational motion from its translational motion. In Wheels, we discussed another
important type of force, friction, as well as a new type of energy, thermal energy, the energy
associated with heat and temperature. In Bumper Cars, we introduced two more conserved
physical quantities: momentum and angular momentum. As we’ll see, following the transfers of energy, momentum, and angular momentum between objects often helps our understanding of how those objects work.

Explanation: A Spinning Pie Dish
Because the balanced dish has rotational inertia, torques are required both to start it spinning
and to stop it from doing so. When you twist the dish with your hand, the torque you exert
gives the dish an angular impulse and sets it spinning with a certain amount of angular
momentum. If the pivot were truly frictionless and there were no air resistance, the dish
would spin indefinitely because it would be unable to get rid of its angular momentum.
However, friction in the pivot exerts a small but significant torque that opposes the dish’s
motion and gradually slows it down. As this frictional torque transfers angular momentum
out of the dish and into the pencil, chair, and Earth, the dish turns more and more slowly
until it finally comes to a stop. The sharper the pivot and the smaller the contact area between
point and dish, the less frictional torque the dish experiences and the longer it spins.
Balancing the dish is easy as long as it’s upside-down. With its edge drooping downward, the dish has relatively little gravitational potential energy and is surprisingly stable. If
it begins to tip to one side, the dish’s average height rises and so does its gravitational potential energy. Since objects naturally accelerate in whatever direction lowers their potential
energy as quickly as possible, the upside-down dish quickly tips back toward level after
being disturbed. In contrast, an upright dish is virtually impossible to balance on a point
because any tip will lower its gravitational potential energy and lead quickly to catastrophe.
We’ll look at these stabilizing/destabilizing effects more carefully later on in this book.

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Seesaws Work: A seesaw is a rotating toy that works best when it’s almost perfectly
balanced, meaning that it experiences no overall torque about its pivot due to gravity. The
seesaw’s pivot usually passes through its center of gravity so that the seesaw balances when
it’s not occupied. The riders arrange themselves so that their gravitational torques cancel one
another and the occupied seesaw continues to balance. The seesaw then experiences zero
net torque and zero angular acceleration, and it rotates with constant angular velocity. It
either remains motionless or turns steadily in one direction or the other.
To make the seesaw tip back and forth, the riders briefly upset its inertial motion. Often
they do this by pushing against the ground with their feet to produce additional torques on the
seesaw. The seesaw then experiences both a net torque and an angular acceleration. By rhythmically changing the net torque on the seesaw, the riders cause it to rotate back and forth.
How Wheels Work: Wheels facilitate motion by eliminating or reducing sliding friction
between an object and a surface. The wheels convey the support forces needed to hold the
object up but allow the object to move without sliding. As a cart with freely turning wheels
moves along the surface, static friction between each wheel and the surface exerts a torque
on that wheel and causes it to turn. However, rubbing may occur between the wheel’s hub

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations

71

and the axle, where sliding friction can waste energy and cause wear. To eliminate this sliding
friction, roller or ball bearings are often used.
The torque that causes a powered wheel on a vehicle to turn comes from an engine by
way of an axle. In this case, static friction between the outside of the wheel and the ground
exerts a torque on the wheel that opposes the torque from the engine. This static frictional
force also contributes to the net force on the vehicle and propels it.
Once supported on wheels and bearings, objects can move freely and can retain linear
momentum, angular momentum, and energy for long periods of time. By eliminating sliding
friction, wheels can also keep objects from converting ordered energy into thermal energy.
Wheels allow vehicles to hold onto these conserved quantities for extended periods and make
transportation far more practical.
How Bumper Cars Work: Since they start from rest, bumper cars must obtain their initial
momenta and angular momenta from the ground and their initial kinetic energies from the
power company. They do this with the help of motors and wheels, which gradually transfer
energy, momentum, and angular momentum into the cars.
Once the cars are moving, they can begin to exchange those conserved quantities by
way of collisions. Each impact usually changes the cars’ speeds and directions of travel in
a manner that may seem rather complicated. However, following the exchanges of momentum, angular momentum, and energy often makes it easier to understand these collisions.
Cars containing massive riders respond weakly when collisions transfer momentum and
angular momentum to them. That’s because their large masses and rotational masses minimize their changes in velocity and angular velocity. Because of their small masses, children
experience the wildest rides.

1. Newton’s first law of rotational motion: A rigid object that is
not wobbling and is not subject to any outside torques rotates at
a constant angular velocity, turning equal amounts in equal
times about a fixed axis of rotation.

6. Linear momentum: An object’s linear momentum is its mass

2. Newton’s second law of rotational motion: The net torque

to the force exerted on that object times the length of time that
force is exerted, or

exerted on an object is equal to that object’s rotational mass
times its angular acceleration, or
net torque = rotational mass · angular acceleration. (2.1.2)
The angular acceleration points in the same direction as the torque.
This law doesn’t apply to objects that are nonrigid or wobbling.
3. Relationship between force and torque: The torque produced

by a force is equal to the lever arm times the component of that
force perpendicular to the lever arm, or
torque = lever arm · force perpendicular to lever arm.

(2.1.3)

4. Rotational definition of work: The work done on an object is

equal to the torque exerted on that object times the angle (in
radians) through which that object rotates in the direction of the
torque, or
work = torque · angle (in radians).

(2.2.1)

5. Kinetic energy: An object’s translational kinetic energy is

one-half its mass times the square of its speed, or
kinetic energy = 12 · mass · speed2.

(2.2.2)

An object’s rotational kinetic energy is one-half its rotational
mass times the square of its angular speed, or
kinetic energy = · rotational mass · angular speed .
1
2

2

(2.2.3)

times its velocity, or
linear momentum = mass · velocity.

(2.3.1)

7. Definition of impulse: The impulse given to an object is equal

impulse = force · time.

(2.3.2)

8. Angular momentum: An object’s angular momentum is its
rotational mass times its angular velocity, or

angular momentum = rotational mass · angular velocity.
(2.3.4)
9. Definition of angular impulse: The angular impulse given to
an object is equal to the torque exerted on that object times the
length of time that torque is exerted, or

angular impulse = torque · time.

(2.3.5)

10. Newton’s third law of rotational motion: For every torque
that one object exerts on a second object, there is an equal but
oppositely directed torque that the second object exerts on the
first object.
11. Potential energy, acceleration, and force: An object experiences a force and accelerates in the direction that reduces its
total potential energy as quickly as possible. That force is equal
but opposite to the potential gradient, or

force = −potential gradient.

(2.3.7)

3

Mechanical Objects
PART 1

ow that we’ve surveyed the laws of motion, we can begin using those laws to explain the
behaviors of everyday objects. But while we can already address some of the central features
at work in a toy wagon, a weight machine, or a ski lift, we’re still missing a number of
mechanical concepts that are important in the world around us. In this chapter, we look at some of
those additional concepts.
One of the most important new concepts will be the feeling of acceleration. If we treat acceleration passively, it can be fairly uninteresting: we push on the cart, and the cart accelerates. If we
think of it more actively, though—for example, if we envision ourselves on a roller coaster as it
plummets down that first big hill—then the experience of acceleration becomes much more intriguing. In fact, we might even need to hold on to our hats.

N

ACTIVE LEARNING
EXPERIMENTS

Swinging Water Overhead

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

To examine some of the novel effects of acceleration, try
experimenting with a bucket of water. If you’re careful,
you can swing the bucket over your head and upside
down without spilling a drop. In the process, you’ll be
demonstrating a number of important physical concepts.
To do this experiment, you’ll need a bucket with a
handle. (You might substitute some equivalent container;
even a plastic cup will do in a pinch.) Fill the bucket

72

partway full of water and then hold it by the handle so
that it hangs down by your side.
Now swing the bucket backward about an eighth of a
turn and bring it forward rapidly. In one smooth, fluid
motion, swing it forward, up, and over your head. Continue this motion all the way around behind you and then
bring the bucket forward again. You’ll need to swing the
bucket quickly to avoid getting wet. As you swing the

Spring Scales

bucket around and around, you’ll notice that the water
stays in it even when it travels over your head and is
upside down. Why doesn’t the water fall out?
You can carry this experiment a step further by swinging the bucket at various speeds—that is, if you don’t mind
getting wet. What will happen if you swing the bucket less
rapidly or more rapidly? Is the pull stronger or weaker
when you swing less rapidly? more rapidly? Is there any
relationship between the upward pull you feel from the
inverted bucket and the water’s tendency to remain inside?
You might vary this experiment in several ways. Try
swinging a plastic cup held in your fingers, or try placing

73

a full wine glass in the bucket and swinging the two
objects together. In the latter case, you’ll find that the wine
will stay in the glass and the glass will stay at the bottom
of the bucket, even when the bucket is upside down.
By the way, the hardest part of all these tricks is stopping. To avoid a catastrophe, you’ll need to do the same
thing you did to get started, only in reverse. Come to a
smooth, gradual stop about an eighth of a turn in front of
you, and then let the bucket loosely drop back to your
side. If you stop moving the bucket too abruptly, the
water, wine, or glass will spill or smash. Why do you suppose that happens?

Chapter Itinerary
In this chapter, we examine three types of everyday objects:
(1) spring scales, (2) ball sports: bouncing, and (3) carousels and roller coasters. In Spring Scales, we review the relationship between mass and weight and explore how the distortion of a spring can be used to measure an object’s
weight. In Ball Sports: Bouncing, we study how balls store
and return energy and how their bouncing depends both on
their own characteristics and on those of the objects they
hit. And in Carousels and Roller Coasters, we look at how
acceleration gives rise to gravity-like apparent forces that
can make us scream with delight at the amusement park.
For a more complete preview of what we examine in this

SECTION 3.1

chapter, skip ahead to the Chapter Summary and Important
Laws and Equations at the end of the chapter.
The concepts these objects illustrate can explain other
phenomena as well. Almost any solid object, from a mattress
to a diving board to a tire, behaves like a spring scale’s spring
when you push on it. Bouncing balls offer a view of collisions
that will help you comprehend what happens when two cars
crash or when a hammer hits a nail. And the sensations associated with acceleration that you experience on a roller coaster
are also present when you ride in airplanes, on subways, or on
swing sets. When it comes to the physics of everyday objects,
there really is nothing new under the sun.

Spring Scales
Supporting arm

Needle
Dial
End of
spring

Basket

How much of you is there? From day to day, depending on how
much you eat, the amount of you stays approximately the
same. But how can you tell how much that is? The best measure
of quantity is mass: kilograms of gold, grain, or you. Mass is the

measure of an object’s inertia and, as we saw in Section 1.1,
it doesn’t depend on the object’s environment or on gravity.
A kilogram box of cookies always has a mass of 1 kilogram, no
matter where in the universe you take it.
But mass is difficult to measure directly. Moreover, the
very concept of mass is only about 300 years old. Consequently, people began quantifying the material in an object by
measuring its weight. Spring scales eventually became one of
the simplest and most practical tools for accomplishing this
task, and they are still found in bathrooms and grocery stores
today. They really do contain springs, although these are normally hidden from view.
Questions to Think About: How is your weight related to your
mass? If Earth’s gravity became twice as strong, how would
your mass be affected? What about your weight? Does jumping
up and down change either your mass or your weight? If you
stand on a strong spring, how does your weight affect the
shape of the spring? Why should there be a relationship
between your weight and how much the spring bends?
Experiments to Do: Find a hanging spring scale of the type
used in the produce section of a grocery store and watch the

74

CHAPTER 3 Mechanical Objects

scale’s basket and weight indicator as you put objects in the
basket. What happens to the basket as you fill it up? Can you
find a relationship between the basket’s height and the weight
reported by the scale? If you drop something into the basket,
instead of lowering it gently, how does the scale respond? Why
does the weight indicator bounce back and forth rhythmically?
What happens to the gravitational potential energy of the
dropped item?
Now find a spring bathroom scale—the short, flat kind
with a rotating dial. Stand on it. Why does it read your correct

weight only when you are standing still? If you jump upward,
how does the scale’s reading change? What about if you let
yourself drop? Bounce up and down gently. How does the
scale’s average reading compare with your normal weight?
Does bouncing really change your weight? You can also
change the scale’s reading by pushing on the floor, wall, or
other nearby objects. Which way must you push to increase
the scale’s reading? to decrease it? When you change the
reading in these ways, are you actually changing your
weight?

Why You Must Stand Still on a Scale
When you stand on a bathroom scale, the scale doesn’t directly measure your weight.
That’s because your weight is a force that Earth’s gravity exerts on you, not on the scale, so
it affects the scale only indirectly. What the scale actually reports is how much upward
force it exerts on you to keep you from falling. When you’re not falling or otherwise accelerating, the scale pushes you upward just as hard as your weight pulls you downward, so
knowing the scale’s force on you is equivalent to knowing your weight.
That subtle difference between your weight and what the scale reports is important,
however, because it makes the weighing process sensitive to acceleration. If you’re
accelerating, the scale won’t report your true weight. For example, when you jump up
and down on the scale, the scale’s reading varies wildly. You accelerate as you jump, so
the two forces acting on you—your weight downward and the scale’s push upward—
don’t sum to zero. If you want an accurate measurement of your weight, therefore, you
have to stand still.
Even when you stand still, weighing is not a perfect way to quantify the amount of
material in your body. That’s because your weight depends on your environment. If you
always weigh yourself in the same place, the readings will be pretty consistent, as long as
you don’t routinely eat a dozen jelly doughnuts for lunch. But if you moved to the moon,
where gravity is weaker, you’d weigh only about one-sixth as much as on Earth. Even a
move elsewhere on Earth will affect your weight: Earth bulges outward slightly at the equator, and gravity there is about 0.5% weaker than at the poles. That change, together with a
small acceleration effect due to Earth’s rotation, means that a scale will read 1.0% less
when you move from the north pole to the equator. Obviously, moving south is not a useful
weight-loss plan.
Check Your Understanding #1: Space Merchants
You’re opening a company that will export gourmet food from Earth to the moon. You want the
package labels to be accurate at either location. How should you label the amount of food in each
package—by mass or by weight?
Answer:

You should sell by mass—for example, by kilogram or pound-mass.

Why: If you label your product by weight, you are specifying the force that gravity exerts on it near
Earth’s surface. When it’s exported to the moon, such a product will weigh just 1/6 as much, and your
company may be fined for selling underweight groceries. If you label the packages according to their
masses, that labeling will remain correct no matter where you ship the packages. Mass is the measure of inertia and depends only on the object, not on its environment.

Stretching a Spring
At the grocery store, you weigh a melon by placing it in the basket of a spring scale. Like
a bathroom scale, the grocery store scale can’t measure the melon’s weight directly;

Spring Scales

instead, it reports how much upward force it exerts on the melon. As long as the melon
isn’t accelerating, the scale’s upward force on the melon is equal but opposite to the melon’s
weight, so measuring one force is equivalent to measuring the other. But how does the
spring scale determine how hard it’s pushing upward on the melon?
In keeping with its name, the spring scale uses a spring to push upward on the melon.
The beauty of that arrangement is that a simple relationship exists between a spring’s length
and the forces it’s exerting on its ends. The spring scale determines how much upward force
it’s exerting on the melon by measuring the length of its spring.
The spring shown in Fig. 3.1.1 consists of a wire coil that pulls inward on its ends
when it’s stretched and pushes outward on them when it’s compressed. When that spring is
neither stretched nor compressed (Fig. 3.1.1a), it exerts no forces on its ends. If no other
forces act on this relaxed spring, each end is in equilibrium—it experiences zero net force.
As the phrase zero net force suggests, equilibrium occurs whenever the forces acting on an
object sum to zero so that the object doesn’t accelerate. When you sit motionless in a chair,
for example, you are in equilibrium. The relaxed spring is also at its equilibrium length,
its natural length when you leave it alone. No matter how you distort this spring, it tries to
return to this equilibrium length.
Let’s attach the left end of our spring to a wall (Fig. 3.1.1b) and its right end to a moveable bar. When the bar isn’t pulling or pushing on the spring’s right end, that end is in
equilibrium at a particular location–its equilibrium position. Since the spring’s right end
naturally returns to this equilibrium position if the bar disturbs it and then lets go, the end
is in a stable equilibrium.
What happens if the bar moves the spring’s right end to the right (Fig. 3.1.1c)? The
stretched spring now exerts a leftward force on that end, trying to restore it to its original
equilibrium position. Because the force that the spring exerts on its end acts to restore that
end to equilibrium, we call it a restoring force. The spring actually exerts restoring forces
on both of its ends, pulling them equally hard in opposite directions. Because the left end
of the spring is held in place by the wall, however, we’ll focus our attention on its moveable
right end and the restoring force on that end.
The farther the bar stretches the spring to the right, the stronger its restoring force on
the right end becomes (Fig 3.1.1d). Remarkably, that restoring force is exactly proportional
to how far the bar has stretched the spring.
If the bar changes directions and moves the spring’s right end to the left (Fig. 3.1.1e),
the compressed spring exerts a rightward force on its right end. Nonetheless, that force is
still a restoring force and it is still proportional to the spring’s distortion.
In general, whenever a spring is distorted away from its equilibrium length, it exerts a
restoring force on its moveable end that is proportional to the distortion and points in the
opposite direction. This observation is expressed in Hooke’s law, named after the Englishman Robert Hooke, who discovered it in the late seventeenth century. This law can be
written in a word equation:
restoring force = −spring constant · distortion,

(3.1.1)

in symbols:
F = −k · x,
and in everyday language:
The stiffer the spring and the farther you stretch it, the harder it pulls back.
Here the spring constant, k, is a measure of the spring’s stiffness. The larger the spring
constant—that is, the firmer the spring—the larger the restoring force the spring exerts for

75

Fig. 3.1.1 Five identical
springs. The ends of spring
(a) are free so that it can
adopt its equilibrium
length. The left ends of the
other four springs are fixed
so that only their right
ends can move. The right
end of spring (b) remains
at its equilibrium position,
but springs (c, d, and e)
are distorted and exert
restoring forces on their
ends that are proportional
to how far their right ends
have been distorted from
their equilibrium positions.

76

CHAPTER 3 Mechanical Objects

a given distortion. The negative signs in these equations indicate that a restoring force
always points in the direction opposite the distortion.

HOOKE’S LAW
The restoring force exerted by an elastic object is proportional to how far it has been
distorted from its equilibrium shape.

Springs are distinguished by their stiffness, as measured by their spring constants.
Some springs are soft and have small spring constants—for example, you need just one
finger to compress the spring in your retractable ballpoint pen. Other springs, like the
large ones that suspend an automobile chassis above the wheels, are firm and have
large spring constants. But no matter the stiffness, nearly all simple springs obey
Hooke’s law.
Hooke’s law is remarkably general and isn’t limited to the behavior of coil springs.
Many objects respond to distortion with restoring forces that are proportional to how far
you’ve distorted them away from their equilibrium lengths—or, in the case of some complicated objects, their equilibrium shapes. Equilibrium shape is the shape an object adopts
when it’s not subject to any outside forces. If you bend a tree branch, it will push back with
a force proportional to how far it has been bent. If you pull on a rubber band, it will pull
back with a force proportional to how far it has been stretched, up to a point. If you squeeze
a mattress, it will push outward with a force proportional to how far it has been compressed. If a heavy truck bends a bridge downward, the bridge will push upward with a
force proportional to how far it has been bent (Fig. 3.1.2).
There is a limit to Hooke’s law, however. If you distort an object too far, it will usually
begin to exert less force than Hooke’s law demands. This is because you will have
exceeded the object’s elastic limit and will have deformed it permanently in the process.
If you stretch a spring too far, it won’t return to its original equilibrium length when you
release it; if you bend a tree branch too far, it will break. As long as you stay within the
elastic limit, however, a great many things obey Hooke’s law—a rope, a ruler, a tabletop,
and a trampoline.
Distorting a spring requires work. When you stretch a spring with your hand, pulling
its ends apart as they move apart, you transfer some of your energy to the spring. The spring
stores this energy as elastic potential energy. If you reverse the motion, the spring returns
most of this energy to your hand; the remainder is converted to thermal energy by frictional
effects inside the spring itself. Work is also required to compress, bend, or twist a spring.
In short, a spring that is distorted away from its equilibrium shape always contains elastic
potential energy.
Restoring
force

Fig. 3.1.2 A steel bridge
sags under the weight of
a truck. The bridge bends
downward until the upward
restoring force it exerts on
the truck exactly balances
the truck’s weight.

Weight

Spring Scales

77

Check Your Understanding #2: Going Down Anyone?
As you watch people walk off the diving board at a pool, you notice that it bends downward by an
amount proportional to each diver’s weight. Explain.

(a)

Answer: The diving board is behaving as a spring, bending downward in proportion to the weight of
each diver.
Why: The heavier the diver, the more the board bends downward before exerting enough upward force
on the diver to balance the diver’s weight.

Check Your Figures #1: A Sinking Sensation
You’re hosting a party in your third-floor apartment. When the first 10 guests begin standing in your
living room, you notice that the floor has sagged 1 centimeter in the middle. How far will the floor sag
when 20 guests are standing on it? when 100 guests are standing on it?
Answer: It will sag 2 centimeters and 10 centimeters (assuming that the floor doesn’t break).
Why: A floor, like most suspended surfaces, behaves like a spring. Your floor distorts 1 cm before it
exerts an upward restoring force equal to the weight of 10 guests. It will thus distort 2 cm before
supporting 20 guests and 10 cm before supporting 100 guests. While this distortion should be within
the elastic limit of the floor beams, it may cause the plaster and paint to crack. If the beams break,
the floor will collapse.

(b)

How a Hanging Grocery Scale Measures Weight
Before you weigh another melon, let’s examine the grocery store scale. It contains a coil
spring that’s responsible for the weighing process. One end of that spring is suspended
from the ceiling, and the other end supports the weighing basket (Fig. 3.1.3). For the sake
of simplicity, let’s suppose the spring and the basket have negligible weights and that the
basket is effectively the bottom end of the spring. With the basket empty, the spring adopts
its equilibrium length and the basket is in a position of stable equilibrium. If you shift the
basket up or down and then let go of it, the spring will push it back to this position. When
you place a melon in the basket, the melon’s weight pushes the basket downward and spoils
its equilibrium. The basket starts descending and as it does, the spring stretches and begins
to exert an upward force on the basket. The more the spring stretches, the greater this
upward force so that eventually the spring is stretched just enough so that its upward restoring force exactly supports the melon’s weight. The basket is now in a new stable equilibrium position—again experiencing zero net force.
The scale, then, uses Hooke’s law to determine the weight of the melon. When the
basket has settled at its new equilibrium position, where the melon’s downward weight is
exactly balanced by the spring’s upward restoring force, the amount the spring has stretched
is an accurate measure of the melon’s weight.
The scales in Fig. 3.1.3 differ only in the way they measure how far the spring has
stretched beyond its equilibrium length. In Fig. 3.1.3a, the scale uses a pointer attached
to the end of the spring, while in Fig. 3.1.3b, the scale uses a rack and pinion gear system
that converts the small linear motion of the stretching spring into a much more visible
rotary motion of the dial needle. The rack is the series of evenly spaced teeth attached to
the lower end of the spring; the pinion is the toothed wheel attached to the dial needle.
As the spring stretches, the rack moves downward, and its teeth cause the pinion to
rotate. The farther the rack moves, the more the pinion turns and the higher the weight
reported by the needle.
Each of these spring scales reports a number for the weight of the melon you put in the
basket. For that number to mean something, the scale has to be calibrated. Calibration is
the process of comparing a local device or reference to a generally accepted standard to
ensure accuracy. To calibrate a spring scale, the device or its reference components must be

Fig. 3.1.3 Two spring
scales weighing melons.
Each scale balances the
melon’s downward weight
with the upward force
of a spring. The heavier
the melon, the more the
spring will stretch before it
exerts enough upward force
to balance the melon’s
weight. The top scale has
a pointer to indicate how
far the spring has stretched
and thus how much the
melon weighs. The bottom
scale has a rack and pinion
gear that turns a needle
on a dial. As the comblike
rack moves up and down,
it turns the toothed pinion
gear.

78

CHAPTER 3 Mechanical Objects

compared against standard weights. Someone must put a standard weight in the basket and
measure just how far the spring stretches. Each spring is different, although spring manufacturers try to make all their springs as identical as possible.
Check Your Understanding #3: Scaling Down
Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

If you pull the basket of a hanging grocery store scale downward 1 cm, it reports a weight of 5 N
(about 1.1 lbf) for the contents of its basket. If you pull the basket downward 3 cm, what weight will
it report?
Answer: The scale will read 15 N (about 3.3 lbf).
Why: The scale’s dial is simply reporting the position of its basket. The dial is calibrated so that a
1-cm drop in the basket indicates that the spring is pulling up on it with a force of 5 N. Since the
spring’s restoring force is described by Hooke’s law, a 3-cm drop in the basket means that the spring
is exerting an upward force of 15 N on the basket.

Fig. 3.1.4 When you step
on this bathroom scale, its
surface moves downward
slightly and compresses
a stiff spring. The extent
of this compression is
proportional to your weight,
which is reported by the
dial. Levers inside the
scale make it insensitive to
exactly where you stand.

Fig. 3.1.5 When you
place a melon in the
basket of a spring scale,
the basket and melon
bounce briefly about their
equilibrium position as the
scale gradually removes
their excess energy. Their
rhythmic motion about
the equilibrium position is
that of a mass on a spring
and is an example of a
harmonic oscillator.

Bouncing Bathroom Scales
As we noted earlier, the most common type of bathroom scale is also a spring scale
(Fig. 3.1.4). When you step on this kind of scale, you depress its surface and levers inside
it pull on a hidden spring. That spring stretches until it exerts, through the levers, an upward
force on you that is equal to your weight. At the same time, a rack and pinion mechanism
(see Fig. 3.1.3b) inside the scale turns a wheel with numbers printed on it. When the wheel
stops moving, you can read one of these numbers through a window in the scale. That
number depends on how far the spring has stretched and has been calibrated so that it accurately indicates your weight.
However, the wheel rocks briefly back and forth around your actual weight before it
settles down. The wheel moves because you’re bouncing up and down as the scale gradually gets rid of excess energy. When you first step on the scale’s surface, its spring is not
stretched and it isn’t pushing up on you at all. You begin to fall. As you descend, the spring
stretches and the scale begins to push up on your feet. By the time you reach the equilibrium height, where the scale is exactly supporting your weight, you are traveling downward quickly and coast right past that equilibrium. The scale begins to read more than
your weight.
The scale now accelerates you upward. Your descent slows, and you soon begin to rise
back toward equilibrium. Again you coast past equilibrium, but now the scale begins to
read less than your weight. You are bouncing up and down because you have excess energy
that is shifting back and forth between potential energy and kinetic energy. This bouncing
continues until sliding friction in the scale has converted it all into thermal energy. Only
then does the bouncing stop and the scale read your correct weight.
The bouncing that you experience about this stable equilibrium is a remarkable motion
(Fig. 3.1.5), one that we’ll study in detail when we examine clocks in Chapter 9. You are
effectively a mass supported by a spring, and your rhythmic rise and fall is that of a
harmonic oscillator. Harmonic oscillators are so common and important in nature that
Chapter 9 is devoted to them. The details can wait, but there are two features of your present situation that I’ll point out now.
First, your total potential energy is at its minimum when you’re at the stable equilibrium. Even though both gravitational and elastic potentials are involved, their sum increases
as you shift away from the equilibrium. Since an object always accelerates so as to reduce
its total potential energy as quickly as possible, you always accelerate toward the stable
equilibrium. Because the restoring force you experience increases as you move farther
from the equilibrium, you reach your peak acceleration and potential energy at the moment
when you are farthest from equilibrium and are turning around to head back toward that
equilibrium.

Ball Sports: Bouncing

79

Second, your kinetic energy reaches its peak as you pass through the stable equilibrium. Having accelerated toward that equilibrium until the moment of arrival, you’re moving fast and coast right through it. But once you leave equilibrium, you begin to accelerate
toward it again. That acceleration is backward, opposite your velocity, so you are decelerating. Therefore, you reach your peak speed and kinetic energy at the moment you pass
through equilibrium. As you bounce up and down, waiting for the scale to waste your
excess energy, that energy transforms back and forth rhythmically between kinetic and
potential forms.

COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS: Equilibrium and Motionlessness
Misconception: An object at equilibrium is always motionless.
Resolution: An object at equilibrium is not accelerating, but its velocity may not be zero. If it was
moving when it reached equilibrium, it will coast through that equilibrium at constant velocity.

Check Your Understanding #4: Weighed Down
When you step on the surface of a spring bathroom scale, you can feel it move downward slightly.
How is the distance that the scale’s surface moves downward when you step on it related to the
weight it reports?
Answer: The distance the scale’s surface moves downward is proportional to the weight it reports.
Why: The scale’s spring is connected to its surface by levers so that as the surface moves downward,
the spring distorts by a proportional amount. The spring’s distortion is reported on the dial. Thus the
dial’s reading is proportional to the surface’s downward movement.

SECTION 3.2

Ball Sports: Bouncing

Rebounding ball

Rigid surface

Jacks

If you visit a toy or sporting goods store, you’ll find many different balls—almost a unique ball for every sport or ball game.
These balls differ in more than just size and weight. Some are
very hard, others very soft; some are smooth, others rough or
ridged.
In this section we’ll focus primarily on another difference—their ability to bounce. A bouncy ball, for example,
bounces extraordinarily well, while a foam rubber ball
hardly bounces at all. Even balls that appear identical can
be very different; a new tennis ball bounces much better
than an old one. We’ll begin this section by exploring these
differences.

Questions to Think About: Is it possible for a ball to bounce
higher than the height from which it was dropped? Where does
a ball’s kinetic energy go as it bounces, and what happens to
the energy that doesn’t reappear after the bounce? What happens when a ball bounces off a moving object, such as a baseball bat? What role does the baseball bat’s structure have in
the bouncing process? Does it matter which part of a baseball
bat hits the ball?
Experiments to Do: Drop a ball on a hard surface and watch it
bounce. What happens to the ball’s shape during the bounce?
Hold the ball in your hands and push its surface inward with
your fingers. What is the relationship between the force it
exerts on your fingers and how far inward you dent it? Denting
the ball takes work. Why? How does the ball’s energy change
as it dents? What happens to the ball’s energy as its shape
returns to normal (to equilibrium)?
Drop the ball from various heights and see whether you
can find a simple relationship between the ball’s initial height
and the height to which it rebounds. Now drop the ball on a
soft surface, such as a pillow, or on a lively surface, such as an
inflated balloon. Why does the surface it hits change the way
the ball bounces?

CHAPTER 3 Mechanical Objects

(a)

The Way the Ball Bounces
Velocity
Collision
energy

(b)

Velocity
Rebound
energy

Fig. 3.2.1 A bounce from
a wall has two halves:
(a) the collision and (b) the
rebound. During the
collision between the ball
and the wall, some of their
kinetic energy is
transformed into other
forms—an amount called
the collision energy. During
the rebound, some stored
energy is released as
kinetic energy—an amount
called the rebound energy.
The rebound energy is
always less than the
collision energy because
some energy is lost as
thermal energy. However, a
lively ball wastes less
energy than a dead one.

What would sports be like without balls? Basketball, baseball, tennis, golf, soccer, volleyball …
the list of sports that depend on them is almost endless—and nearly all those ball sports involve
bouncing. While most bounces are obvious, others are more subtle. When a baseball hits a bat
or a player kicks a soccer ball, those balls are actually bouncing, albeit from moving objects.
Why does a ball bounce, and how do its characteristics and circumstances affect its bounce?
We’ll start by looking at a ball’s shape. When nothing pushes on the ball, it adopts its
equilibrium shape, typically a sphere. The term equilibrium shape, of course, is one we’ve
seen already; the previous section used it to describe springs. That’s no coincidence, for
balls and springs have some important similarities. Chief among those similarities is their
ability to store and return energy. Both balls and springs store energy as you distort them
away from their equilibrium shapes and release that stored energy when you let them return
to their equilibrium shapes.
This energy storage and return is evident when a ball bounces off a hard surface. As those
two objects collide (Fig. 3.2.1a), the ball’s surface distorts and its elastic potential energy
increases. The energy responsible for that distortion is extracted from the kinetic energies of
the colliding objects. As the two objects subsequently rebound (Fig. 3.2.1b), the ball’s surface
returns toward its equilibrium and its elastic potential energy decreases. That return to equilibrium releases energy that is added to the kinetic energies of the rebounding objects.
We’ll call the kinetic energy absorbed during the collision the collision energy and the
kinetic energy released during the rebound the rebound energy. How do those two energies compare? Since energy is conserved and the two objects appear unchanged by the
bounce, shouldn’t the rebound energy equal the collision energy?
In fact, the two energies would be equal except for one important detail: the two objects
have changed. Their thermal energies have increased. As it distorts and then returns to
equilibrium, the ball wastes some of the collision energy as thermal energy, so the rebound
energy is always less than the collision energy (Fig. 3.2.2). While total energy is conserved
during the bounce, individual forms of energy are not. No physical law prevents kinetic
energy from becoming thermal energy, and it happens every bounce.

Fig. 3.2.2 When a tennis ball hits the
floor, it dents inward to store energy and
then rebounds somewhat more slowly than
it arrived. These images show the ball’s
position at 12 equally spaced times. Is the
ball bouncing to the left or the right? How
can you tell?

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

80

Ball Sports: Bouncing

TABLE 3.2.1

Approximate Energy Ratios and Speed Ratios for a Variety of Balls

Type of Ball

Rebound Energy
Collision Energy

Rebound Speed†
Collision Speed

Superball
Racquet ball

0.81
0.72

0.90
0.85

Golf ball
Basketball

0.67
0.64

0.82
0.80

Tennis ball

0.56

0.75

Steel ball bearing

0.42

0.65

Baseball

0.30

0.55

Foam rubber ball

0.09

0.30

“Unhappy” ball

0.01

0.10

0.002

0.04

Beanbag
†

Known as the coefficient of restitution, this speed ratio can be squared to obtain the energy ratio.

Some balls bounce better than others. A bouncy ball is often called “lively,” and a ball
that doesn’t bounce well is said to be “dead.” A lively ball is extremely elastic—it converts
most of the collision energy into elastic potential energy during the collision and converts
most of that elastic potential energy into rebound energy during the rebound. A dead ball,
on the other hand, is barely elastic at all—it converts most of the collision energy into thermal energy during the collision and converts most of what’s left into thermal energy during
the rebound.
The ratio of rebound energy to collision energy (Table 3.2.1) determines how high a
ball will bounce when you drop it from rest onto a hard floor (Fig. 3.2.3). Before you drop
it, the ball has only gravitational potential energy, which is proportional to its height above
the floor (Eq. 1.3.2). That potential energy becomes kinetic energy as the ball falls and then
collision energy when it collides with the floor. The ball’s rebound energy becomes kinetic
energy as it rebounds from the floor and then gravitational potential energy as it rises. At its
peak, the ball has only gravitational potential energy, which is again proportional to its
height. The ratio of the ball’s rebound energy to its collision energy is therefore equal to the
ratio of its final height to its initial height.
For an ideally elastic ball, these ratios are 1.00; all the collision energy is returned as
rebound energy and the ball rebounds to its initial height. Known as elastic collisions, such
perfect bounces are common among the tiny atoms in a gas but are unattainable for ordinary objects; there are just too many ways for any large item to divert or dissipate energy,
including as thermal energy, sound, vibration, and light.
A real ball experiences inelastic collisions—it wastes some of the collision energy as
thermal energy and rebounds to a lesser height. For example, a baseball’s rebound energy
is only 0.30 times its collision energy, so it will rebound to only 30% of its original height
(Fig. 3.2.3a). Without that dramatic energy loss during a bounce, baseball pitchers would
need to wear armor.

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

(b)

Baseball

Distance

Height (m)

Height (m)

(a)

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

Golf ball

Distance

Fig. 3.2.3 (a) A baseball wastes 70% of the collision energy as thermal energy and bounces weakly.
(b) In contrast, a golf ball wastes only 30% of the collision energy and bounces well.

81

82

CHAPTER 3 Mechanical Objects

While that energy ratio is useful, a ball is traditionally characterized by a speed ratio:
its rebound speed divided by its collision speed. Here, the collision speed is how fast the
two objects approach one another before the bounce, and the rebound speed is how fast
those objects separate after the bounce. The speed ratio is known as the ball’s coefficient
of restitution:
coefficient of restitution =

rebound speed of ball
collision speed of ball

(3.2.1)

(see Table 3.2.1). The larger a ball’s coefficient of restitution, the faster it rebounds from a
surface for a given collision speed. For example, a basketball’s coefficient of restitution is
0.80, so when it bounces off the backboard during a foul shoot, its rebound speed is only
0.80 times its collision speed. That decrease in speed makes it easier for the ball to drop
into the basket after it bounces than before it bounces.
Since a ball’s kinetic energy is proportional to the square of its speed, its energy ratio
is simply the square of its speed ratio. Measuring those ratios is more than an academic
exercise because most of the organizations that govern ball sports specify their balls’ coefficients of restitution. It’s a matter of fairness and safety. For example, baseballs could
easily be made so lively that every game would be a home-run derby. Just think of all the
asterisks.
Balls bounce best when they store energy through compression rather than through
surface bending. That’s because most ball materials, such as leather or leather-like plastics,
experience lots of wasteful internal friction during bending. Since solid balls involve compression, they usually bounce well, whether they’re made of rubber, wood, plastic, or metal.
Air-filled balls, however, bounce well only when properly inflated. A normal basketball,
which stores most of its energy in its compressed air, has a high coefficient of restitution. In
contrast, an underinflated basketball, which experiences lots of surface bending during a
collision, barely bounces at all. Similarly, a tennis ball bounces best when new; after a while,
the compressed air inside leaks out and the ball’s coefficient of restitution drops.

Check Your Understanding #1: A Game of Marbles
As you head into the park to play a game of marbles with your friends, several of the glass marbles
fall through a hole in your marble bag and bounce nicely on the granite walkway. How can a marble
bounce?
Answer: When the marble collides with the hard granite surface, it dents inward and converts most
of its kinetic energy into elastic potential energy. It then rebounds, converting this stored energy back
into kinetic energy as it bounces from the surface.
Why: An elastic marble has a very high coefficient of restitution and bounces well from a hard
surface.

How the Surface Affects the Bounce
Since the surface on which a ball bounces isn’t perfectly hard, that surface also contributes
to the bouncing process. It distorts and stores energy when the ball hits it and returns some
of this stored energy to the rebounding ball. Overall, the collision energy is shared between
the ball and the surface, and each provides part of the rebound energy.
Just how the collision energy is distributed between the surface and ball depends on
how stiff each one is. During the bounce, they push on one another with equal but oppositely directed forces. Since the forces denting them inward are equal, the work done in
distorting each object is proportional to how far inward it dents. The object that dents farthest receives most of the collision energy.

Ball Sports: Bouncing

Since the ball usually distorts more than the surface it hits, most of the collision energy
normally goes into the ball. You might expect the ball to provide most of the rebound
energy, too. However, that’s not always true. Some lively elastic surfaces store collision
energy very efficiently and return almost all of it as rebound energy. Since a relatively dead
ball wastes most of the collision energy it receives, a lively surface’s contribution to the
rebound energy can be very important to the bounce.
For example, a lively racket is critical to the game of tennis because the racket’s
strings provide much of the rebound energy as the ball bounces off the racket (Fig. 3.2.4).
The strings are livelier than the ball, so increasing the fraction of collision energy that is
invested in the strings actually speeds up the rebounding ball. That’s why a player who is
willing to sacrifice aiming accuracy for greater ball speed will string his racket relatively
loosely. The looser strings will receive more of the collision energy and return almost all
of it as rebound energy.
Trampolines and springboards are even more extreme examples, with surfaces so lively
that they can make people bounce. People, like beanbags, have coefficients of restitution
near zero; when you land on a trampoline, it receives and stores most of the collision
energy and then provides most of the rebound energy.
The stiffnesses of the ball and surface also determine how much force each object
exerts on the other and thus how quickly the collision proceeds. When both objects are very
hard, the forces involved are large and the acceleration is rapid. Thus a steel ball rebounds
very quickly from a concrete floor because the two exert enormous forces on one another.
If the ball or surface is relatively soft, the forces are weaker and the acceleration is slower.
What if the surface that a ball hits isn’t very massive? In that case, the surface may do
part or all of the “bouncing.” During the bounce, the ball and the surface accelerate in
opposite directions and share the rebound energy. Massive surfaces, such as floors and
walls, accelerate little and receive almost none of the rebound energy. But when the surface
a ball hits is not very massive, you may see it accelerate. For example, when a ball hits a
lamp on the coffee table, the ball will do most of the accelerating, but the lamp is likely to
fall over, too.
Similarly, when a baseball strikes a baseball bat, the ball and bat accelerate in opposite
directions. The more massive the bat, the less it accelerates. To ensure that most of the
rebound energy went to the baseball, the legendary hitters of the early twentieth century
used massive bats. Such bats are no longer in vogue because they’re too difficult to swing.
But in the early days of baseball, when pitchers were less skillful, massive bats drove many
long home runs.
Check Your Understanding #2: The Game Begins
You are playing the game of marbles on a soft dirt field. The goal is to knock glass marbles out of a
circle by hitting them with other marbles. You initially drop several marbles onto the ground inside
the circle, and they hardly bounce at all. What prevents them from bouncing well here?
Answer: The soft dirt distorts more than the hard marble and receives most of the collision energy. It
converts most of that energy into thermal energy so the marble rebounds weakly.
Why: While a marble bounces nicely on a hard surface, the dirt is soft and receives virtually all the
collision energy when the hard marble hits it. The dirt distorts during the impact but stores little
energy because it’s not very elastic. The marble doesn’t rebound much.

How a Moving Surface Affects the Bounce
When a moving ball hits a stationary bat, they bounce. When a moving bat hits a stationary
ball, they still bounce. In fact, any time the bat and ball approach one another and collide,
it’s a bounce and everything we’ve discussed about bouncing applies. The ball’s coefficient
of restitution, for example, is still the ratio of the ball’s rebound speed to its collision speed.

83

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Fig. 3.2.4 When a
tennis ball bounces from
a moving racket, both
the ball and racket dent
inward. The ball and racket
share the collision energy
almost evenly.

84

CHAPTER 3 Mechanical Objects

(a)

(b)

210 km/h
100 km/h
100 km/h

100 km/h

Fig. 3.2.5 (a) Before they collide, the bat and ball are approaching one another at an overall speed
of 200 km/h. (b) After the collision, the two are separating from one another at a speed of 110 km/h.
However, because the bat is moving toward the pitcher at 100 km/h, the outgoing ball is traveling at
210 km/h in that same direction.

But when the bat is moving before or after the bounce, we clearly have to be careful what
we mean by collision speed and rebound speed.
Collision speed is neither the speed of the ball nor the speed of the bat; it’s the speed
at which those two objects approach one another before the bounce. Similarly, rebound
speed is the speed at which the objects separate from one another after the bounce. Technically, both speeds stem from the difference between the bat’s velocity and the ball’s velocity. However, as long as each object is heading directly toward or away from the other
object, collision and rebound speeds are relatively simple to calculate. When the bat and
ball are heading in opposite directions, you add their speeds and when they’re heading in
the same direction, you subtract their speeds.
That simple approach should be familiar from watching cars on the highway. When
two cars are moving 60 mph in opposite directions on a narrow road, they are approaching
one another at a hair-raising 120 mph. Let’s hope they don’t collide. When a car traveling
60 mph comes up behind a second car traveling 55 mph in the same direction, however,
they are approaching one another at a leisurely 5 mph. If they collide, it’ll be only a
fender-bender.
We can use these observations about speeds and bouncing to explain why the baseball
you just hit is now traveling over the center fielder’s head. Let’s suppose that, right before
the collision (Fig. 3.2.5a), the pitched baseball was approaching home plate at 100 km/h
(62 mph) and that, as you swung to meet the ball, your bat was moving toward the pitcher
at 100 km/h. Since each object is moving toward the other, their collision speed is the sum
of their individual speeds, or 200 km/h (124 mph).
The baseball’s coefficient of restitution is 0.55, so after the collision (Fig. 3.2.5b) their
rebound speed was only 0.55 times their collision speed, or 110 km/h. The outgoing ball
and the swinging bat separate from one another at 110 km/h. Since the bat is still moving
toward the pitcher at 100 km/h, the ball must be traveling toward the pitcher even faster: at
100 km/h plus 110 km/h or a total speed of 210 km/h (130 mph)! That’s why the baseball
flies past everyone in the outfield and into the stands.
Check Your Understanding #3: Marble Frames of Reference
Two of you flick your marbles into the circle simultaneously from opposite sides of the circle, and
they collide head-on. Each marble was traveling forward at 1 m/s (3.3 ft/s). How quickly were the two
marbles approaching one another just before they hit?
Answer: They were approaching at 2 m/s (6.6 ft/s).
Why: The velocities reported in the question are those observed by people sitting still with respect to
the circle. Since the marbles are heading toward one another, you must add their speeds to obtain
the collision speed.

Ball Sports: Bouncing

85

Surfaces Also Bounce … and Twist and Bend
We’ve seen how a surface affects a ball when they bounce. Now let’s look at how the ball
affects the surface. When you swing your bat into a pitched ball, the bat doesn’t continue
on exactly as before. The ball pushes on the bat during the collision, and the bat responds
in a number of interesting ways.
First, the ball’s impact force causes the bat to accelerate backward during the collision,
so its speed toward the pitcher decreases slightly. Since the ball finishes its rebound from
the slower-moving bat, the ball doesn’t bounce back toward the pitcher quite as fast it
would if the bat had maintained its speed. Increasing the bat’s mass reduces this slowing
effect, but it also makes the bat harder to swing.
Second, the ball’s impact force can also produce a torque on the bat about its center of
mass, so that the bat undergoes angular acceleration (Fig. 3.2.6). Together, the bat’s acceleration and angular acceleration produce interesting effects on the bat’s handle. The bat’s
acceleration tends to jerk its handle away from the pitcher, while its angular acceleration
tends to jerk its handle toward the pitcher. The extent of these two opposing motions
depends on just where the ball hits the bat. If the ball hits the bat’s center of percussion,
the two motions cancel and the bat handle moves forward steadily (Fig. 3.2.6c). The smooth
feel of such a collision explains why the center of percussion, located about 7 inches from
the end of the bat, is known as a “sweet spot.”
Third, the ball’s impact often causes the bat to vibrate. Like a xylophone bar struck by
a mallet (Fig. 3.2.7a), the bat bends back and forth rapidly with its ends and center moving
in opposite directions (Fig. 3.2.7b). These vibrations sting your hands and can even break
a wooden bat. However, near each end of the bat, there’s a point that doesn’t move when
the bat vibrates—a vibrational node. When the ball hits the bat at its node, no vibration
occurs. Instead, the bat emits a crisp, clear “crack” and the ball travels farther. Fortunately,
the bat’s vibrational node and its center of percussion almost coincide, so you can hit the
ball with both sweet spots at once.
As these handle motions and bending vibrations illustrate, the science and engineering
of bats are surprisingly complicated. That’s why bat manufacturers are forever developing
better, more potent ones. Multiwalled aluminum, titanium, and composite bats are the latest examples. Each of these hollow bats has a thin outer wall that dents considerably on
impact with the ball and therefore receives much of the collision energy. Because that wall
is also highly elastic, nearly all this energy emerges as rebound energy as the wall returns
to its equilibrium shape. As a bonus, the bat’s light outer wall and massive inner wall ensure
that it retains very little energy in its vibrations following the bounce.
Unlike the hard surface of a wooden bat, which barely dents and thus barely participates in the energy storage process, one of these hi-tech bats acts as a trampoline—it stores
and returns so much of the collision energy that it substantially increases the outgoing
speed of the batted ball. You can find equally hi-tech equipment at the golf shop or tennis
store. We’re in an era in which scientific analysis and design are radically altering sports.
Check Your Understanding #4: Mass and Marbles
The marbles you’re playing with are not all the same size and mass. You notice that larger marbles
are particularly effective at knocking other marbles out of the circle. You decide to use a 10-cmdiameter glass ball as a marble, expecting to clean out the entire circle. But when you flick it with
your thumb, your thumb merely bounces off. Why doesn’t the glass ball move forward quickly?
Answer: The glass ball is so much more massive than your thumb that your thumb receives almost
all the rebound energy. Your thumb bounces, not the glass ball.
Why: In any collision, it’s the least massive object that experiences the greatest acceleration and that
receives the largest share of the rebound energy. The effect is similar to what would happen if you
swung a light aluminum baseball bat at a pitched bowling ball. The bat would rebound wildly but the
bowling ball would continue to travel toward the catcher. This same effect is true in automobile collisions, where a massive sedan is much less disturbed than the tiny subcompact with which it collides.

(a)
Center of
mass

Center of
percussion

(b)

(c)

Fig. 3.2.6 When a
ball hits a bat, the
bat experiences both
acceleration and angular
acceleration. (a) If the ball
hits near the bat’s center,
the angular acceleration
is small and the bat’s
handle accelerates
backward. (b) If the ball
hits near the bat’s end,
the angular acceleration is
large and the bat’s handle
accelerates forward.
(c) But if the ball hits the
bat’s center of percussion,
the angular acceleration
is just right to keep the
handle from accelerating.

86

CHAPTER 3 Mechanical Objects

(b)

(a)

Antinode

Antinode

Node
Node

Center of mass

Center of mass

Antinode

Antinode

Node

Node

Antinode

Antinode

Fig. 3.2.7 (a) When struck by a mallet, a xylophone bar vibrates with its middle and ends moving
back and forth in opposite directions. The parts that move farthest are antinodes, and the points that
don’t move at all are nodes. (b) When struck by a ball, a baseball bat vibrates in a similar fashion.
However, an impact at one of the bat’s nodes causes no vibration.

SECTION 3.3

Carousels and Roller Coasters

Lift chain
Track support
structure

Roller coaster
Track

As your sports car leaps forward at a green light, you’re pressed
firmly back against your seat. It feels as though gravity were
somehow pulling you down and backward at the same time. It’s
not gravity pulling backward on you, though; it’s your own inertia trying to prevent you from accelerating forward with the car.
When this happens, you’re experiencing the feeling of
acceleration. We encounter this feeling many times each day,
whether through turning in an automobile or riding up several
floors in a fast elevator. Nowhere are the feelings of acceleration
more acute than at the amusement park. We accelerate up,
down, and around on the carousel, back and forth in the bumper
cars, and left and right in the scrambler. The ultimate ride, of
course, is the roller coaster, which is one big, wild experience
of acceleration. When you close your eyes on a straight stretch

of highway, you can hardly tell the automobile is moving. When
you close your eyes on a roller coaster, however, you have no
trouble feeling every last turn in the track. It’s not the speed you
feel, but the acceleration. What is often called motion sickness
should really be called acceleration sickness.
Questions to Think About: How does your body feel its own
weight? When you swing a bucket full of water around in a
circle, as I asked you to do in the chapter opening, why does
the bucket pull outward on you? Why can you swing that
bucket completely over your head without spilling the water
inside it? What keeps you from falling out of a roller coaster as
it goes over the top of a loop-the-loop? Which car of a roller
coaster should you sit in to experience the best ride?
Experiments to Do: To begin associating the familiar sensations
of motion with the physics of acceleration, travel as a passenger
in a vehicle that makes lots of turns and stops. Close your eyes
and find whether you can tell which way the vehicle is turning
and when it’s starting or stopping. Which way do you feel pulled
when the vehicle turns left? turns right? starts? stops? How is
this sensation related to the direction of the vehicle’s acceleration? Now during a time when the vehicle is traveling at constant velocity on a level path, find if you feel any sensations that
tell you which way it’s heading. Try to convince yourself that it’s
heading backward or sideways rather than forward. Which is
easier to feel: your acceleration or your velocity?

Carousels and Acceleration
While roller coasters offer interesting visual effects, such as narrowly missing obstacles,
and strange orientations, such as running upside down, the real thrill of roller coasters

Carousels and Roller Coasters

acceleration =

speed 2
= angular speed 2 · radius,
radius

(3.3.1)

Boy
’s

(a)
th
pa

Velocity

Force &
acceleration

ity

Feeling
of acceleration

o e
er f ac ling
at ce
io ln

y’s path
Bo

Fe

Ve
l

oc

(b)

& n
e io
rc rat
Fo ele
c
ac

N
Feeling
of acceleration

E
S

Force &
acceleration

th
pa

(c)

Velocity

W

Boy
’s

comes from their accelerations. Plenty of other amusement park rides suspend you sideways or upside down so that you feel ordinary gravity pulling at you from unusual angles.
But why pay for those when you can stand on your head for free? For a real thrill, you need
acceleration to give you the weightless feeling you experience as a roller coaster dives over
its first big hill or the intense heaviness you feel as it whips you around a sharp corner. Why
do accelerations give rise to these wonderful sensations, and why are they most extreme
when you’re sitting in the last car of the roller coaster?
To answer those questions, we’ll need to take another look at acceleration. Although
you may start your day at an amusement park by riding its biggest roller coaster, some of
us might benefit from a warm-up. Let’s start with a simpler ride, a carousel.
When you ride on a carousel, you travel in a circular path around a central pivot.
That’s not the motion of an object that’s simply coasting forward and exhibiting inertia. If
you were experiencing zero net force, you would travel in a straight line at a steady pace in
accordance with Newton’s first law. However, since your path is circular instead of straight,
your direction of travel is changing; you are accelerating and must be experiencing a nonzero net force.
Which way are you accelerating? Remarkably, you are always accelerating toward the
center of the circle. To see why that’s so, let’s look down on a simple carousel that’s turning
counterclockwise at a steady pace (Fig. 3.3.1). At first, the boy riding the carousel is directly
east of its central pivot and is moving northward (Fig. 3.3.1a). If nothing were pulling on
the boy, he would continue northward and fly off the carousel. Instead, he follows a circular
path by accelerating toward the pivot—that is, toward the west. As a result, his velocity
turns toward the northwest and he heads in that direction. To keep from flying off the
carousel, he must continue to accelerate toward the pivot, which is now southwest of him
(Fig. 3.3.1b). His velocity turns toward the west, and he follows the circle in that direction.
And so it goes (Fig. 3.3.1c).
The boy’s body is always trying to go in a straight line, but the carousel keeps pulling
him inward so that he accelerates toward the central pivot. The boy is experiencing uniform circular motion. Uniform means that the boy is always moving at the same speed,
although his direction keeps changing. Circular describes the path the boy follows as he
moves, his trajectory.
Like any object undergoing uniform circular motion, the boy is always accelerating
toward the center of the circle. An acceleration of this type, toward the center of a circle,
is called a centripetal acceleration and is caused by a centrally directed force, a centripetal force. A centripetal force is not a new, independent type of force like gravity
but the net result of whatever forces act on the object. Centripetal means “center-seeking,” and a centripetal force pushes the object toward that center. The carousel uses
support forces and friction to exert a centripetal force on the boy, and he experiences a
centripetal acceleration. Amusement park rides often involve centripetal acceleration
(Fig. 3.3.2).
The amount of acceleration the boy experiences depends on his speed and the radius
of the carousel. The faster the boy is moving and the smaller the radius of his circular trajectory, the more he accelerates. His acceleration is equal to the square of his speed divided
by the radius of his path.
We can also determine the boy’s acceleration from the carousel’s angular speed and
its radius. The faster the carousel turns and the larger the radius of the boy’s circular trajectory, the more he accelerates. His acceleration is equal to the square of the carousel’s
angular speed times the radius of his path. We can express these two relationships as word
equations:

87

Fig. 3.3.1 A boy riding on
a turning carousel is always
accelerating toward the
central pivot. His velocity
vector shows that he is
moving in a circle, but his
acceleration vector points
toward the pivot. When he
is heading north (a), he
is accelerating toward the
west. His velocity gradually
changes direction until
he is heading northwest
(b), at which time he is
accelerating toward the
southwest. He turns further
until he is heading west
(c) and is then accelerating
toward the south. (North is
upward.)

CHAPTER 3 Mechanical Objects

©Andrew Scott, Brisbane, Australia/Getty Images

88

Fig. 3.3.2 The people on this ride travel in a circle, pushed inward by the wall behind them so that
they accelerate toward the center of the circle.

in symbols:
a=

v2
= 𝜔2 · r,
r

and in everyday language:
Making a tight, high-speed turn involves lots of acceleration.

COMMON MISCON CEPT I O N S: Centrifugal Force
Misconception: As you swing an object in a circle, that object is pulled outward by “centrifugal
force.”
Resolution: If the object were free of forces, inertia would cause it to travel in a straight line. But
because you are pulling the object inward, it accelerates inward and its path bends into a circle.
Since you are exerting an inward force on the object, it is exerting an outward force on you, in
accordance with Newton’s third law. However, that outward force acts on you, not on the object.
There is no outward “centrifugal force” acting on the object itself.

Check Your Understanding #1: Banking on a Curve
Your racing car comes to a banked, left-hand turn, which it completes easily. Why is it essential that
a racetrack turn be banked so that it slopes downhill toward the center of the turn?
Answer: A banked turn is needed so that the support force exerted by the racetrack on the car’s
wheels can provide at least some of the centripetal force needed to accelerate the car around the
turn.
Why: As a car and driver travel around a circular turn, they are accelerating toward the center of the
track and require a huge centripetal force inward. On a level track, the only horizontal force available
is static friction between the ground and the car’s tires. If static friction is unable to provide enough
inward force, the car will skid off the track, following a straight-line path. This type of accident is
typical of a highway curve on an icy day and is why designers bank the curves. The banks are ramps
sloping down toward the center so that the horizontal component of the support force exerted by the
track on the car’s wheels provides an additional, inward, centripetal force to help that car accelerate
around the curve.

Carousels and Roller Coasters

89

Check Your Figures #1: Going for a Spin
Some children are riding on a playground carousel with a radius of 1.5 m (4.9 ft). The carousel turns
once every 2 s. How quickly are the children accelerating?
Answer: They are accelerating about 15 m/s2 (50 ft/s2).
Why: Because the children are in uniform circular motion, their acceleration is given by Eq. 3.3.1.
The carousel turns once every 2 s, so its angular velocity is 2π radians divided by 2 s. Omitting radians
because they’re the natural unit of angle, the carousel’s angular velocity is π 1/s. Since its radius is
1.5 m, the children’s acceleration is
children’s acceleration = (π 1/s) 2 · 1.5 m = 14.8 m/s2.
Since our measurements of the carousel’s radius and its turning time are accurate only to about 10%,
our calculation of the children’s acceleration is accurate only to about 10%. We report it as 15 m/s2
(50 ft/s2).

The Experience of Acceleration
Nothing is more central to the laws of motion than the relationship between force and
acceleration. Until now, we’ve looked at forces and noticed that they can cause accelerations; now let’s take the opposite perspective, looking at accelerations and noticing that
they require forces. For you to accelerate, something must push or pull on you. Just where
and how that force is exerted on you determines what you feel when you accelerate.
The backward sensation you feel as your car accelerates forward is caused by your
body’s inertia, its resistance to acceleration (Fig. 3.3.3). For you to accelerate forward with
the car, something must push you forward; otherwise, inertia will keep you in steady
motion as the accelerating car drives out from under you. Fortunately, your seat provides
you with that forward push. But the seat can’t exert a force uniformly throughout your
body. Instead, it pushes only on your back, and your back then pushes on your bones, tissues, and internal organs to make them accelerate forward. Each piece of tissue or bone is
responsible for the forward force needed to accelerate forward the tissue in front of it. A
whole chain of forces, starting from your back and working forward toward your front,
causes your entire body to accelerate forward.
Let’s compare this situation with what happens when you’re standing motionless on
the floor. Since gravity exerts a downward force on you that’s distributed uniformly
throughout your body, each part of your body has its own independent weight; these individual weights, taken together, add up to your total weight. The floor, for its part, is exerting
an upward support force on you that keeps you from accelerating downward through its
surface. But the floor can’t exert a force uniformly throughout your body. Instead, it pushes
only on your feet, and your feet then push on your bones, tissues, and internal organs to
keep them from accelerating downward. Each piece of tissue or bone is responsible for the
upward force needed to keep the tissue above it from accelerating downward. A whole
chain of forces, starting from your feet and working upward toward your head, keeps your
entire body from accelerating downward.
As you probably noticed, the two previous paragraphs are very similar—and so are the
sensations of gravity and acceleration. When the ground is preventing you from falling, you
feel “heavy”; your body senses all the internal forces needed to support its pieces so that
they don’t accelerate, and you interpret these sensations as weight. When the car seat is
causing you to accelerate forward, you also feel “heavy”; your body senses all the internal
forces needed to accelerate its pieces forward, and you interpret these sensations as weight.
This time you experience the weight-like sensation toward the back of the car.
Try as you may, you can’t distinguish the weight-like sensation that you experience as
you accelerate from the weight sensation you experience due to gravity. And you’re not the
only one fooled by acceleration. Even the most sophisticated laboratory instruments can’t

Feeling of
acceleration Acceleration

Fig. 3.3.3 As you
accelerate forward in a
car, you sense a gravitylike feeling of acceleration
in the direction opposite
to the acceleration. This
feeling of acceleration is
really the mass of your
body resisting acceleration.

90

CHAPTER 3 Mechanical Objects

(a)

Seat
force

Feeling of
acceleration

Apparent
weight
(b)

Acceleration
Weight
Seat
force

Feeling of
acceleration
Apparent
weight

Acceleration
Weight

Fig. 3.3.4 (a) When you
accelerate forward gently,
the backward feeling of
acceleration is small and
your apparent weight
is mostly downward.
Your apparent weight
is equal but opposite
to the force your seat
exerts on you. (b) When
you accelerate forward
quickly, you experience a
strong backward feeling
of acceleration and
your apparent weight is
backward and down.

determine directly whether they are experiencing gravity or are accelerating. However,
despite the convincing sensations, the backward heavy feeling in your gut as you accelerate
forward is the result of inertia and is not due to a real backward force.
We’ll call this experience a feeling of acceleration. It always points in the direction
opposite the acceleration that causes it, and its strength is proportional to that acceleration.
When you turn your car to the left, you’re accelerating leftward and experience a rightward
feeling of acceleration. The tighter your turn, the stronger that feeling of acceleration
becomes. When you’re not driving and can safely close your eyes, you should be able to
sense both the direction and amount of each acceleration you make.
So what does the boy on the spinning carousel feel? Since he is accelerating inward,
toward the center of the circle, he experiences a feeling of acceleration outward, away
from the center of the circle. Although the boy’s actual weight can’t change, his feeling of
acceleration can have any strength. If the carousel is spinning fast enough, he can experience a feeling of acceleration that is much stronger than his weight. That’s why he’s holding on tight!
Since you often compare your feelings of acceleration to your feeling of weight, it is
customary to measure feelings of acceleration in g’s, where 1 g (1 gravity) is equal to the
feeling of your actual weight. In this context, it is also customary to measure acceleration
in g’s, where 1 g is 9.8 m/s2 (32 ft/s2), the acceleration due to gravity. These two definitions
lead to a simple observation: a 1-g acceleration produces a 1-g feeling of acceleration in the
opposite direction. For example, a 1-g inward acceleration on a playground carousel produces a 1-g outward feeling of acceleration. If you accelerate five times that quickly, on the
scrambler or on an airplane maneuvering sharply, your 5-g acceleration will produce a 5-g
feeling of acceleration in the opposite direction.
As we’ve seen, you experience a backward feeling of acceleration when you accelerate
forward in your car. However, you don’t experience this feeling of acceleration all by itself;
you also experience the downward feeling of your weight. Together these two effects feel
like an especially strong weight at an angle somewhere between straight down and the back
of the car (Fig. 3.3.4a). We’ll call the combined feelings of weight and acceleration your
apparent weight. The faster you accelerate forward, the stronger your apparent weight
becomes and the more it points toward the back of the car (Fig. 3.3.4b).
You feel apparent weight because the seat is pushing on you, both to support your
actual weight and to make you accelerate. In fact, your apparent weight is equal but opposite to the real force that the seat is exerting on you. As you accelerate forward in your car,
the seat pushes you upward and forward, and your apparent weight is downward and backward (Fig. 3.3.4).
Like feeling of acceleration, apparent weight is customarily measured in g’s. When
you slam the car’s accelerator pedal to the floor and accelerate forward rapidly, your apparent weight may reach 2 g. The seat is then pushing you forward and upward with a force
that’s twice as large as your actual weight, and you’re pushing back just as hard. No wonder
you’re pressed tightly into the seat!
Check Your Understanding #2: The Feel of a Tight Turn
You’re sitting in the passenger seat of a racing car that is moving rapidly along a level track. The track
takes a sharp turn to the left, and you find yourself thrown against the door to your right. What horizontal forces are acting on you, and what feelings of acceleration do you experience?
Answer: The car seat and door are exerting a leftward force on you, causing you to accelerate leftward
with the car. You also experience a rightward feeling of acceleration as your inertia acts to keep you
from accelerating leftward.
Why: As the car turns left, it accelerates toward the left. The car seat and right door together exert a
leftward force on you to prevent the car from driving out from under you. Because it has mass, your
body resists this leftward acceleration. You feel your body trying to go in a straight line, which would
carry it out the right door of the car as the car accelerates toward the left.

Carousels and Roller Coasters

Roller Coaster Acceleration
We’re now prepared to look at a roller coaster and understand what you feel when you go
over hills (Fig. 3.3.5) and loop-the-loops (Fig. 3.3.6). Every time the roller coaster accelerates, you experience a feeling of acceleration in the direction opposite your acceleration.
That feeling of acceleration gives you an apparent weight that’s different from your actual
weight.
As we saw with a car, rapid horizontal accelerations tip your apparent weight in the
direction opposite your acceleration. A roller coaster, however, can do something a car
normally can’t—it can accelerate downward! In that case, the feeling of acceleration you
experience is upward and opposes your downward feeling of weight. The two feelings at
least partially cancel, so that your apparent weight points weakly downward or perhaps, if
the downward acceleration is fast enough, points upward.
There is one more possibility: if you accelerate downward at just the right rate, your
upward feeling of acceleration will exactly cancel your downward feeling of weight. Your
apparent weight will then be zero, and you’ll feel perfectly weightless. Since your feeling
of weight is 1 g downward, perfect cancellation occurs when your feeling of acceleration
is 1 g upward. You must be accelerating downward at 1 g; you must be in free fall!
When you’re falling, you feel perfectly weightless. Your apparent weight is zero, and
nothing is supporting you. Because your hat and sunglasses are falling with you, nothing is
supporting them, either. If they come off your head, they will hover around you as you all
fall together.
Similarly, your internal organs don’t need to support one another as they fall, and the
absence of internal support forces gives rise to the exhilarating sensation of free fall. Our
bodies are very sensitive to even partial weightlessness, and this falling sensation is half the
fun of a roller coaster. An astronaut falling freely in space has this disquieting weightless
feeling for days on end. No wonder astronauts have such frequent troubles with motion (or,
rather, acceleration) sickness.
Because a roller coaster is attached to a track, however, its rate of downward acceleration can actually exceed that of a freely falling object. In those special situations, the track
will be assisting gravity in pushing the roller coaster downward. As a rider, you’ll be pushed
downward, too, and your apparent weight will point upward, as though the world had
turned upside down!

91

© Harry DiOrio/The Image Works

Fig. 3.3.5 As this roller
coaster plunges down
the first hill, its last car
is pulled over the edge
by the cars in front of it
and its riders feel almost
weightless.

© Charles V. Angelo/Photo
Researchers/Getty Images, Inc.

Check Your Understanding #3: Drop Tower Panic
A drop tower is a terrifying amusement park ride in which you are strapped into a seat, lifted high in
the air, and then dropped. While you’re in free fall, what is your apparent weight?
Answer: Your apparent weight is zero.
Why: As you fall freely, you are accelerating downward at 1 g, the full acceleration due to gravity. The
1-g upward feeling of acceleration you experience exactly matches your downward weight, so that
your apparent weight is zero. You feel perfectly weightless.

Roller Coaster Loop-the-Loops
Figure 3.3.7 shows a single-car roller coaster at various points along a simple track with
one hill and one loop-the-loop. You are riding in the car, and your weight, feeling of acceleration, and apparent weight are indicated with arrows of varying lengths that show each
vector quantity’s direction and magnitude. The longer the arrow, the greater the magnitude
of the quantity that it represents.
At the top of the first hill (Fig. 3.3.7a), the single-car roller coaster is almost stationary.
You feel only your weight, straight down—nothing exciting yet. However, as soon as the
car begins its descent, accelerating down the track, a feeling of acceleration appears

Fig. 3.3.6 As it goes
over the loop-the-loop,
this roller coaster is
accelerating rapidly toward
the center of the circle.
When it reaches the top of
the loop, the track pushes
the roller coaster downward
and the riders feel pressed
into their seats. If they
close their eyes, they won’t
even be able to tell that
they’re upside down.

92

CHAPTER 3 Mechanical Objects

Fig. 3.3.7 A single-car
roller coaster going over
the first hill and a loopthe-loop. At each point
along the track, the car
experiences its weight, a
feeling of acceleration due
to its current acceleration,
and an apparent weight
that is the sum of those
two. The apparent weight
always points toward the
track, and the car doesn’t
fall off it.

(a)

Stationary
(b)

(e)

Weight
Feeling of acceleration
(d)

Apparent weight
(c)

pointing up the track (Fig. 3.3.7b). Your feelings of weight and acceleration together give
you an apparent weight that is much less than 1 g and points down and into the track. Most
people find this sudden reduction in apparent weight to be terrifying, so you’re welcome to
scream!
On Earth, weightless feelings can’t last. They occur only during downward acceleration and disappear as your car levels off near the bottom of the hill. By the time the car
begins its rise into the loop-the-loop, it is traveling at maximum speed and has begun to
accelerate upward (Fig. 3.3.7c). This upward acceleration of about 2 g creates a downward
feeling of acceleration of about 2 g. Your apparent weight is about 3 g downward, and
you’re pressed tightly into your seat.
As the car climbs the right side of the loop-the-loop against gravity, its speed decreases
somewhat and its path bends inward, toward the center of the loop. Halfway up the right
side, you’re accelerating inward and downward, so your feeling of acceleration is outward
and upward (Fig. 3.3.7d). Your apparent weight is greater than 1 g outward, away from the
center of the loop, and you’re still pressed into your seat (Fig. 3.3.8).
At the top of the loop-the-loop (Fig. 3.3.7e), the car’s path is still bending inward,
toward the center of the loop. You’re accelerating downward, and your feeling of acceleration points in the opposite direction—upward toward the sky. That upward feeling of acceleration is greater than your downward feeling of weight, so your apparent weight is upward
(Fig. 3.3.6)!
Not only does the inverted car stay on its track, but you also remain pressed into your
seat. Actually, the car is pushing downward on you to help gravity accelerate you around
the loop. If your hat were to come off at the top of the loop, it would land in your seat, even
though that seems to involve some sort of upward movement. In fact, the car is accelerating
downward at more than 1 g, while your hat has only the 1-g downward acceleration of a
freely falling object. Gravity and the track together push the car downward so fast that it
overtakes the hat—your hat is falling, but the car is plummeting even faster.

© Digital Vision/Getty Images, Inc.

Carousels and Roller Coasters

Fig. 3.3.8 The roller coaster pushes these riders inward as it travels around the loop-the-loop. The
riders experience strong feelings of acceleration outward and can hardly tell that they’re upside down.

In truth, a typical loop-the-loop isn’t perfectly circular; it’s more sharply curved on
top than on its sides or bottom. This varying radius curve, known as a clothoid, is chosen for safety and comfort. By sharpening the curve only on top, the clothoid track
maximizes the downward acceleration there while reducing the accelerations elsewhere
on the track. High acceleration is important only when the roller coaster is upside
down. Everywhere else, it simply makes the riders feel heavy and uncomfortable, particularly at the bottom of the loop where the coaster is traveling fastest and accelerating
upward rapidly.
Most roller coaster tracks are designed so that their riders are always pressed into their
seats, even when the cars go upside down. On loop-the-loops, for example, these tracks
ensure that the riders are accelerating inward rapidly enough to remain seated securely. In
principle, roller coasters that travel on such tracks don’t need seat belts to prevent their
riders from falling out (although seat belts are comforting to the passengers and insurance
companies). Their riders’ apparent weights are always directed toward the track, so the
riders and their seats push against one another throughout the ride.
However, some roller coaster tracks use special cars and restraints that allow them to
direct their riders’ apparent weights away from the track. At such moments, the cars must
pull on their riders to keep them from popping out of their seats. These roller coasters can
and do go upside down without the strong downward accelerations needed to press their
riders into their seats. The riders are then hanging from their inverted cars, and if one of
them loses a hat, it falls to the ground rather than into the car.
What about a roller coaster with more than one car? For the most part, the same rules
apply. However, new forces now act on each car—forces exerted by the other cars in the
train. The effects of these cars are most pronounced at the top of the first and biggest hill.
As the train disconnects from the lift chain and approaches the descent, it is rolling forward
slowly and the first cars are well over the crest of the hill before they pick up much speed
(Fig. 3.3.9a). They’re pulling hard on the cars behind them, and those cars are pulling back,
slowing their descent. By the time the train is moving fast, the first car is well down the hill
and the track is beginning to turn upward. The first car’s riders experience mostly upward
acceleration and downward feeling of acceleration. That’s why riders in the first few cars
of a roller coaster don’t feel much weightlessness.

93

94

CHAPTER 3 Mechanical Objects

(a)

Weight
Feeling of acceleration
Apparent weight

In contrast, the last car is moving at high speed early in its descent. It undergoes a
dramatic downward acceleration as it’s yanked over the crest of the first hill by the cars in
front of it (Fig. 3.3.9b). As a result, its riders experience large upward feelings of acceleration and quite extreme weightlessness. In fact, the designers of the track must be careful not
to make the downward acceleration too rapid or the roller coaster will flick the riders in the
last car right out of their seats. Each time the last car crests a hill, it accelerates downhill in
a way that no other car on the coaster can match.
Obviously, it does matter where you sit on a roller coaster. The first seat offers the
most exciting view, but it provides less than spectacular weightless feelings. The last car
almost always offers the best weightless feelings. Probably the dullest seat in the roller
coaster is the second; it offers a relatively tame ride and an unchanging view of the people
in the front seat.
Check Your Understanding #4: Taking to the Air
Your racing car travels over a bump in the track and suddenly becomes airborne. What keeps you in
the air? Has gravity disappeared?

(b)

Answer: Gravity is still present, but your inertia prevents you from following a rapid downturn in the
surface you are traveling along.
Why: If the road you are traveling along suddenly turns downward, you must accelerate downward to
stay in contact with its surface. The steeper and more abrupt the descent, the more downward acceleration you need. The only downward force you experience is your weight, which can cause a downward acceleration of no more than 9.8 m/s2 (32 ft/s2). If the surface drops out from under you faster
than that, you will become airborne. You will then be falling freely and accelerating downward as fast
as gravity will permit. Eventually, you will fall to the surface. In many sports, including skiing, motorcycle racing, and skateboarding, a person traveling along an uneven surface becomes airborne after
passing over a bump.
Fig. 3.3.9 When a
multicar roller coaster
descends the first hill, the
ride experienced in the first
cars is different from that
in the last cars. (a) The
first cars travel over the
crest of the hill slowly and
reach high speed only well
down the hill. The cars
behind them slow their
descent. (b) The last cars
are whipped over the top
and are traveling very
rapidly early on. The last
cars accelerate downward
dramatically as they go
over the first hill and their
riders experience a strong
feeling of weightlessness.

Epilogue for Chapter 3
In this chapter we have looked at the physical concepts involved in four types of simple
machines. In Spring Scales, we explored the relationship between the force acting on a
spring and its distortion, and we examined how this distortion can be used to measure an
object’s weight. In Ball Sports: Bouncing, we examined the process of storing and releasing kinetic energy during a collision. As we saw, both the ball and the object it hits contribute to the bounce.
In Carousels and Roller Coasters, we explored both the sensations we feel as we accelerate and why those sensations occur. We saw that circular motion involves a centrally
directed acceleration that gives rise to an outwardly directed feeling of acceleration.

Explanation: Swinging Water Overhead
As you swing the bucket over your head, you are pulling downward on it and causing it
to accelerate downward very rapidly. The water remains in the inverted bucket because
the bucket is accelerating downward faster than gravity alone can accelerate the water.
As the water tries to fall, the bucket overtakes the falling water. As a result, the water is
pressed into the bottom of the bucket. The same effect occurs when you throw a book
toward the floor by pushing it downward rapidly with your open palm. As the book tries
to fall, your palm overtakes it, and it remains pressed into your palm because your hand
is accelerating it downward faster than gravity. Finally, if you stop swinging the bucket
too abruptly, the bucket’s contents will not decelerate with it. Instead, they will spill or
smash.

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations

95

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Spring Scales Work: A spring scale measures an object’s weight by supporting that
object with a spring. When the object is at rest, the spring’s upward force exactly balances
the object’s downward weight; the scale then reports the upward restoring force its spring is
exerting on the object. As Hooke’s law describes, that restoring force is proportional to the
spring’s distortion, so the scale can determine it by measuring how far the spring has bent.
This measurement is often done mechanically and is reported using a needle or dial.
How Bouncing Balls Work: A ball behaves like a spherical or oblong spring. It stores elastic
potential energy as it distorts away from its equilibrium shape and releases some of that
energy as it returns to normal. When a ball strikes a surface, some kinetic energy is removed
from the ball and the surface, and is either stored within those objects as elastic potential
energy or lost as thermal energy. As the objects rebound, some of the stored energy becomes
kinetic energy again. The kinetic energy returned—the rebound energy—is always less than
the kinetic energy initially removed from the objects—the collision energy. The missing energy has been converted into thermal energy.
How Carousels and Roller Coasters Work: A carousel uses centripetal acceleration to give
each rider an outward feeling of acceleration. Combined with weight, this gravity-like sensation gives the rider an apparent weight that points downward and outward.
A roller coaster also uses rapid acceleration to create unusual apparent weights for its
riders. Each time the coaster accelerates on a hill or turn, the rider experiences a feeling of
acceleration in the direction opposite the acceleration. This feeling of acceleration, combined with the rider’s weight, creates an apparent weight that varies dramatically in amount
and direction throughout the ride. It’s this fluctuating apparent weight, particularly its near
approaches to zero, that make riding a roller coaster so exciting.

1. Hooke’s law: The restoring force exerted by an elastic object
is proportional to how far it is from its equilibrium shape, or

restoring force = −spring constant · distortion.

(3.1.1)

2. Acceleration of an object in uniform circular motion: An ob-

ject in uniform circular motion has a centripetal acceleration

equal to the square of its speed divided by the radius of its circular trajectory, which is equal to the square of its angular speed
times the radius of its circular trajectory, or
acceleration =

speed2
= angular speed2 · radius.
radius

(3.3.1)

4

Mechanical Objects
PART 2

o matter how sophisticated the machines around us appear, most are based in large part on
the simple principles that we have already encountered. In this chapter, we take a look at two
more fascinating machines and see what makes them tick. As we do, we’ll find ourselves
revisiting familiar issues and exploring a few new ones all the way to the frontiers of science and
the cosmos.

N
 
ACTIVE LEARNING
EXPERIMENTS

High-Flying Balls

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Among the physical issues that we discuss in this chapter
are the reaction effects that push rockets forward. These
reaction effects appear in an interesting way in a simple
experiment that involves two different-size balls: a basketball and a tennis ball.
If you can’t find a basketball and a tennis ball, any
two lively balls of very different masses will do. Drop the
balls separately and see how high they bounce. You’ll
immediately notice that an individual ball can’t bounce
higher than the point from which you dropped it. Such a
rebound would give it more energy than it had originally.
In fact, some of the ball’s energy will be lost to thermal
energy, so it will not even reach its original height.

96

But what will happen when you stack the smaller
ball on top of the larger ball and drop the two balls
together? Think about the sequence of events that will
occur, and then give it a try. Make sure that the small ball
remains directly above the large ball as the two balls fall
to the floor.
Why does the smaller ball rebound as it does?
How does your choice of balls influence this effect? If
you put the smaller ball on the bottom, will that change
the outcome? What about dropping the pair of balls
from a different height? Try the same experiment with
balls of various sizes to gather more insight into what
is happening.

Bicycles

97

Chapter Itinerary
The objects in this chapter combine many of the concepts we
have discussed and add a few new ones of their own. These
objects are (1) bicycles and (2) rockets. In Bicycles, we see how
motion and clever design can make an apparently unstable vehicle stable enough to ride easily, even without your hands on the
handlebars. In Rockets and Space Travel, we look at the principle of action and reaction, and see how this basic idea makes it
possible for spacecraft to leave Earth’s surface and even travel
toward the stars. For a more complete preview of this chapter,
turn ahead to the Chapter Summary and Important Laws and
Equations at the end of the chapter.

Bicycles

SECTION 4.1
Seat

Handlebars
Stem

Extension
Shifter
Brake lever
Shock absorber

Rear brake

Front brake
Front
derailleur
Fork
Crank
sprocket

Hub
Rim
Tire

Crank
Chain
Rear derailleur

This chapter revisits many ideas from the previous chapters but it also introduces a variety of new concepts we can use.
In Bicycles, we learn about dynamic stability and explore issues
that waiters, water-skiers, and warehouse clerks must deal with
all the time. We also encounter gyroscopes and their peculiar
responses to torques. In Rockets and Space Travel, we see how
gravity causes objects to orbit one another, giving rise to the
intricate motions of the planets, moons, and comets. We also
look at new physics that appears near the extremes of speed
and gravity.

Idler sprocket

Pedal
Spoke

A bicycle is a wonderfully energy-efficient, human-powered vehicle. Its wheels allow its rider to coast forward easily on level surfaces and accelerate effortlessly down hills. Compare the easy
motion of a bicycle to that of walking, which requires effort every
step of the way. Bicycles are very simple machines, and most of
their moving parts are quite visible: the pedals, sprockets, brakes,
and steering mechanisms, to name a few. Their simplicity and
visibility make bicycles relatively easy to fix, even for a novice.

Questions to Think About: Why is a two-wheeled bicycle preferable to the apparently more stable three-wheeled tricycle?
Why do you lean a bicycle in the direction that you are turning? How is it possible to ride a bicycle without hands on the
handlebar? How does pedaling a bicycle make it move forward? Why does a bicycle have such a complicated drive system between its pedals and its rear wheel?
Experiments to Do: If you know how to ride a bicycle, pay
attention to its stability as you ride it. Notice how you lean
the bicycle in the direction that you are turning and how the
bicycle naturally steers into that turn as you begin to lean.
This automatic steering is part of the bicycle’s self-stabilizing
behavior. As you ride, observe how fast the pedals are turning and how hard you must push on the pedals to keep them
turning at that rate. Go up and down some hills in various
gears, and see how each gear choice affects the pedaling
rate and the forces you must exert on the pedals. Why do you
choose a certain gear for a certain situation? What pedaling
rate do you find most comfortable? What pedaling force feels
best?

Tricycles and Static Stability
Bicycles have a stability problem. With only two wheels to support them, stationary bicycles tip over easily. Why then do we use two-wheeled bicycles for transportation?
We can begin to answer that question by looking at static stability, an object’s stability at rest. To have static stability, an object needs a stable equilibrium—a concept we first
encountered in Section 3.1. Equilibrium means zero net force or torque, but near a stable
equilibrium an object experiences restoring influences—forces and/or torques—that push
it back toward that equilibrium. Aided by such influences, a statically stable object returns
to its stable equilibrium after being displaced slightly.
A marble in a bowl exhibits static translational stability—when displaced from its
equilibrium position at the bottom of the bowl, it experiences restoring forces that act to
return it to the bottom of the bowl. In contrast, a stool exhibits static rotational stability—
when displaced from its upright equilibrium orientation it experiences restoring torques

98

CHAPTER 4 Mechanical Objects

Fig. 4.1.1 A tricycle
is very stable when it’s
standing still. However, it
tips over easily during a
high-speed turn because
the rider can’t lean in the
direction that the tricycle is
turning. The rider must also
pedal furiously to move at a
reasonable speed.

that act to return it to upright. The fact that bicycles don’t exhibit static translation stability
is a good thing; a bicyclist doesn’t want to stay near one place. But bicycles don’t exhibit
static rotational stability either. If you want a pedal-powered vehicle that has statically
rotational stability, try a tricycle (Fig. 4.1.1).
An upright tricycle has static rotational stability because it experiences restoring torques
following a tip (Fig. 4.1.2a). Rather than look for those torques directly, however, let’s take
a much more general approach. Physicists are trained to look for the big-picture concepts
hiding behind seemingly unrelated examples, and sometimes I just have to do it.
Recall that an object accelerates in whichever direction reduces its total potential
energy as quickly as possible. In this case, the tricycle undergoes angular acceleration in
whichever rotational direction reduces its total potential energy as quickly as possible.
Since small tips always raise the tricycle’s center of gravity and thus increase its gravitational potential energy, the tipped tricycle can reduce its total potential energy by rotating
back to upright. The upright tricycle is thus in a stable rotational equilibrium—it will
return spontaneously to that upright equilibrium after being tipped slightly. No wonder
children love tricycles!
This relationship between static stability and total potential energy is universal. There
is no need to look directly for the restoring influences, which may be complicated anyway.
If an object’s total potential energy rises whenever it’s displaced, it’s in a stable equilibrium
and will tend to return there following the displacement. That useful rule applies not only
to static rotational stability and tricycles but also to static translational stability and everything from canoes to bridge spans to decorative mobiles. If you want an object to be stable
at rest, ensure that any small displacement increases its total potential energy.
(a)

Center
of
gravity

Weight

Torque
about pivot

Pivot
Stable
equilibrium

The tricycle returns
to its original position

After a
small push

(b)
Center
of
gravity

Torque
about pivot

Weight

Pivot

Unstable
equilibrium

After a
small push

The bicycle
falls over

Fig. 4.1.2 (a) A tricycle is in a stable rotational equilibrium. When it’s tipped, its center of gravity
and gravitational potential energy rise and it experiences restoring forces that return it to upright.
(b) A bicycle is in an unstable rotational equilibrium. Any tip causes it to fall.

Bicycles

STABLE EQUILIBRIUM AND POTENTIAL ENERGY
An object is in a stable equilibrium when any small displacement increases its total
potential energy.

That general observation underlies a simple rule of thumb: an object resting on a surface is in a stable rotational equilibrium if a vertical line passing through its center of
gravity also passes through the interior of its base of support—the polygon defined by its
contact points with the ground. This rule follows from geometry: if a vertical line through
the object’s center of gravity passes within its base of support, then tipping it always raises
its center of gravity and increases its gravitational potential energy. Assuming that no other
potential energies are significant, the tipped object will undergo angular acceleration back
toward its original orientation, making that orientation a stable rotational equilibrium. For
example, a tricycle is in a stable rotational equilibrium when its center of gravity is above
the interior of its triangular base of support (Fig. 4.1.3).
Geometry also sets the limits of the object’s static rotational stability. If the vertical
line passing through its center of gravity also passes through the edge of its base of support, there are three possibilities. If its center of gravity is below the edge, the object is in
a stable rotational equilibrium. If its center of gravity is exactly on the edge, the object is
in a neutral equilibrium—it remains in rotational equilibrium even when you tip it about
that edge.
If the object’s center of gravity is above the edge, however, it is in an unstable equilibrium—that is, when displaced slightly in certain directions, the object will experience
anti-restoring torques that cause angular acceleration away from equilibrium. Tipping the
object in those directions lowers its center of gravity and decreases its gravitational potential energy, so it undergoes angular acceleration away from equilibrium and tips over. If the
rider of a tricycle leans out so far that their combined center of gravity is located above the
edge of the triangular base of support, they’ll be in an unstable equilibrium and in danger
of tipping over.
Unlike a tricycle, a bicycle has no stable equilibrium (Fig. 4.1.2b). Its base of support
is a line defined by its two wheels and a line has only an edge, no interior. Although the
rider of a bicycle can achieve rotational equilibrium by locating their combined center of
gravity above that edge, that equilibrium is unstable and the slightest displacement to the
side will tip them over.

UNSTABLE EQUILIBRIUM AND POTENTIAL ENERGY
An object’s equilibrium is unstable when a small displacement can decrease its total
potential energy.

Check Your Understanding #1: Keeping Coffee in Its Place
Some travel mugs taper outward at the bottom so that they have very wide bases. Why does
this shape make such a mug particularly stable and keep it from flipping over during the morning
commute?
Answer: The mug’s wide base ensures that its total potential energy will continue to increase as it
tips, even if that tip becomes quite severe, so it will naturally return to its stable equilibrium.
Why: A mug with a narrow base is stable, but only if it never tips very far. As soon as its center of
gravity moves beyond its original base of support, over it will go. However, a mug with a wide base
has a broad base of support and will recover even from severe tips.

99

Center
of gravity

Base of
Support
Fig. 4.1.3 An upright
tricycle is in a stable
equilibrium because a
vertical line through its
center of gravity passes
through the interior of the
triangular base of support
formed by its three contact
points with the ground.

100

CHAPT ER 4 Mechanical Objects

(a)

Bicycles and Dynamic Stability
Center
of gravity

(b)

Friction’s
torque
Center
of mass

Friction
Acceleration

Fig. 4.1.4 (a) A tricycle
that is heading straight
is stable because any tip
causes its center of gravity
to move upward. (b) During
a fast left turn, however,
the tricycle accelerates
left and friction exerts a
large leftward force on
the wheels. This frictional
force produces a torque
about the tricycle and
rider’s combined center of
mass and can cause the
tricycle to tip over.

Static rotational stability matters most to people who have difficulty balancing. That’s why
children learn to ride tricycles first (Fig. 4.1.4a). But when a tricycle is moving, static rotational stability doesn’t guarantee safety. If a child rolls down a steep hill and then makes a
sudden sharp turn, he or she will probably flip over. What has gone wrong?
A moving tricycle stays upright only if the girl riding it avoids sudden accelerations,
such as a left turn at high speed. To make such a turn, she steers the tricycle’s wheels so that
friction with the pavement pushes the tricycle to the left (Fig. 4.1.4b). Frictional forces on
the wheel accelerate the tricycle leftward, redirecting its speed so that it turns. Of course,
the girl needs to turn, too, so the tricycle pushes her along with it. As long as the turn is
slow, a gentle push is all that’s required and the tricycle and girl turn together safely.
If the turn is too abrupt, however, the girl doesn’t complete the turn along with the tricycle. Instead, her body goes straight as the tricycle drives out from under her. Crash. As you
can see, a tricycle has good static stability but poor dynamic stability, stability in motion.
The tricycle flips because it can’t handle the enormous torque that friction exerts on it
during a sharp turn. Because the horizontal frictional force that turns the tricycle is exerted
well below the tricycle and rider’s combined center of mass (Fig. 4.1.4b), it produces a
torque about that center of mass. If this torque is small, the tricycle’s static rotational stability will provide enough restoring torque in the opposite direction to prevent any angular
acceleration. If the turn is too sharp, the huge frictional torque will overwhelm the limited
restoring torque and the tricycle and rider will flip over. During high-speed turns, the tricycle is dynamically unstable.
Since the goal of a wheeled vehicle is to go somewhere, dynamic rotational stability is
ultimately more important than static rotational stability. And while a bicycle lacks static
stability, a moving bicycle is remarkably stable. Its dynamic stability is so good that it’s
almost hard to tip over and can even be ridden without any hands on the handlebars. This
feat is a popular daredevil stunt among children who haven’t yet realized how easy it is.
As British physicist David Jones discovered, the bicycle’s incredible dynamic stability
results from its tendency to steer automatically in whatever direction it’s leaning. For example, if the bicycle begins leaning to the left, the front wheel will automatically steer toward
the left so as to return the bicycle to an upright position. Although a stationary bicycle falls
over when it’s displaced from its unstable equilibrium, a forward-moving bicycle naturally
drives under the combined center of mass and returns to that unstable equilibrium.
There are two physical mechanisms acting together to produce this automatic steering
effect: one involving rotation and one involving potential energy. The first is based on the
wheels alone: they behave as gyroscopes. Because each wheel is spinning, it has angular
momentum and tends to continue spinning at a constant angular speed about a fixed axis in
space. Since a wheel’s angular momentum can be changed only by a torque, it naturally
tends to keep its upright orientation.
But angular momentum alone doesn’t prevent the bicycle from tipping over, any more
than it prevents a tricycle from doing so. Instead, it prompts the bicycle to steer automatically by way of gyroscopic precession, the pivoting of a gyroscope’s rotational axis caused
by a torque exerted perpendicular to its angular momentum. When a bicycle is upright, the
pavement’s upward support force points toward the front wheel’s center of mass and produces no torque on that wheel. But when the bicycle leans to the left, the pavement’s
upward support force no longer points at the wheel’s center of mass and it therefore produces a torque on the wheel. That torque is perpendicular to the wheel’s angular momentum, so the wheel precesses; its axis of rotation pivots toward the left and thereby steers the
bicycle to safety!
Assisting gyroscopic precession in this automatic steering process is a second effect
due to potential energy. Because of the shape and angle of the fork supporting its front
wheel, a leaning bicycle can lower its center of gravity and reduce its total potential energy
by steering its front wheel in the direction that the bicycle is leaning. When the bicycle

Bicycles

leans to the left, its front wheel steers toward the left to reduce the bicycle’s total potential
energy as quickly as possible. Once again the bicycle automatically steers in the direction
that it’s leaning and avoids falling over. These self-correcting effects explain why a riderless bicycle stays up so long when you roll it forward or down a hill.
There is little a bicycle designer can do to change the gyroscopic effect, but the potential energy effect depends on fork shape and angle. To be stable, the front wheel must touch
the ground behind the steering axis (Fig. 4.1.5). If the fork is flawed, so that the wheel
touches the ground ahead of the steering axis, the bicycle will steer the wrong way when it
leans and be virtually unridable.
The front fork of a typical adult’s bicycle arcs forward so that the wheel touches the
ground just behind the steering axis. This situation leaves the bicycle dynamically stable enough to ride yet highly maneuverable. In contrast, the front fork of a typical
child’s bicycle is relatively straight so that the wheel touches the ground far behind the
steering axis. The child’s bicycle is therefore more dynamically stable than the adult’s
bicycle but also less easy to turn. That trade-off between dynamic stability and maneuverability is universal, appearing not only in pedal-powered vehicles but in cars, boats,
and aircraft as well.

101

Wheel touches
Steering axis touches

Fig. 4.1.5 A bicycle
is stable when moving
forward, in part because
its front wheel touches
the ground behind the
steering axis. As a result,
the front wheel naturally
steers in the direction that
the bicycle is leaning and
returns the bicycle to an
upright position.

Check Your Understanding #2: Like a Rolling Coin
Standing a coin on edge is difficult, but a rolling coin stays upright easily. What effect is stabilizing
the moving coin?
Answer: The effect is gyroscopic precession.

(a)

Why: On its edge, the coin has little or no static stability and tips over easily. But when it’s rolling
forward quickly, the same gyroscopic precession effect that causes a bicycle to steer under its center
of gravity also dynamically stabilizes the coin’s otherwise unstable equilibrium.
Center of
mass/gravity

Leaning While Turning
Why does a bicycle rider lean during a turn? The answer is that leaning can balance out the
torque that friction exerts on him during the turn, the same frictional torque that flipped our
unfortunate tricycle rider. With the proper lean, the bicyclist can safely complete even the
sharpest turn.
As he rides along, the bicyclist tries to keep himself and the bicycle in rotational equilibrium. Since they experience a frictional torque about their combined center of mass each
time they turn, the bicyclist balances that torque by leaning them toward the inside of the
turn. The pavement’s upward support force then produces a torque on them about their
center of mass that opposes the frictional torque. When those two torques sum to zero, the
bicyclist and bicycle are safely in rotational equilibrium.
These two opposing torques are both produced by pavement forces on the wheels, and
their sum is the overall torque that the overall pavement force on the wheels produces. That
overall torque drops to zero when the overall pavement force points directly toward the
combined center of mass. As we saw in Section 2.1, a force exerted directly toward a pivot
produces zero torque about that pivot. To stay in rotational equilibrium as he rides, the
bicyclist always places the combined center of mass directly in line with the pavement’s
overall force on the wheels.
For example, when the bicycle is heading straight, the rider can obtain zero net torque
by keeping the bicycle upright. The pavement pushes the wheels straight upward, directly
toward the combined center of mass (Fig. 4.1.6a). But when the bicycle is turning left, the
rider must lean to the left to stay in rotational equilibrium. During the leftward turn,
the pavement pushes the wheels upward and leftward (Fig. 4.1.6b). Leaning leftward the
proper amount ensures that the pavement force points toward the combined center of mass
and produces zero torque (Fig. 4.1.7).

Support force

(b)

Center of
mass/gravity
Total
force
Friction

Support force
Acceleration

Fig. 4.1.6 (a) A bicycle
that is heading straight is
in rotational equilibrium
when it’s perfectly upright.
The support force from
the road produces no
torque about its center of
mass. (b) A bicycle that is
turning left is in rotational
equilibrium when it’s tilted
to the left. Together, the
support and frictional
forces from the road
produce no torque about
its center of mass.

102

CHAPT ER 4 Mechanical Objects

© Bryn Lennon/Getty Images, Inc.

Fig. 4.1.7 As they round
a turn during a race,
these cyclists lean toward
the inside of the turn.
This leaning prevents the
pavement from producing
torques on them and
tipping them over.

After a while, leaning the bike while turning becomes so automatic, so habitual, that
you don’t even think about it. You simply can’t ride a bicycle or motorcycle without leaning
as you turn. Even if you turn one of these vehicles so sharply that it skids, leaning can still
keep it safely in rotational equilibrium.
All this discussion of leaning during turns begs the question: How do you make the
bicycle lean prior to a turn? Actually, you cause that lean unconsciously by steering the
bicycle briefly in the wrong direction—the direction opposite the turn itself! The bicycle
then drives out from under you, and the two of you begin to lean in the desired manner. You
then steer in the correct direction and remain in rotational equilibrium throughout the turn.
When you’re ready to stop turning, you steer extra hard briefly in the direction of the turn.
The bicycle then drives under you, and the two of you return to upright. The turn is over.
Since only a statically unstable vehicle can lean, a statically stable one must rely on
restoring torques to keep it near its rotational equilibrium. As we saw with tricycles, restoring torques are limited, and a vehicle can tip out of its rotational equilibrium during rapid
accelerations. A car, truck, or SUV will flip if it turns too sharply, and some are particularly
prone to such catastrophes. The higher a vehicle’s center of mass and the narrower its base
of support, the more limited its restoring torques and the more easily it flips during turns.
SUVs are surprisingly vulnerable to such rollover accidents, and small trucks that have
been boosted up to resemble tractor-trailer cabs are truly hazardous. Even some ordinary
cars have been found unsafe in this regard.
Check Your Understanding #3: Cutting Corners
Why does a skier lean in the direction of a turn during a downhill run?
Answer: She leans into the turn to make sure that the force on her skis is directed toward her center
of mass.
Why: In many sports and situations a person must lean in the direction of a turn. Since a turn always
involves horizontal acceleration and horizontal force, the person must shift her center of mass toward
the inside of the turn. When she leans just the right amount, the net force on her feet points directly
toward her center of mass and exerts no torque on her about her center of mass. She remains in
rotational equilibrium and doesn’t tip over.

Pedaling Bicycles
So far, we have only discussed stability. Once we’ve settled on a bicycle as the most likely
configuration for a useful person-powered vehicle, we need to figure out how to person
power it. The rider could push his feet on the ground, but that would be pretty inconvenient
and even dangerous at high speeds. Instead, we use foot pedals to produce a torque on one
of the wheels. But which wheel, and how do we produce that torque?
The original answer was to power the front wheel, using cranks attached directly to its
axle. A crank is simply a lever that projects from the axle and produces a torque on that axle
as you push its free end around in a circle. Each bicycle crank has a pedal installed on its
free end so that you can use your foot to push on it. With its axle suspended in bearings, the
front wheel turns as you pedal it. Friction between the turning wheel and the ground then
pushes the bicycle forward.
This pedaling method is still used in children’s tricycles, but it has three drawbacks.
First, pedaling the front wheel interferes with its other responsibility: steering. Second, you
can’t take a break from pedaling; if the vehicle is moving, so are the pedals. Third, you can
produce more than enough torque on the front wheel, but you often have trouble moving
your legs quickly enough to keep up with the pedals. When you ride fast on level ground,
you find yourself pedaling furiously and feeling very little resistance from the pedals.
The frantic pedaling problem goes to the heart of all pedal-powered vehicles, vehicles
that draw power from you, the rider. You provide that power by doing a certain amount of

Bicycles

103

Pedal
Pedaling
torque

Tension

Torque on
freewheel

Freewheel
sprocket

Crank
sprocket
Idler
sprockets
Fig. 4.1.9 The drive system for a modern bicycle. Pedaling produces torque on the crank sprocket,
which in turn produces tension in the top segment of the chain. That segment of chain produces
torque on the freewheel sprocket, which conveys that torque to the bicycle’s rear wheel (not shown).
The idler sprockets handle the extra chain.

work on the pedals each second. Since work is equal to force times distance, you can do the
same work on the pedals each second—that is, you can provide the same power to the
vehicle—by pushing the pedals forward hard as they turn slowly or by pushing the pedals
forward gently as they turn quickly. However, for reasons having to do with physiology
more than physics, your legs are best at providing power when you are pushing the pedals
forward medium hard as they turn medium fast.
Unfortunately, the pedals of an ordinary tricycle turn too quickly and too easily to
make good use of your pedaling power. When the tricycle is moving fast on level ground,
you can barely keep up with its pedals, let alone do work on them. The only time a tricycle
makes good use of your capacity to supply power is when it’s going uphill at moderate
speed; only then do the pedals turn medium fast and require that you push them forward
medium hard.
An early solution to the frantic pedaling problem was to use a gigantic front wheel. In
such a configuration, one turn of the wheel would take you a considerable distance, so you
no longer had to pedal furiously to go fast on a level road. At last you could reach your
peak performance on level ground, pushing the pedals forward medium hard as they
turned medium fast. The pennyfarthing of the mid-nineteenth century was this sort of
bicycle (Fig. 4.1.8). But pedaling still interfered with steering and you couldn’t stop pedaling while the bicycle was moving. Furthermore, this bicycle had a new problem—you
couldn’t push the pedals forward hard enough to keep its front wheel turning steadily on
uphill stretches.
These problems were solved by removing the cranks from the front wheel’s axle and
using an indirect drive scheme to convey power to the rear wheel (Fig. 4.1.9). Employing
toothed sprockets and a chain loop, that indirect drive allowed the pedals and the wheels
to turn at different rates. This change lets you use mechanical advantage to choose how
you supply power to the bicycle: whether you exert large forces on slowly moving pedals
or small forces on rapidly moving pedals or, ideally, medium forces on medium-fastmoving pedals. Whether you’re zooming along a level road or grinding slowly up a steep
hill, you can always find a drive setting, or gear, that lets you comfortably supply your
maximum power.
Finally, the nonstop pedaling problem was solved by incorporating a one-way drive or
freewheel in the hub of the rear wheel. This freewheel (Fig. 4.1.10) allows the rear wheel
to turn freely in one direction so that you can stop pedaling as you coast forward. A modern
bicycle with these improvements appears in Fig. 4.1.11.

Fig. 4.1.8 The
pennyfarthing used a large,
directly driven front wheel
to permit the rider to travel
at a reasonable speed
without having to pedal
very rapidly. Its name came
from its resemblance to
two coins, the large English
penny and the smaller
farthing.

Pawl
Spring

Driver for
rear wheel

Freewheel
sprocket
Fig. 4.1.10 The ratchet
in a bicycle freewheel. If
the relative rotation of the
inner and outer parts is in
the correct direction, the
pawls transmit torque from
the outer part to the inner
part. If the relative rotation
direction is reversed, the
pawls compress the springs
and skip along the teeth on
the inside of the outer part.
No torque is transmitted.

104

CHAPT ER 4 Mechanical Objects

Fig. 4.1.11 A modern bicycle.
The rear wheel is driven by a
chain that allows the rider to
vary the mechanical advantage
between the pedals and the rear
wheel. A freewheel in the hub
of the rear wheel lets that wheel
turn freely in one direction. This
free motion allows the bicycle
to coast forward, even when the
pedals are stationary.

Check Your Understanding #4: Bigger Isn’t Always Better
Why is it so difficult to climb a hill on a pennyfarthing?
Answer: Each turn of the huge wheel takes you a long distance up the hill and requires lots of work.
To do this much work in a single turn of the pedals, you must push on the pedals very hard.
Why: As you pedal a bicycle, you are doing work on the pedals; you push the pedals as they move in
the direction of that push. If too much work is required, as is the case when you’re going uphill on a
pennyfarthing, the force required becomes unbearable.

SECTION 4.2

Rockets and Space Travel
Despite the complexity of modern spacecraft, the rocket is
one of the simplest of all machines. It’s based on the principle that every action has a reaction. A rocket is propelled
forward by pushing material out of its tail. As simple as
rockets are, however, people have been developing better
rockets for over 700 years. They’re used for such pursuits
as space exploration, weaponry, rescue operations, and
amusement.

Fairing

Payload

Second stage

Questions to Think About: What pushes a rocket forward?
How can a rocket work in space, where there seems to be
nothing to push against? Why do modern rockets have such
fancy exhaust nozzles? What is the fastest speed that a rocket
can reach? Why do satellites travel endlessly around Earth?
What sort of path does a rocket take as it travels from planet
to planet?

Interstage
(covers engine)

First stage

Booster

Landing legs

Engines

Booster

Experiments to Do: While an afternoon spent launching
model rockets (available at hobby and toy stores) would be
the best introduction to this section, a toy balloon will do
just fine. Blow up the toy balloon and let it go. It will sail
around the room. What pushes the balloon forward? Are the
room’s air and walls involved in the propulsion, or is the
balloon propelled by the very act of ejecting gas through its
opening? How could you verify your answer to the previous
question?

Rockets and Space Travel

105

Rocket Propulsion
Among a rocket’s most impressive features are its ability to propel itself forward even in
the complete isolation of space and its capacity to reach astonishing speeds using that propulsion. It somehow manages to push itself forward without any outside help and to use
that forward push to accelerate seemingly without limits.
Of course, a rocket can’t really push itself forward, any more than you can lift yourself up by your boots, and it can’t accelerate forever. In reality, it obtains a forward
force, a thrust force, by pushing against its own limited store of fuel, and when that fuel
runs out, it stops accelerating. To understand how a rocket obtains thrust from its fuel
supply, let’s look at how Newton’s third law, the one describing action and reaction,
applies to rockets.
Imagine that you’re standing in the middle of a frozen pond with zero velocity and no
momentum. It’s a warm day and the wet ice is remarkably slippery. Try as you may, you
can’t seem to get moving at all. How can you get off the ice?
Because of your inertia, the only way you can start moving is if something pushes on
you. Sure, you could order a pizza and then push against the delivery truck when it arrives.
Instead you remove a shoe and throw it as hard as you can toward the east side of the pond
(Fig. 4.2.1). As you throw the shoe, you exert a force on it with your hand. The shoe accelerates and heads off across the ice.
What happens to you? You head off toward the west side of the pond! You’re moving
because when you pushed the shoe toward the east side of the pond, it pushed you equally
hard toward the west side of the pond. In the process, you transferred momentum to the
shoe and it transferred momentum in the opposite direction to you. Momentum isn’t being
created or destroyed, it’s only being redistributed. Even after you let go of the shoe, your
combined momentum remains at zero. The shoe has as much momentum in one direction
as you have in the other.
Of course, you are much more massive than the shoe, so you end up traveling slower
than it does. Momentum is equal to mass times velocity, so the more massive the object, the
less velocity it needs for the same amount of momentum. Still, you’ve achieved what you
set out to do—you’re sliding slowly toward the west side of the pond.
Your final speed is limited because you managed to transfer only a small amount of
momentum to the shoe and thus received only a small amount of opposite momentum in
return. If you’d been able to throw the shoe faster or if you’d thrown a whole display case
of shoes, you’d have transferred more momentum and would be going faster.
Instead of throwing shoes, you’d have done better to throw very fast-moving gas
molecules. Even at room temperature, the molecules in air are traveling about 1800 km/h
(1100 mph). When gas molecules are heated to roughly 2800 ºC (5000 ºF), as they are in
a liquid-fuel rocket engine, they move about three times that fast. If you throw something
in one direction at that kind of speed, you receive quite a lot of momentum in the other
direction.
That’s what a conventional rocket engine does. It uses a chemical reaction to create
very hot exhaust gas from fuels contained entirely within the rocket itself. What started as
chemical potential energy in those fuels becomes thermal energy during the reaction and
then mostly directed kinetic energy as the hot gas rushes out of the rocket engine in a plume
of incandescent exhaust.
The rocket engine exerts a tremendous backward force on the gas, accelerating that gas
to exhaust velocities measured in kilometers per second or miles per second. The gas
pushes forward equally hard on the rocket engine. Propelled by such rocket engines, spacecraft can reach astonishing heights and speeds (Fig. 4.2.2).
Achieving those amazing exhaust velocities requires carefully designed nozzles. If
you’ve ever watched the launch of a large rocket, you’ve probably noticed the bell-shaped
nozzles through which the exhaust flows (Fig. 4.2.3). Each nozzle allows the rocket to

(a)

Man and shoe
(stationary)

(b)
Man’s
velocity
Shoe’s
velocity

Man and shoe
(after throwing)

Fig. 4.2.1 (a) A man who
is holding a shoe while
standing still on ice has
zero momentum. (b) Once
he has thrown the shoe to
the right, the shoe has a
momentum to the right and
the man has a momentum
to the left. The total
momentum of the man and
shoe is still zero. Because
the man is much more
massive than the shoe, the
shoe moves much faster
than the man.

106

CHAPT ER 4 Mechanical Objects

Fig. 4.2.2 This
spacecraft’s rocket engine
pushes its fuel leftward in
a plume of high-velocity
exhaust and that fuel
pushes the spacecraft
rightward, action and
reaction. As the spacecraft
accelerates toward the
right, its rightward velocity
increases and the leftward
velocity of its ejected fuel
decreases. Throughout this
propulsion process, the
rocket’s total momentum
remains unchanged; it
was zero prior to launch,
so it remains zero as the
spacecraft and fuel push
on each other.

Unburned
fuel

Hot
gases

Nozzle

Exhaust
plume

Fig. 4.2.3 A molecular
picture of what happens in
a chemical rocket engine.
The engine burns its fuel
in a confined chamber,
and the exhaust gas flows
out of a nozzle. The nozzle
converts the random
thermal motions of the
exhaust-gas molecules into
directed motion away from
the rocket engine.
1 Swedish inventor and
engineer Carl Gustaf de
Laval’s (1845–1913)
invention of the convergingdiverging nozzle predates
the modern development
of rockets by several
decades. He invented this
nozzle as a way to make
steam turbines more
efficient and is credited
with laying the foundation
for all future turbine
technology. De Laval is
also known for his
invention of the cream
separator for milk.

obtain as much forward momentum as possible from its exhaust by directing that exhaust
backward and accelerating it to the greatest possible speed. As we’ll see in Chapter 6, nozzles allow gases to convert their various internal energies into kinetic energy and are ideally
suited for directing and accelerating gases. In the case of rocket exhaust, the most effective
nozzle shape is a converging-diverging one, called a de Laval nozzle after its Swedish
inventor, Carl Gustaf de Laval. 1
To understand fully why this complicated nozzle structure works so well for rocket
engines, we’d need to examine the physics of flowing gases up to and beyond the speed of
sound. We’ll encounter some of these issues later in this book, but for now a brief summary
will have to suffice.
Inside the rocket and before the de Laval nozzle, the hot exhaust gas is tightly packed
and its pressure is enormous. Like the gas in a spray bottle, this exhaust gas accelerates
rapidly through the nozzle toward the lower pressure environment outside. The narrowing
throat of that nozzle aids its acceleration, up to a point. When the gas reaches the narrowest
part of the nozzle, it’s traveling at the speed of sound and its characteristics begin to change
dramatically. To coax the supersonic exhaust gas to accelerate still further, the nozzle stops
narrowing and begins to widen. The tightly packed exhaust gas expands in volume as it
flows through that widening bell and thereby prepares to enter the more open environment
outside the nozzle.
Just how wide the diverging end of the de Laval nozzle must be to obtain the maximum
thrust from its exhaust gas depends on the nozzle’s surroundings. Near sea level, the
exhaust gas flows into ordinary air outside the nozzle and a relatively narrow de Laval
nozzle works best. At high altitude or in space, the exhaust gas enters thinner air or nothing
at all, so a wider de Laval nozzle is more ideal. Rockets typically make a compromise in
their nozzle shapes so as to operate reasonably well in all environments.
By the time the gas reaches the end of the de Laval nozzle, it has converted most of its
original energy into kinetic energy, with its velocity directed away from the nozzle. In fact,
because the gas actually continues to burn even as it flows through the nozzle, its kinetic
energy and speed keep rising until they reach fantastic levels. With the help of the de Laval
nozzle, exhaust gas leaves the rocket’s engine at an exhaust velocity, or backward-directed
flow speed, of between 10,000 and 16,000 km/h (6000 and 10,000 mph).
As it creates this plume of exhaust, the rocket pushes the gas backward and gives it
backward momentum. The gas completes the momentum transfer by pushing the rocket
forward. The very act of ejecting the exhaust is all that’s required to obtain forward thrust;

Rockets and Space Travel

the rocket doesn’t need anything external to push and will operate perfectly well in empty
space (see 2 ). When it pushes hard enough on its exhaust, the rocket not only can support
its own weight, it can even accelerate upward.
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS: Action and Reaction in Rockets
Misconception: A rocket needs some external object to react against to push itself forward.
Resolution: While rocket propulsion does involve a pair of equal but opposite forces, action and
reaction, the rocket is pushing its exhaust backward (action) and the exhaust is pushing the
rocket forward (reaction). What this exhaust plume hits, if anything, makes no difference to the
propulsion effect.

Check Your Understanding #1: A Rocket with a Head Start
When a missile is launched from beneath the wing of a fighter aircraft, what does it push against to
accelerate forward?
Answer: It pushes against its own exhaust, as do all rockets.
Why: While it may appear that the plume of exhaust beneath a ground-launched rocket is what lifts
that rocket upward, the ground itself doesn’t contribute to the thrust. The very act of pushing the gas
out the nozzle propels the rocket forward.

The Ultimate Speed of a Spacecraft
At rest on the launchpad, a rocket consists principally of a spacecraft and a supply of fuel.
Once the rocket’s engine begins to fire, exhaust from the burned fuel accelerates backward
and the spacecraft accelerates forward. The fuel is gradually consumed until eventually it
runs out and the spacecraft coasts along on its own. Although weight and air resistance
influence this story, let’s neglect both for now to see what determines the spacecraft’s
eventual speed.
Remarkably, the ultimate speed of the spacecraft is not limited to the rocket’s exhaust
speed. As long as the rocket keeps pushing exhaust backward, it will continue to accelerate
forward. For the spacecraft to reach speeds in excess of its exhaust speed, however, the
rocket must push the majority of its initial mass backward as exhaust. After all, the momentum of the exhaust’s larger mass heading backward at the exhaust speed cancels the
momentum of the spacecraft’s smaller mass heading forward at more than the exhaust
speed. For a rocket that is 90% fuel and 10% spacecraft at launch, we might reasonably
expect the spacecraft to end up traveling forward at nine times the exhaust speed.
Unfortunately, that simple analysis overestimates the spacecraft’s speed. Because the
rocket accelerates forward while its engine is firing, only the first portion of its exhaust travels backward at the full exhaust speed (Fig. 4.2.2.). As the rocket picks up speed in the forward direction, its exhaust moves less rapidly in the backward direction. When the rocket’s
forward speed exceeds its exhaust speed, the exhaust actually ends up moving forward!
Despite this problem, a spacecraft can still travel forward faster than the exhaust speed;
it just needs more fuel. If we neglect air resistance and weight, the spacecraft’s final speed
is given by the rocket equation:
spacecraft speed = exhaust speed · loge (

massspacecraft + massfuel
massspacecraft

).

(4.2.1)

For a rocket that is 90% fuel and 10% spacecraft at launch, its spacecraft can reach
2.3 times the speed of its exhaust gas. If it is more than 90% fuel, it can go even faster.

107

2 On January 13, 1920,
The New York Times ran
an editorial attacking
Robert Goddard for
proposing that rockets
could be used for travel in
space. With modest
financial support from the
Smithsonian Institution,
Goddard was pioneering
the development of
liquid-fuel rockets. The
editorial began: “That
Professor Goddard, with
his ‘chair’ in Clark
College and the countenancing of the Smithsonian
Institution, does not know
the relation of action to
reaction, and of the need
to have something better
than a vacuum against
which to react—to say
that would be absurd. Of
course he only seems to
lack the knowledge ladled
out daily in high schools.”

108

CHAPT ER 4 Mechanical Objects

There’s a problem, however, with trying to burn up and eject a huge fraction of the
rocket’s original mass as exhaust. It’s difficult to construct a rocket that is 99.99% fuel
and 0.01% spacecraft. Instead, a space-bound rocket is typically a stack of several separate rocket stages, each stage much smaller than the previous stage. Once the first
stage has used up all its fuel, the whole stage is discarded and the next rocket stage
begins to operate. In this manner, the rocket behaves as though it’s ejecting almost all
its mass as rocket exhaust. With the help of several stages and lots of fuel, rockets can
travel substantially faster than their exhaust velocities and reach Earth orbit or the solar
system beyond.

Check Your Understanding #2: Not Everything Is Disposable
The space shuttle didn’t have the staged look of expendable rockets. How did it manage to eject most
of its launch mass as exhaust?
Answer: It was actually staged subtly. Its two solid-fuel boosters were effectively the first stage, the
external liquid-fuel tank was the second stage, and the orbiter itself was the third stage.
Why: Although the space shuttle was not stacked one stage on the next like a Saturn or Delta rocket,
it didn’t travel from ground to space as a single object. It discarded empty fuel containers as it
accelerated upward. First to go were the two boosters, followed by the external fuel tank. The final
mass of the orbiter itself was much less than what left the launchpad.

Orbiting Earth

3 English physicist Henry
Cavendish (1731–1810)
proved that terrestrial
objects do exert gravitational forces on one
another. His experiment,
performed in 1798,
measured the tiny forces
that two metal spheres
exert on one another,
using a very sensitive
torsion balance. Comparing the forces between the
two spheres with those
between Earth and those
same spheres (their
weights), Cavendish
was able to deduce the
mass of Earth. In effect,
Cavendish’s tabletop
experiment allowed him
to weigh the Earth.

If the spacecraft were heading straight up when it ran out of fuel, it would either fall back
to the ground or leave Earth forever (more on that later). But if it were heading primarily
horizontally when its engine turned off, it might find itself circling Earth endlessly. With no
atmosphere to affect it, the spacecraft follows a path determined only by inertia and gravity,
and since the spacecraft’s weight causes it to accelerate toward the center of Earth, its
trajectory can bend into a huge elliptical loop around Earth.
The spacecraft is following an orbit around Earth. An orbit is the path an object
takes as it falls freely around a celestial object. Although the spacecraft accelerates
directly toward Earth’s center at every moment, its huge horizontal speed prevents it
from actually hitting Earth’s surface. Instead, Earth’s curved surface bends away from
it so rapidly that the fast-moving spacecraft falls around Earth rather than into it
(Fig. 4.2.4). To orbit Earth just above the atmosphere, a spacecraft must travel at the
enormous horizontal speed of 7.9 km/s (about 17,800 mph) and will circle Earth once
every 84 minutes.
The farther the spacecraft’s orbit is from Earth’s surface, however, the longer its
orbital period, the time it takes to complete one orbit. That longer period is due in part to
the increased distance the spacecraft must travel when completing a larger orbit, but it’s
also due to an important characteristic of gravity: Earth’s gravity becomes weaker as
distance from Earth’s center of mass increases.
Section 1.2 observed that an object’s weight is equal to its mass times 9.8 N/kg, the
acceleration due to gravity. That relationship (Eq. 1.2.1), however, is only an approximation, valid for an object near Earth’s surface. As the object’s altitude increases, both the
acceleration due to gravity and the object’s weight decrease—you truly weigh less on a
mountaintop than you do in the valley nearby. Moreover, Eq. 1.2.1 completely ignores the
fact that gravity attracts every object in the universe toward every other object in the
universe (see 3 ).
To determine orbits around Earth and other celestial bodies, scientists and engineers
use a more general formula that relates the gravitational forces between two objects to their
masses and the distance separating them. These forces are equal to the gravitational constant times the product of the two masses, divided by the square of the distance separating

Rockets and Space Travel
(a)

(b)

Velocity
Acceleration

(c)

Circular
orbit

Fig. 4.2.4 (a) Newton’s drawing of a cannonball fired horizontally from the top of a tall mountain. As
the cannonball’s speed increases, it travels farther from the mountain before hitting Earth. (b) When
the cannonball moves fast enough, the curved Earth drops away beneath it and it never hits Earth at
all. (c) The cannonball then orbits Earth.

them. This relationship, discovered by Newton and called the law of universal gravitation, can be written as a word equation:
force =

gravitational constant · mass1 · mass2
(distance between masses) 2

,

(4.2.2)

in symbols:
F=

G · m1 · m2
r2

,

and in common language:
The pull of gravity is strongest between massive objects but diminishes rapidly
as distance increases.
Note that the force on mass1 is directed toward mass2 and the force on mass2 is directed
toward mass1. Those two forces are equal in magnitude but oppositely directed. The
gravitational constant is a fundamental constant of nature, with a measured value of
6.6720 × 10−11 N · m2/kg2.

THE LAW OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION
Every object in the universe attracts every other object in the universe with a force
equal to the gravitational constant times the product of the two masses, divided by the
square of the distance separating the two objects.

109

110

CHAPT ER 4 Mechanical Objects

This relationship describes any gravitational attraction, whether it’s between two
planets or between Earth and you. The effective location of an object’s mass is its center
of mass, so the distance used in Eq. 4.2.2 is the distance separating the two centers of
mass. For a spacecraft orbiting Earth just above its atmosphere, that distance is roughly
Earth’s radius of 6378 km (3964 miles). For a spacecraft far above the atmosphere, however, the distance is larger and the force of gravity is weaker; that spacecraft experiences
a smaller acceleration due to gravity. To give it the additional time it needs for its path to
bend around in a circle, the high-altitude spacecraft must travel more slowly than the
low-altitude spacecraft. This reduced speed explains the long orbital periods of highaltitude spacecraft.
At 35,900 km (22,300 miles) above Earth’s surface, the orbital period reaches
24 hours. A satellite traveling eastward in such an orbit turns with the Earth and is said to
be geosynchronous. If a geosynchronous satellite orbits Earth around the equator, it’s also
geostationary—it always remains over the same spot on Earth’s equator. Such a fixed
orientation is useful for communications and weather satellites.
Not all orbits are circular (Fig. 4.2.5). The orbits of some spacecraft are elliptical, so
their altitudes vary up and down once per orbit. At apogee, its greatest distance from Earth’s
center, a spacecraft travels relatively slowly because it has converted some of its kinetic
energy into gravitational potential energy. At perigee, its smallest distance from Earth’s
center, the spacecraft travels relatively rapidly because it has converted some of its gravitational potential energy into kinetic energy. Of course, the perigee should not bring the
spacecraft into Earth’s atmosphere or it will crash.
The greater a spacecraft’s total energy, the farther its orbit extends from Earth. If the
spacecraft has too much total energy, Earth’s gravity will be unable to bend its path into a
closed loop and the spacecraft will coast off into interplanetary space. The spacecraft’s path
near Earth is then a parabola or hyperbola. The spacecraft follows this parabolic or hyperbolic path only once and then drifts away from Earth forever.
A spacecraft usually enters parabolic or hyperbolic orbit by firing its rocket engine. It
starts in an elliptical orbit around Earth and uses its rocket engine to increase its kinetic
energy. The spacecraft then arcs away from Earth, and its kinetic energy gradually transforms into gravitational potential energy. But Earth’s gravity becomes weaker with distance,
and the spacecraft’s gravitational potential energy slowly approaches a maximum value
even as its distance from Earth becomes infinite. If the spacecraft has enough kinetic energy
to reach this maximum gravitational potential energy, it will be able to escape completely

(a) Circular orbit

Fig. 4.2.5 As a
spacecraft’s total energy
increases, its orbit evolves
from circular (a) to
elliptical (b) to parabolic
(c), to hyperbolic (d).
Circular and elliptical
orbits are closed loops,
so a spacecraft following
one of those orbits does
so repeatedly. Parabolic
and hyperbolic orbits are
open curves, so once a
spacecraft following one of
those orbits begins heading
away from Earth, it never
returns.

Acceleration
(c) Parabolic orbit

(b) Elliptical orbit

Velocity
(d) Hyperbolic orbit

Rockets and Space Travel

from Earth’s gravity. If its kinetic energy approaches zero as it escapes, it’s in a parabolic
orbit. If it retains excess kinetic energy after the escape, it’s in a hyperbolic orbit.
The speed that a spacecraft needs to escape from Earth’s gravity is called the escape
velocity. This escape velocity depends on the spacecraft’s altitude and is about 11.2 km/s
(25,000 mph) near Earth’s surface. A spacecraft traveling at more than the escape velocity
follows a hyperbolic orbital path and heads off toward the other planets or beyond.
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS: Astronauts and “Weightlessness”
Misconception: An astronaut orbiting Earth is too far from Earth to experience gravity and is truly
weightless.
Resolution: The astronaut is still so near Earth’s surface that he experiences almost his full Earth
weight. He feels weightless only because he is in free fall.

Check Your Understanding #3: Speeding Up the Lunar Month
The moon orbits Earth every 27.3 days, at a distance of 384,400 km from Earth’s center of mass.
For the moon to orbit in less time, how would its distance from Earth have to change?
Answer: The distance between Earth and moon would have to decrease.
Why: The moon behaves just like a spacecraft orbiting Earth at a distance of 384,400 km. Such a
spacecraft would also have an orbital period of 27.3 days. To reduce this orbital period, the moon
would have to move closer to Earth so that Earth’s gravity could bend its path more rapidly.

Check Your Figures #1: Attractive Cars
How much gravitational force does a 1000-kg automobile exert on an identical car located
10 m away?
Answer: It exerts about 6.73 × 10−7 N.
Why: We use Eq. 4.2.2 to obtain the force:
force =

6.6720 × 10−11 N · m2/kg2 · 1000 kg · 1000 kg
(10 m) 2

= 6.6720 × 10−7 N.
This force is roughly equal to the weight of a grain of sand. No wonder it’s hard to feel gravity from
anything but the entire Earth.

Orbiting the Sun: Kepler’s Laws
Once it escapes from Earth’s gravity and again turns off its rocket engine, the spacecraft
behaves like a tiny planet and orbits the sun. If you watch it patiently as it travels and compare its orbital motion with the motions of the planets themselves, you may begin to notice
three universal features of all these solar orbits. First recognized by German astronomer
Johannes Kepler (1571–1630) through his careful analysis of the extensive observational
data collected by Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe, those three orbital behaviors are known
as Kepler’s laws.
Kepler’s first law is already rather familiar to us from our examination of Earth orbits.
This law describes the shape of the spacecraft’s looping orbit around the sun; it’s an ellipse,
with the sun at one focus of that ellipse (Fig. 4.2.6). An ellipse isn’t an arbitrary oval; it’s a
planar curve with two foci and a rule stating that the sums of the distances between each
point on the curve and the two foci are the same. In this case, one focus is occupied by the
sun, and the other focus is usually empty. If you add the distance from the spacecraft to the

111

112

CHAPT ER 4 Mechanical Objects

Velocity

Spacecraft

ce 1

an

st
Di

ance
Dist

Fig. 4.2.6 A spacecraft’s orbit around the
sun is an ellipse, with one focus occupied by
the sun and the other focus empty. The sum
of distance1 and distance2 is the same for all
points on this ellipse.

2

Sun
focus

Empty
focus
Orbit

sun and the distance from the spacecraft to the empty focus, that sum will remain constant
as the spacecraft orbits the sun. A circular orbit around the sun is a particularly simple
elliptical one; its two foci coincide and the sun occupies them both.
Kepler recognized that every object orbiting the sun follows such an elliptical path. The
planets move along nearly circular ellipses, while the comets travel in highly elongated
ones. Our spacecraft’s orbit may be circular or elongated, depending on its position and
velocity at the time its engine stopped firing. To reach another planet, the spacecraft’s solar
orbit and that of its destination planet must overlap and the two objects must reach that overlapping point at the same time. Traveling from planet to planet is clearly a tricky business.
Newton later recognized that these elliptical orbits are a direct consequence of the law
of universal gravitation (Eq. 4.2.2) and its inverse square relationship between force and
distance (force ∝ 1/distance2). Any other relationship between force and distance would
yield curving paths that don’t close on themselves at all, let alone form ellipses. As you
follow the spacecraft’s elliptical orbit around the sun, you are witnessing an elegant exhibition of the law of universal gravitation.

KEPLER’S FIRST LAW: ORBITS
All planets move in elliptical orbits, with the sun at one focus of the ellipse.

Kepler’s second law describes the area swept out by a line stretching from the sun to
the spacecraft: that line sweeps out equal areas in equal times (Fig. 4.2.7). Regardless of
how circular or elongated the spacecraft’s orbit is, or where the spacecraft is along that
orbit, the area marked off each second by that moving line is always the same.
Velocity

Orbital
area

Fig. 4.2.7 The orbiting spacecraft
sweeps out the same orbital area each
second, despite variations in its distance
from the sun. This steady sweep is a
result of the spacecraft’s constant angular
momentum about the sun.

Orbital
area

Rockets and Space Travel
Fig. 4.2.8 The square of the spacecraft’s
orbital period is proportional to the cube of its
mean distance from the sun (the average of its
maximal and minimal distances from the sun).

Velocity

Minimal
distance

Maximal
distance

This observation demonstrates another physical law—conservation of angular momentum. Since the sun’s gravity pulls the spacecraft directly toward the sun, it exerts no torque
on the spacecraft and the spacecraft’s angular momentum about the sun is constant.
Remarkably, the rate at which this line sweeps out area is proportional to the spacecraft’s
angular momentum, so the steadiness of that sweep demonstrates the constancy of the
spacecraft’s angular momentum about the sun.

KEPLER’S SECOND LAW: AREAS
A line stretching from the sun to a planet sweeps out equal areas in equal times.

Kepler’s third law describes the spacecraft’s orbital period around the sun: the
square of its orbital period is proportional to the cube of its mean distance from the sun,
that is, the average of its maximal and minimal distances from the sun (Fig. 4.2.8). This
relationship can be derived from the law of universal gravitation (Eq. 4.2.2), the equations describing centripetal acceleration (for example, Eq. 3.3.1), and Newton’s second
law (Eq. 1.1.2).

KEPLER’S THIRD LAW: PERIODS
The square of a planet’s orbital period is proportional to the cube of that planet’s mean
distance from the sun.

Check Your Understanding #4: Out of Round
Your spacecraft has just left Earth behind and is now orbiting the sun independently. Its elongated
orbit has the same mean distance from the sun as Earth’s orbit, but its maximal distance from the
sun is twice its minimal distance. Compare its speeds at the maximal and minimal distances from
the sun. Will it ever meet up with Earth again?
Answer: It is moving half as fast at its maximal distance from the sun as at its minimal distance, and
it will meet Earth again in exactly 1 year.
Why: In accordance with Kepler’s first law, the spacecraft is traveling in an elliptical orbit. Since
Kepler’s second law requires it to sweep out area at a constant rate, the spacecraft must move half
as fast when it is twice as far from the sun. Finally, because the spacecraft’s mean distance from the
sun is the same as that of Earth, the two have the same orbital periods. They’ll both complete their
orbits in one year and meet up at that time.

113

114

CHAPT ER 4 Mechanical Objects

Travel to the Stars: Special Relativity
4 In 1905, while Albert
Einstein (German-born
Swiss then American
physicist, 1879–1955)
was working as a patent
examiner in Bern, he
published four revolutionary papers in three
different areas of physics.
For the 26-year-old
doctoral student from
Germany, it was quite a
banner year. Though
Einstein is often portrayed
as an elderly, wild-haired
gentleman, his most
important contributions to
science were made when
he was a vibrant young
man who had married his
first wife only just two
years earlier.

Despite formidable challenges, it may one day be possible for human-crewed spacecraft to
venture away from the solar system and travel to the stars. The distances involved are so
vast that the only way to cover them in an astronaut’s lifetime would be to move at fantastic
speeds, speeds comparable to that of light itself.
Should spacecraft one day be able to attain such enormous speeds, they’ll find that the
basic laws of motion, the Galilean and Newtonian laws that we have been learning up to
this point, are incomplete. Although extremely accurate at ordinary speeds, those laws
falter near the speed of light (exactly 299,792,458 m/s). They turn out to be low-speed
approximations for the more accurate laws of motion developed by Einstein in 1905 ( 4 ).
Built on the observation that light always travels at the same speed, regardless of an observer’s inertial frame of reference, these relativistic laws of motion are accurate at any speed.
They are part of Einstein’s special theory of relativity, the conceptual framework that
describes space, time, and motion in the absence of gravity.
We saw in Section 1.1 that observers in different inertial frames of reference can disagree on an object’s position and velocity. Special relativity recognizes that those observers can also disagree on the distance and time separating two events. More broadly, two
inertial observers who are in relative motion perceive space and time somewhat differently. If they’re moving at ordinary speeds, that difference in perceptions is negligible and
the Newtonian laws of motion are nearly perfect. But if they’re moving relative to one
another at a substantial fraction of the speed of light, then they perceive space and time
quite differently. In that case, the Newtonian approximations fail and the full laws of relativity are required.
Special relativity has many consequences for high-speed space travel, but we’ll concentrate on how relativity alters two familiar conserved quantities: momentum and energy.
At low speeds, our spacecraft’s momentum takes its usual Newtonian value: mass times
velocity (Eq. 2.3.1). But with increasing speed, a new relativistic factor enters the picture:
(1 − speed2/light speed2)−1/2. Relativistic momentum is equal to the object’s mass times
its velocity times that factor. This relationship can be written as a word equation:
relativistic momentum =

mass · velocity
√1 − speed2/light speed2

,

(4.2.3)

in symbols:
p=

m·v
√1 − v2/c2

,

and in common language:
For a spacecraft to reach the speed of light, its momentum would have
to be infinite.
At ordinary speeds, the relativistic factor is so nearly equal to 1 that this relativistic
relationship is beautifully approximated by the Newtonian one. However, as the spacecraft’s speed begins to approach that of light itself, the relativistic factor spoils the simple
proportionality between momentum and velocity. Momentum then increases more rapidly
than velocity. One result of this change is that it becomes impossible to reach the speed of
light, let alone exceed it. Even if the spacecraft’s thrust increases its forward momentum at
a steady rate, its speed will increase less and less quickly. It will approach—but never
reach—the speed of light.
A similar change happens to the spacecraft’s energy as it approaches the speed of light.
At low speeds, our isolated spacecraft’s kinetic energy takes its usual Newtonian value:

Rockets and Space Travel

half its mass times the square of its speed (Eq. 2.2.1). At high speeds, however, we must
begin using relativistic energy. Relativistic energy is equal to the object’s mass times the
square of the speed of light times the relativistic factor. This relationship can be written as
a word equation:
relativistic energy =

mass · light speed2
√1 − velocity2/light speed2

,

(4.2.4)

in symbols:
E=

m · c2
√1 − v2/c2

,

and in common language:
A spacecraft starts with a rest energy and its energy grows toward infinity as its
speed approaches the speed of light.
At ordinary speeds, the spacecraft’s relativistic energy can be approximated as:
relativistic energy ≃ mass · light speed2 + 12 · mass · speed2.
The usual Newtonian kinetic energy appears at the right in this approximation, but to its left
is a new energy that we’ve never seen before. Called the rest energy, it’s present even when
the spacecraft is motionless. Because the rest energy is constant, it doesn’t affect low-speed
motion and was overlooked in the Newtonian laws. However, this energy associated with
mass itself (stated symbolically as E = mc2) does have consequences and is surely the most
famous feature of the special theory of relativity.
The relativistic version of energy has two implications for our spacecraft. First, the
spacecraft’s energy increases so quickly as it nears the speed of light that it can never reach
that speed. Second, the spacecraft’s initial store of energy before launch is associated with
its initial mass. That mass and energy are so closely related is something to which we’ll
return in Chapter 15.
Check Your Understanding #5: Stellar Tugboats
A stellar tugboat is pulling forward on a spacecraft that is already traveling close to the speed of light.
Although the tugboat is steadily increasing the spacecraft’s forward momentum, the spacecraft is
speeding up less and less quickly. Why?
Answer: Although the spacecraft’s forward momentum increases steadily, in accordance with the relativistic relationship between momentum and velocity, the spacecraft’s velocity increases ever more slowly.
Why: At ordinary speeds, a steady transfer of momentum to an object will yield a steady increase in
its speed. Near the speed of light, however, the object’s increase in speed no longer keeps pace with
its increase in momentum.

Check Your Figures #2: The Real Speed Limit
A spacecraft passes your planetary base going half the speed of light. Using special equipment, you
transfer exactly enough momentum to that spacecraft to double its forward momentum. How fast is
it going now?
Answer: It is going √4/7 times the speed of light.
Why: When the spacecraft is traveling at ½ the speed of light, Eq. 4.2.3 gives its forward momentum
as √1/3 times its mass times the speed of light. Doubling that momentum and solving Eq. 4.2.3 for
the velocity yields √4/7 times the speed of light.

115

116

CHAPT ER 4 Mechanical Objects

Check Your Figures #3: It Packs a Wallop
The speed of a 1-kg minispacecraft is √3/4 times the speed of light. What is its relativistic energy
and what fraction of that energy is rest energy?
Answer: Its total energy is 1.8 × 1017 J, of which half is rest energy.
Why: For an object traveling at √3/4 times the speed of light, Eq. 4.2.4 gives a total energy of 2
times its mass times the square of the speed of light. For a 1-kg object, that energy is 1.8 × 1017 J.
Its rest energy is simply its mass times the square of the speed of light, or 9.0 × 1016 J. Both values
of energy are astonishingly large.

Visiting the Stars: General Relativity
In its travels near stars and other massive celestial objects, our spacecraft is likely to
encounter another surprise: the Newtonian view of gravity is also an approximation! Near
extremely dense, massive objects, gravity is no longer accurately described by Newton’s
law of universal gravitation. Instead, understanding gravity requires a new conceptual
framework that Einstein first presented in 1916, the general theory of relativity.
This new framework is based on the observation that you can’t distinguish between
downward gravity and upward acceleration. As we found in Section 3.3, they feel exactly
the same. For example, if you feel heavy as you stand inside a closed spacecraft, you can’t
be sure whether you’re experiencing a weight due to downward gravity or a feeling of
acceleration due to upward acceleration. In fact, the spacecraft’s scientific instruments
can’t help you because they can’t distinguish the effects of gravity from those of-acceleration either. No matter how hard you try, you can’t tell the difference.
At the heart of this problem is the concept of mass. Up to this point, we have seen mass
play two apparently different roles that we can refer to as gravitational mass and inertial
mass. When you’re experiencing a weight, your gravitational mass is acting together with
gravity to make you feel heavy. When you’re experiencing a feeling of acceleration, your
inertial mass is acting together with acceleration to make you feel heavy. However, in spite
of their different roles, these two masses seem to be related. Without exception, an object
that has a large inertial mass and is therefore difficult to shake back and forth also has a large
gravitational mass and is therefore hard to support against gravity. In fact, the two masses
seem to be the same. That observation led Einstein to propose the principle of equivalence,
that these two masses, gravitational and inertial, are truly identical and therefore that no
experiment you perform inside your spacecraft can distinguish between free fall and the
absence of gravity. The general theory of relativity is based on this principle of equivalence.
As long as your spacecraft stays in regions of weak gravity, Newton’s law of universal
gravitation will adequately describe its motion. At the extremes of gravity, however, the
general theory of relativity is necessary. That theory describes a universe in which massive
objects distort the structure of nearby space and time, and in which extreme masses produce extreme distortions. One of the most startling predictions of this theory is the existence of objects so radical in their gravitational warping of nearby space and time that they
are black holes, spherical or nearly spherical surfaces from which not even light can
escape. A number of black holes have been discovered, including an enormous one at the
center of our galaxy. You might want to avoid them.
Check Your Understanding #6: Rip-van-Twinkle
You awaken aboard your small spacecraft only to discover that you have been asleep for almost 20
years and the crew has vanished. The windows are closed, and you have no idea where your spacecraft is located or what it is doing. You realize that you feel pulled toward the floor of the spacecraft.
Are you experiencing weight or a feeling of acceleration?
Answer: Trick question! You can’t possibly determine the answer!
Why: The central principle of general relativity is that no experiment you make inside your spacecraft
can distinguish between the consequences of gravity and the consequences of acceleration. You’re
simply going to have to look out the window to figure it out.

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations

Epilogue for Chapter 4
This chapter has discussed the physical concepts behind two types of machines. In Bicycles, we
investigated the concept of dynamic stability, where an object that falls over when stationary
becomes remarkably stable in motion. We also saw how the need for mechanical advantage
between the pedals and the wheels led to the development of the modern multispeed bicycle.
In Rockets and Space Travel, we studied the ways in which reaction forces propel
rockets forward. We found that a rocket’s ultimate speed is not limited by its exhaust velocity, allowing it to lift itself into orbit around Earth. We also learned that gravity weakens as
the distance between two gravitating objects increases, making it possible for a spaceship
to break free from Earth’s gravity and begin orbiting the sun. Finally, we took a brief look
at the exotic physics a spacecraft would encounter if it approached the speed of light or
passed through the extreme gravity near some celestial objects.

Explanation: High-Flying Balls
The top ball doesn’t bounce off the ground; it bounces off the bottom ball. The top ball
actually completes its bounce as the bottom ball is heading upward. After colliding, the two
balls push off one another in just the same way that a rocket pushes off its exhaust. The
balls exchange momentum and energy as they push against one another, and the small top
ball—which has less mass and accelerates much more easily than the bottom ball—ends up
with a large upward momentum and more than its fair share of energy. It flies upward as
though it were hit by a massive upward-moving bat. In fact, it has been hit by a massive
upward-moving ball, and it rebounds at high speed.
If the small ball’s mass were really negligible compared to that of the large ball and the
balls bounced without wasting any energy, then the small ball would rebound from the big ball
traveling three times as fast as when it arrived. Its kinetic energy would be nine times as great
as before, and it would rebound to nine times its original height. Of course, real balls aren’t
perfect, so the tennis ball won’t bounce quite so high. Still, the effect is pretty impressive.

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Bicycles Work: While a stationary bicycle tips over easily, a moving bicycle is remarkably stable. It remains upright with the help of two stabilizing effects of motion: one due to
gyroscopic precession and the other due to the shape and angle of the front fork. These
effects work together to steer the bicycle in the direction that it’s leaning. Whenever it tips,
it automatically drives under its center of gravity and returns to upright. Leaning is also an
essential part of turns. By leaning his body and/or the bicycle properly during a turn, the
bicyclist ensures that there is no overall torque on the bicycle and that it doesn’t tip over.
The rider powers the bicycle by pushing its pedals around in a circle. Since the rider can
provide the most pedaling power when the pedals are turning at a moderate rate and he is
pushing on them with moderate forces, a modern multispeed bicycle allows him to adjust the
relative rotation rates of the pedals and the wheels. By choosing the right gear, the bicycle
allows him to provide his peak power comfortably.
How Rockets Work: A rocket obtains its thrust by ejecting gas from an engine in its tail. The
rocket pushes on the gas, and the gas pushes back. This gas usually comes from burning
chemical fuels contained entirely inside the rocket itself and is released from the rocket’s
engine through a nozzle. A carefully designed nozzle permits the rocket to make efficient use
of the energy stored in the fuel by ensuring that gas leaves the rocket at the maximum possible speed. The rocket’s thrust is used to lift the rocket against the force of gravity and to
accelerate it upward. Once in space, with its engine inactive, the rocket will orbit Earth or
the sun, or it may travel off into interstellar space.

117

118

CHAPT ER 4 Mechanical Objects

1. Law of universal gravitation: Every object in the universe attracts every other object in the universe with a force equal to the
gravitational constant times the product of the two masses, divided by the square of the distance separating the two objects, or

force =

gravitational constant · mass1 · mass2
(distance between masses)

2

5. Relativistic momentum: An object’s relativistic-momentum

is equal to its mass times its velocity times the relativistic
factor, or
relativistic momentum =

. (4.2.2)

2. Kepler’s first law: All planets move in elliptical orbits, with

the sun at one focus of the ellipse.
3. Kepler’s second law: A line stretching from the sun to a

planet sweeps out equal areas in equal times.
4. Kepler’s third law: The square of a planet’s orbital period
is proportional to the cube of that planet’s mean distance from
the sun.

mass · velocity
√1 − speed2/light speed2

. (4.2.3)

6. Relativistic energy: An object’s relativistic energy is equal to
its mass times the square of the speed of light times the relativistic factor, or

relativistic energy =

mass · light speed2
√1 − velocity2/light speed2

.

(4.2.4)

5

Fluids

o far all the everyday objects we’ve examined have been solids. However, since gases and
liquids are also important parts of the world around us—as the air we breathe, the water we
swim in, and even the blood we pump through our veins—we now turn to objects that, unlike
solids, don’t have well-defined shapes. These objects are called fluids, and the study of fluid behavior and motion is a broad field, extending across the sciences and engineering. Fluid dynamics,
often called hydrodynamics, is as important to an oil-well engineer as to an animal physiologist or
a stellar astrophysicist. The tools used to analyze fluids are somewhat more complicated than for
solids because fluids themselves are more complicated—it’s hard to exert a force directly on them,
and even if we could, they usually don’t move as a single rigid object. In this chapter, we’ll look at
some of the concepts and tools needed to understand their complex behaviors.

S
 

ACTIVE LEARNING
EXPERIMENTS

A Cartesian Diver
object that’s more dense than the surrounding fluid sinks,
while one that’s less dense than that fluid floats.
To see the importance of density in determining
whether an object sinks or floats, you can construct a simple toy called a Cartesian diver. This once-popular parlor
gadget consists of a small air-filled vial floating in a
sealed container of water. Normally, the air bubble inside

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

One of these concepts is buoyancy: an object immersed in
a fluid experiences an upward force from that fluid. This
buoyant force is what lifts a helium balloon into the sky
and suspends a boat on the surface of water. How the object
responds to buoyancy depends on the relative densities of
the object and the fluid surrounding it, where density is the
ratio of mass to volume. As we’ll see in this chapter, an

119

120

CHAPT ER 5 Fluids

the vial keeps it floating at the surface of the water, but
whenever you squeeze the container, the vial sinks.
To make a Cartesian diver, you’ll need only a plastic
soda bottle and a small vial that’s open at one end. The
vial can be made of almost anything—plastic, metal, or
glass—as long as it’s dense enough to sink in water. Fill
the plastic soda bottle with water and float the vial in it
upside down; air trapped inside the vial should keep the
vial afloat. Now slowly reduce the size of the air bubble
inside the vial until the vial barely floats. You can make
this adjustment by tipping the vial to let some of its air
escape or by removing it from the bottle and pouring
water into it. Once you have the vial floating only a few
millimeters out of the water at the top of the soda bottle,
cap the bottle and prepare to test your diver.

Before you squeeze the soda bottle, think about how
squeezing it will affect the air bubble. Now squeeze the
bottle gently and watch the air bubble. How does the bubble’s size depend on how hard you squeeze the bottle?
Why should the two be related? Squeeze the bottle hard
enough that the vial sinks. Why is there a relationship
between the size of the air bubble and the diver’s height in
the water?
As you release the pressure on the bottle, the diver
will float back up to the surface. Why does the sunken
diver suddenly become buoyant again? By carefully
squeezing the bottle, you can even make the diver hover
in the middle of the bottle. Try making the diver hover
while your eyes are closed. Why is hovering so difficult to
sustain? Why must you watch the diver to make it hover?

Chapter Itinerary
We’ll return to the diver at the end of the chapter. First, we
examine two things from the world around us: (1) balloons and
(2) water distribution. In Balloons, we explore how the concepts
of pressure and buoyancy help explain how Earth’s atmosphere
keeps hot-air and helium balloons from falling to the ground. In
Water Distribution, we see both how pressure propels water
through plumbing and the ways in which water can contain
energy. For a more complete preview of this chapter, jump
ahead to the Chapter Summary and Important Laws and
Equations at the end of the chapter.

SECTION 5.1

The issues we’ll be looking at crop up frequently in our
everyday experiences. Pressure plays an important role in aerosol cans, steam engines, firecrackers, and even the weather;
buoyancy supports ships on water and keeps oil above vinegar
in a bottle of salad dressing. Just as important, these concepts
lay the groundwork for Chapter 6, where we’ll examine objects
in which motion affects the behavior of fluids.

Balloons
Because gravity gives every object near Earth’s surface a weight
proportional to its mass, objects fall when you drop them. Why
then does a helium-filled balloon—which, after all, is just
another object with a mass and a weight—sail upward into the
sky when you let go of it? Does the balloon have a negative
mass and a negative weight, or are we forgetting something?
We’re forgetting air—specifically, the layer of air that sits
atop Earth’s surface and is held in place by gravity. Since this
air is difficult to see and moves out of our way so easily, we
often forget that it’s there. But air sometimes makes itself
noticeable. When you ride a bicycle, you feel its forces; when
you blow up a beach ball, you see that it takes up space. And
when you release a helium balloon, air lifts the balloon upward.
Panel
Webbing

Wind guard
Basket support cable

Basket

Burner

Questions to Think About: Since most objects fall to the
ground through the atmosphere, why doesn’t the atmosphere
itself fall downward? Why is the air “thinner” in the mountains
than at sea level? If you suck all the air out of a plastic bag,
what squeezes the bag into a thin sheet? Why does blowing air
into the bag make it inflate? What happens to the bag’s total
mass when you fill it with air? with hot air? with helium? If you
took a sturdy helium balloon to the moon, where there is no
air, and then released it, which way would it move?

Balloons

Experiments to Do: Pull on the string of a helium balloon to
get a feel for how it behaves. If it pulls upward on your fingers,
does that mean its weight (and mass) is negative? How would
an object with a negative mass respond to a force? Shake the
balloon and convince yourself that the balloon’s mass is positive. Do you think there are any objects with negative masses?
Since the balloon’s mass and weight are both positive,
gravity must be pulling the balloon downward. But how can the
stationary balloon pull upward on your finger? What other

121

forces might be pushing the balloon upward? You can enhance
these upward forces by partially submerging the balloon in a
container of water. Where else do similar upward forces appear
in everyday life?
Take the helium balloon for a ride in a car. Which way
does the balloon move when you start suddenly? when you stop
suddenly? Again, it seems as though the balloon’s mass is negative. What is pushing on the balloon to make it move in this
counterintuitive way?

Air and Air Pressure
Hot-air and helium balloons don’t really defy gravity. In fact, they’re not even close to
weightless. But even though these balloons may weigh hundreds of pounds, something
supports their weight and holds them aloft—the surrounding air. To understand balloons,
we must start by understanding air.
Like the objects we’ve already studied, air has weight and mass. If you don’t believe
me, compare two identical scuba tanks, one freshly filled with air and the other empty. If
you weigh each tank carefully, you’ll find that the full tank is heavier than the empty tank—
an indication that air has weight. If you shake each tank, you’ll find that the full tank is
harder to accelerate than the empty tank—an indication that air has mass. So air really is
like any other object … or almost.
What makes air different from our previous objects is that air has no fixed shape or
size. You can mold 1 kg of air into any form you like, and it can occupy a wide range of
volumes. Air is compressible, that is, you can squeeze a certain mass of it into almost any
space. For example, 1 kg of air could fill a single scuba tank or a whole basketball arena.
This flexibility of size and shape originates in the microscopic nature of air. Air is a
gas, a substance consisting of tiny, individual particles that travel around independently.
These individual particles are atoms and molecules. An atom is the smallest portion of an
element that retains all the chemical characteristics of that element; a molecule, an assembly of two or more atoms, is the smallest portion of a chemical compound that retains all
the characteristics of that compound. A molecule’s atoms are held together by chemical
bonds, linkages formed by electromagnetic forces between the atoms.
Air particles are extremely small, less than 1 millionth of a millimeter in diameter.
Most are nitrogen and oxygen molecules, but others include carbon dioxide, water, methane, and hydrogen molecules, and also argon, neon, helium, krypton, and xenon atoms.
Those particular atoms, which don’t make strong chemical bonds and rarely form molecules, are called inert gases because of their chemical inactivity.
Like tiny marbles, these air particles have sizes, masses, and weights. But, while marbles quickly settle to the ground when you spill them from a bag, air particles don’t seem
to fall at all. Why don’t they pile up on Earth’s surface?
The answer has to do with air’s thermal energy, the portion of air’s internal energy
that’s associated with temperature. Air’s individual particles have such minuscule masses
that, even at room temperature, they exhibit frenetic thermal motion (Fig. 5.1.1a); thermal
energy keeps them moving, spinning, and ricocheting off one another at bullet-like speeds
of roughly 500 m/s (1100 mph). Their frequent collisions prevent them from making much
progress in any particular direction and, between collisions, they travel in nearly straightline paths because gravity doesn’t have time to make them fall very far. This vigorous
thermal motion spreads the air particles apart, so they don’t accumulate on the ground. Real
marbles, however, are too massive to exhibit noticeable thermal motion and fall to the
ground in heaps.
Let’s ignore gravity for the moment and consider what happens in a truck tire containing 1 kg of room-temperature air. The air particles whiz around inside the tire, and each

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 5.1.1 (a) As air
particles bounce off
surfaces in this box, they
exert pressure on those
surfaces. (b) Packing the
air particles more densely
increases the number
of particles that hit the
surfaces each second and
thus increases the air’s
pressure. (c) Increasing
the air’s temperature
increases the speed of the
air particles (show by the
arrows) so that they hit the
box’s surfaces harder and
more frequently, and thus
increases the air’s pressure.

122

CHAPT ER 5 Fluids

time a particle bounces off a wall of the tire, it exerts a force on that wall. Although the
individual forces are tiny, the number of particles is not, and together they produce a large
average force. The size of this total force depends on the wall’s surface area; the larger its
surface area, the more average force it experiences. To characterize the air, however, we
don’t really need to know the wall’s surface area; instead, we can refer to the average force
the air exerts on each unit of surface area, a quantity called pressure:
pressure =

force
.
surface area

Pressure is measured in units of force per area. Since the SI unit of surface area is the
meter2 (abbreviated m2 and often referred to as the square meter), the SI unit of pressure is
the newton per meter2. This unit is also called the pascal (abbreviated Pa), after French
mathematician and physicist Blaise Pascal. One pascal is a small pressure; the air around
you has a pressure of about 100,000 Pa (2100 lbf/ft2 or 15 lbf/inch2), so it exerts a force of
about 100,000 N on a 1-m2 surface. Since 100,000 N (22,500 lbf) is about the weight of a
city bus, air pressure can exert enormous forces on large surfaces.
Besides pushing on the walls of the tire, air also pushes on any object immersed in it.
Its particles bounce off the object’s surfaces, pushing them inward. As long as the object
can withstand these compressive forces, the air won’t greatly affect it since the uniform air
pressure ensures that the forces on all sides of the object cancel one another perfectly. A
sheet of paper, for example, will experience zero net force because the forces exerted on its
two sides will sum to zero.
Air particles also bounce off one another, so that air pressure exerts forces on air, too.
A cube of air inserted into the tire experiences all of the inward forces that a cube of metal
would experience. The air around the cube pushes inward on it, and the cube pushes outward on the air around it. Since the net force on the cube of air is zero, the cube doesn’t
accelerate.

Check Your Understanding #1: Getting a Grip on Suction
After you push a suction cup against a smooth wall, the elastic cup bends back and a small, empty
space is created between the cup and the wall. What keeps the suction cup against the wall?
Answer: Air pressure keeps it against the wall.
Why: Because the space between the suction cup and the wall is empty, the pressure there is zero.
Pressure of the surrounding air exerts large inward forces on the outsides of both the cup and the
wall, squeezing them together. As long as there is no air between them to push outward, the cup and
wall remain tightly attached. Once air leaks into the suction cup, it’s easily detached from the wall.

Pressure, Density, and Temperature
Since air pressure is produced by bouncing air particles, it depends on how often, and how
hard, those particles hit a particular region of surface. The more frequent or harder the
impacts, the greater is the air pressure.
To increase the rate at which air particles hit a surface, we can pack them more tightly.
Suppose we use an air pump to add another 1 kg of room-temperature air to the tire. Since that
truck tire is sturdy and stiff, its volume doesn’t change significantly as the number of air molecules inside it doubles. However, doubling the number of air particles in the same volume
doubles the rate at which they hit each surface and therefore doubles the pressure (Fig. 5.1.1b).
Air’s pressure is thus proportional to its density, that is, its mass per unit of volume:
density =

mass
.
volume

Balloons

Since the SI unit of volume is the meter3 (abbreviated m3 and often referred to as the cubic
meter), the SI unit of density is the kilogram per meter3 (abbreviated kg/m3). The air
around you has a density of about 1.25 kg/m3 (0.078 lbm/ft3). Water, in contrast, has a
much greater density of about 1000 kg/m3 (62.4 lbm/ft3).
We can also increase the rate at which air particles hit a surface by speeding them up
(Fig. 5.1.1c). The hotter the air, the more thermal energy it contains and the faster its particles move. Thermal energy is a combination of internal kinetic energy in the particles’
random thermal motion and internal potential energy stored as part of that random thermal motion. Since air particles are essentially independent, except during collisions, nearly
all of air’s thermal energy is internal kinetic energy.
If we double the internal kinetic energy of the calm air in the tire, we double the average kinetic energy of each particle. Because a particle’s kinetic energy is proportional to
the square of its speed, doubling its kinetic energy increases its speed by a factor of √2.
As a result, each particle hits the surface √2 times as often and exerts √2 times as much
average force when it hits. With each particle exerting √2 ? √2, or two times as much
average force, the pressure doubles. Calm air’s pressure is thus proportional to the average
kinetic energy of its particles. Even when air is moving as wind and has noninternal kinetic
energy in its overall motion, its pressure is proportional to the average internal kinetic
energy of its particles.
Temperature measures this average internal kinetic energy per particle; the hotter the
air, the larger is the average internal kinetic energy per particle and the greater the air’s
pressure. That’s why the tire’s air pressure increases on hot days and when it heats up during highway driving.
The most convenient scales for relating air’s temperature to air’s pressure aren’t
the common Celsius (°C) and Fahrenheit (°F) scales; instead, they are special absolute temperature scales, in which the zero of the temperature scale is absolute zero,
the temperature at which an object contains zero thermal energy. At absolute zero
(−273.15 °C or −459.67 °F), air contains no internal kinetic energy at all and has no
pressure. When you use an absolute temperature scale, air’s pressure is proportional to
its temperature.
The SI scale of absolute temperature is the Kelvin scale (K). The Kelvin scale is
identical to the Celsius scale, except that it’s shifted so that 0 K is equal to −273.15 °C.
In addition to associating the zero of temperature with the zero of internal kinetic energy,
the Kelvin scale avoids the need for negative temperatures. Room temperature is about
293 K.
Since air pressure is proportional to both the air’s density and its absolute temperature,
we can express the relationship among these quantities in the following way:
pressure ∝ density · absolute temperature.

(5.1.1)

This relationship is useful because it allows us to predict what will happen if we change
the temperature or density of a specific gas, such as air. The relationship does have its
limitations; in particular, it doesn’t work if we compare the pressures of two different
gases, such as air and helium, which differ in their chemical compositions. To make such
a comparison, we’ll need to improve on Eq. 5.1.1. We’ll do that later when we examine
helium balloons.
Even in describing a specific gas, Eq. 5.1.1 has other shortcomings. The main problem
is that real gas particles aren’t completely independent of one another. If the temperature
drops too low, the particles begin to stick together to form a liquid and Eq. 5.1.1 becomes
invalid. Despite its limitations, however, this simple relationship between pressure, density,
and temperature will prove useful in understanding how hot-air balloons float. It will help
us understand the basic structure of Earth’s atmosphere, the origins of the upward force that
keeps a hot-air balloon aloft, and the reason why hot air rises.

123

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 5.1.1 (repeated)
(a) As air particles bounce
off surfaces in this box,
they exert pressure on
those surfaces. (b) Packing
the air particles more
densely increases the
number of particles that hit
the surfaces each second
and thus increases the air’s
pressure. (c) Increasing
the air’s temperature
increases the speed of the
air particles (show by the
arrows) so that they hit the
box’s surfaces harder and
more frequently, and thus
increases the air’s pressure.

124

CHAPT ER 5 Fluids

English Unit

SI → English

meter2 (m2)

foot2 (ft2)

1 m2 = 10.764 ft2

1 ft2 = 0.092903 m2

3

3

1 m = 35.315 ft

1 ft3 = 0.028317 m3

1 Pa = 0.020885 lbf/ft2

1 lbf/ft2 = 47.880 Pa

1 kg/m = 0.062428
lbm/ft3

1 lbm/ft3 = 16.018
kg/m3

Quantity

SI Unit

Area

3

Volume

meter (m )

Pressure

pascal (Pa)

Density

3

3

foot (ft )
pound-force per foot2 (lbf/ft2)
3

kilogram per meter
(kg/m3)

3

pound-mass per foot
(lbm/ft3)†

English → SI

3

3

Check Your Understanding #2: Snacks That Go Pop in the Night
If you remove a partially filled container of food from the refrigerator and allow it to warm to room
temperature, the lid will often bow outward and may even pop off. What has happened?
Answer: The pressure of the air trapped in the container increases as its temperature increases,
causing the lid to bulge outward.
Why: Whenever a trapped quantity of gas changes temperature, it also changes volume or pressure or both. In this case, warming the air trapped in the container causes its pressure to increase.
The unbalanced pressures inside and outside the container cause the lid to bow outward or even
to pop off.

Earth’s Atmosphere
Most of the mass of Earth’s atmosphere is contained in a layer less than 6 km (4 miles)
thick. Since Earth is 12,700 km (7,900 miles) in diameter, this layer is relatively thin—so
thin that, if Earth were the size of a basketball, it would be no thicker than a sheet of paper.
The atmosphere stays on Earth’s surface because of gravity. Every air particle, as
we’ve seen, has a weight. Just as a marble thrown upward eventually falls back to the
ground, so the particles of air keep returning toward Earth’s surface. Although the particles
are moving too fast for gravity to affect their motions significantly over the short term,
gravity works slowly to keep them relatively near Earth’s surface. An air particle, like a
rapidly moving marble, may appear to travel in a straight line at first, but it will arc over and
begin to fall downward eventually. Only the lightest and fastest moving particles in the
atmosphere—hydrogen molecules and helium atoms—occasionally manage to escape
from Earth’s gravity and drift off into interplanetary space.
While gravity pulls the atmosphere downward, air pressure pushes the atmosphere
upward (Fig. 5.1.2a). As the air particles try to fall to Earth’s surface, their density increases
and so does their pressure. It’s this air pressure that supports the atmosphere and prevents
it from collapsing into a thin pile on the ground.
To understand how gravity and air pressure structure the atmosphere, picture a 1-m2
column of the atmosphere as though it were a tall stack of 1-kg air blocks (Fig. 5.1.2b).
These blocks support one another with air pressure to form a stack of about 10,000 blocks.
The bottom block must support the weight of all the blocks above it and is tightly compressed, with a height of about 0.8 m, a density of about 1.25 kg/m3, and a pressure of about
100,000 Pa. A block farther up in the stack has less weight to support and is less tightly
compressed. The higher in the stack you look, the lower the density of the air and the less
the air pressure.
The atmosphere has essentially the same structure as this stack of blocks. The air near
the ground supports the weight of several kilometers of air above it, giving it a density
of about 1.25 kg/m3 and a pressure of about 100,000 Pa. At higher altitudes, however, the
air’s density and pressure are reduced, since there is less atmosphere overhead and the
air doesn’t have to support as much weight. High-altitude air is thus “thinner” than lowaltitude air.

Balloons

125

(a)
(b)
60

Altitude (km)

40

1000 kg

30
20
10
0

1000 kg

Density gradient
Pressure gradient

50

1000 kg

1m

Fig. 5.1.2 (a) A model of Earth’s atmosphere, showing that a competition between gravity and thermal energy gives rise to the
structure of Earth’s atmosphere, notably its increasing pressure, density, and temperature with decreasing altitude. (b) The air in a
1-m2 column of atmosphere has a mass of about 10,000 kg. The bottom 1000 kg is the most tightly compressed because it supports
the most weight above it. At higher altitudes, the air is less tightly compressed because it has less weight above it.

Since the atmosphere’s density and pressure increase gradually with distance in the
downward direction, the atmosphere has a downward density gradient and a downward
pressure gradient. As we’ll see shortly, that pressure gradient is what allows a balloon to
float. Whatever the altitude, however, the pressure of the surrounding air is always referred
to as atmospheric pressure. The atmosphere also has a downward temperature gradient
that makes ballooning chilly at high altitudes; you might want to bring coffee or hot chocolate. We’ll return to that temperature gradient in Section 7.3.
Check Your Understanding #3: Mountain Travel Is a Pain in the Ears
As you drive up and down in the mountains, you may feel a popping in your ears as air moves to
equalize the pressures inside and outside your eardrum. What causes these pressure changes?
Answer: As you change altitude, the atmospheric pressure changes.
Why: The air inside your ears is trapped, so its temperature, density, and pressure are normally
constant. As your altitude changes, the pressure outside your ear changes and your eardrum experiences a net force. It bows inward or outward, muting the sounds you hear and causing some discomfort. The pressure imbalance is relieved during swallowing, when air can flow into or out of your
middle ear.

The Lifting Force on a Balloon: Buoyancy
So far we’ve examined air, air pressure, and the atmosphere. While it may seem that we’ve
avoided dealing with balloons, these topics really are involved in keeping hot-air and
helium balloons aloft. As we’ve seen, the air in Earth’s atmosphere is a fluid, a shapeless
substance with mass and weight. This air has a pressure and exerts forces on the surfaces it
touches; that pressure is greatest near the ground and decreases with increasing altitude.
Air pressure and its variation with altitude allow air to lift hot-air and helium balloons
through an effect known as buoyancy.
Buoyancy was first described more than 2000 years ago by the Greek mathematician
Archimedes (287–212 bc). Archimedes realized that an object partially or wholly immersed
in a fluid is acted on by an upward buoyant force equal to the weight of the fluid it

126

CHAPT ER 5 Fluids

displaces. Archimedes’ principle is actually very general and applies to objects floating or
submerged in any fluid, including air, water, or oil. The buoyant force originates in the
forces that a fluid exerts on the surfaces of an object. We’ve seen that such forces can be
quite large but tend to cancel one another. How then can pressure create a nonzero total
force on an object, and why should that force be in the upward direction?

ARCHIMEDES’ PRINCIPLE
An object partially or wholly immersed in a fluid is acted on by an upward buoyant
force equal to the weight of the fluid it displaces.

Without gravity, the forces would cancel each other perfectly because the pressure of
a stationary fluid would be uniform throughout. But gravity causes a stationary fluid’s pressure to increase with distance in the downward direction; the fluid has a downward pressure
gradient. When nothing is moving, the air pressure beneath an object is always greater than
the air pressure above it. Thus air pushes upward on the object’s bottom more strongly than
it pushes downward on the object’s top, and the object consequently experiences an upward
overall force from the air—a buoyant force.
How large is the buoyant force on this object? It’s equal in magnitude to the weight of
the fluid that the object displaces. To understand this remarkable result, imagine replacing
the object with a similarly shaped portion of the fluid itself (Fig. 5.1.3a). Since the buoyant
force is exerted by the surrounding fluid, not the object, it doesn’t depend on the object’s
composition. A balloon filled with helium will experience the same buoyant force as a
similar balloon filled with water or lead or even air. So replacing the object with a similarly
shaped portion of fluid will leave the buoyant force on it unchanged.
However, a portion of fluid suspended in more of the same fluid doesn’t accelerate
anywhere; it just sits there, so the net force on it is clearly zero. It has a downward weight,
but that weight must be canceled by some upward force that can come only from the surrounding fluid. This upward force is the buoyant force, and it’s always equal in magnitude
to the weight of the object-shaped portion of fluid displaced by the object.
This buoyant principle explains why some objects float while others sink. An object
placed in a fluid experiences two forces: its downward weight and an upward buoyant
force. If its weight is more than the buoyant force, it will accelerate downward (Fig. 5.1.3b);
if its weight is less than the buoyant force, it will accelerate upward (Fig. 5.1.3c). If the
two forces are equal, it won’t accelerate at all and will maintain a constant velocity. If the
balloon in this latter case starts motionless, it will remain motionless and will hover at a
constant velocity of zero.
Buoyant
force
(a)
Fig. 5.1.3 (a) A portion
of air immersed in that
same air experiences an
upward buoyant force equal
to its weight and doesn’t
accelerate. (b) An object
that is heavier than the air
it displaces sinks, while
(c) another object that
is lighter than the air it
displaces floats.

Buoyant
force
(b)

Buoyant
force
(c)

Weight

Weight
Weight

Balloons

Whether an object will float in a fluid can also be viewed in terms of density. An object
that has an average density greater than that of the surrounding fluid sinks, while one that
has a lesser average density floats. A water-filled balloon, for example, will sink in air
because water and rubber are denser than air. If you double the volume of the balloon, you
double both its weight and the buoyant force on it, so it still sinks. The total volume of an
object is less important than how its density compares to that of the surrounding fluid.
Check Your Understanding #4: Only Eyes above the Surface
Crocodiles sometimes swallow rocks, partly to aid their digestion but also to lower their heights in the
water. To float with only its eyes above the water’s surface, approximately what average density does
a crocodile need?
Answer: It needs an average density just slightly less than the density of water.
Why: The crocodile should weigh a little less than the water it displaces when fully immersed. That
way, it will experience a net upward force and will rise to the water’s surface. Once its eyes are above
the surface and not displacing water, the net force on the crocodile will drop to zero and it will hover.
Since the crocodile’s mass is slightly less than an equal volum of water, its average density is slightly
less than that of water.

Check Your Figures #1: Why People Don’t Float in Air
If a person displaces 0.08 m3 (2.8 ft3) of air, what is the buoyant force he experiences?
Answer: It is about 1 N (0.22 lbf).
Why: Air exerts a buoyant force on a person equal to the weight of the air he displaces. The density
of air near sea level is about 1.25 kg/m3, so 0.08 m3 of air has a mass of about 0.1 kg (1.25 kg/m3
times 0.08 m3) and a weight of about 1 N. So the upward buoyant force on him is about 1 N. This
buoyant force due to the air is real and reduces the weight you read when you stand on a scale by
about 0.125%.

Hot-Air Balloons
Since air is very light, with a density of only 1.25 kg/m3 (0.078 lbm/ft3), few objects float
in it. One of these rare objects is a balloon with a vacuum inside it. Assuming that the balloon has a very thin outer shell or envelope, it will weigh almost nothing and have an average density near zero. Because its negligible weight is less than the upward buoyant force
it experiences, the empty balloon will float upward nicely.
Unfortunately, this empty balloon won’t last long. Because it’s surrounded by atmosphericpressure air, each square meter of its envelope will experience an inward force of 100,000 N.
With nothing inside the balloon to support its envelope against this crushing force, it will
smash flat. A thick, rigid envelope might be able to withstand the pressure of the surrounding
air, but then the balloon’s average density would be large and it would sink. So an empty
balloon won’t work.
What will work is a balloon filled with something that exerts an outward pressure on
the envelope equal to the inward pressure of the surrounding air. Then each portion of the
envelope will experience zero net force and the balloon will not be crushed. We could fill
the balloon with outside air, but that would make its average density too high. Instead, we
need a gas that has the same pressure as the surrounding air but a lower density.
One gas that has a lower density at atmospheric pressure is hot air. Filling our balloon
with hot air takes fewer particles than filling it with cold air, since each hot-air particle is
moving faster and contributes more to the overall pressure than does a cold-air particle. A
hot-air balloon contains fewer particles, has less mass, and weighs less than it would if it
contained cold air (Fig. 5.1.4). Now we have a practical balloon with an average density
less than that of the surrounding air. The buoyant force it experiences is larger than its
weight, and up it goes.

127

128

CHAPT ER 5 Fluids

Fig. 5.1.4 A cube of
hot air contains fewer air
particles than an equivalent
cube of cold air at the
same pressure. Since
it weighs less than the
cold air it displaces, the
hot air inside the balloon
experiences an upward
buoyant force that is
greater than its downward
weight.

© Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Fig. 5.1.5 The bottom of
a hot-air balloon is open so
that heated air can flow in
and cold air can flow out.
The heated air displaces
more than its weight in
cold air and makes the
balloon lighter.

Cold
air

Hot
air

Because the air pressure inside a hot-air balloon is the same as the air pressure outside
the balloon, the air has no tendency to move in or out (an issue we will cover in the next
section), and the balloon doesn’t need to be sealed (Fig. 5.1.5). A large propane burner,
located beneath the balloon’s open end, heats the air that fills the envelope. The heated air
expands to fill more volume at the same pressure and some of it flows out the balloon’s
open bottom.
The hotter the air in the envelope, the lower its density and the less the balloon
weighs. The balloon’s pilot controls the flame so that the balloon’s weight is very nearly
equal to the buoyant force on the balloon. If the pilot raises the air’s temperature, particles leave the envelope, the balloon’s weight decreases, and the balloon rises. If the pilot
allows the air to cool, particles enter the envelope, the balloon’s weight increases, and the
balloon descends.
Even if the pilot heats the air until it is very hot, the balloon won’t rise upward forever.
As the balloon ascends, the air becomes thinner and the pressure decreases both inside and
outside the envelope. Although the balloon’s weight decreases as the air thins out, the buoyant force on it decreases even more rapidly and it becomes less effective at lifting its cargo.
When the air becomes too thin to lift the balloon any higher, the balloon reaches a flight
ceiling above which it can’t rise. For each hot-air temperature, then, there is a cruising
altitude at which the balloon will hover. When the balloon reaches that altitude, it’s in a
stable equilibrium. If the balloon shifts downward for some reason, the net force on it will
be upward; if it shifts upward, the net force on it will be downward.
Because a balloon’s fabric envelope ages quickly at high temperatures, the balloon’s
air mustn’t be heated above about 120 °C (248 °F). Lower air temperatures prolong the life
of the envelope, and a pilot usually tries to reduce the air temperature required by reducing
the weight of the balloon’s cargo. If you want to bring yet another friend on board, you
might have to leave the champagne behind.

Check Your Understanding #5: Ballooning Weather
Can a hot-air balloon lift more on a hot day or a cold day?
Answer: It can lift more on a cold day.
Why: On a cold day, the outside air is relatively dense and the buoyant force on a balloon is larger
than it would be on a hot day. The hot air in the balloon will cool off more quickly on a cold day, but
the balloon will be able to carry a heavier load. Airplanes also fly better on cold days.

Balloons

Helium Balloons
Although the particles in hot and cold air are similar, there are fewer of them in each cubic
meter of hot air than in each cubic meter of cold air. We call the number of particles per unit
of volume the particle density,
particle density =

particles
,
volume

and hot air has a smaller particle density than cold air (Fig. 5.1.4). Because they contain
similar particles, hot air also has a smaller density than cold air and is lifted upward by the
buoyant force.
There’s another way to make one gas float in another: use a gas consisting of very light
particles. Helium atoms, for example, are much lighter than air particles. When they have
equal pressures and temperatures, helium gas and air also have equal particle densities.
Since each helium atom weighs 14% as much as the average air particle, 1 m3 of helium
weighs only 14% as much as 1 m3 of air. Thus a helium-filled balloon has only a fraction
of the weight of the air it displaces, and the buoyant force carries it upward easily.
Why should air and helium have the same particle densities whenever their pressures
and temperatures are equal? Because a gas particle’s contribution to the pressure doesn’t
depend on its mass (or weight). At a particular temperature, each particle in a gas has the
same average internal kinetic energy in its translational motion, regardless of its mass.
Although a helium atom is much less massive than a typical air particle, the average helium
atom moves much faster and bounces more often. As a result, lighter but faster-moving
helium atoms are just as effective at creating pressure as heavier but slower-moving air
particles.
Thus, if you allow the helium atoms inside a balloon to spread out until the pressures
and temperatures inside and outside the balloon are equal, the particle densities inside and
outside the balloon will also be equal (Fig. 5.1.6). Since the helium atoms inside the
balloon are lighter than the air particles outside it, the balloon weighs less than the air it
displaces, and it will be lifted upward by the buoyant force.

Air

Helium

Fig. 5.1.6 A cube of helium contains the same number of particles as a cube of air at the same
pressure and temperature. Since each helium atom weighs much less than the average air particle,
the helium inside the balloon experiences an upward buoyant force that is greater than its downward
weight.

129

130

CHAPT ER 5 Fluids

The pressure of a gas is proportional to the product of its particle density and its
absolute temperature, as the following formula indicates:
pressure ∝ particle density · absolute temperature.

(5.1.2)

This proportionality holds regardless of the gas’s chemical composition. Our previous
proportionality, Eq. 5.1.1, worked only as long as the gas’s composition didn’t change, so
density and particle density remained proportional to one another. Now, however, we have
a relationship with a wider applicability.
Equation 5.1.2, with an associated constant of proportionality, is called the ideal gas
law. This law relates pressure, particle density, and absolute temperature for a gas in which
the particles are perfectly independent. It’s also fairly accurate for real gases in which the
particles do interact somewhat. The constant of proportionality is the Boltzmann constant,
with a measured value of 1.381 × 10−23 Pa · m3/(particle · K). Using the Boltzmann constant,
the ideal gas law can be written as a word equation:
pressure = Boltzmann constant · particle density · absolute temperature, (5.1.3)
in symbols:
p = k · ρparticle · T,
and in everyday language:
Helium gas is obtained
as a by-product of natural
gas production from
underground reservoirs in
the United States, where it
formed through the
gradual radioactive decay
of uranium and other
unstable elements. While
some of this gas is saved
for industrial and
commercial use, much is
simply released into the
atmosphere. The only
other source of helium is
the atmosphere, where
helium is present at a level
of 5 parts per million.
Once the underground
stores are consumed,
helium will become a
relatively rare and
expensive gas.
1

2 Even helium-filled
airships were easily
destroyed by bad weather.
The Shenandoah, one of
two U.S. airships based on
German designs, was
destroyed by air turbulence on September 3,
1925, near Ava, Ohio.
Crowds from a local fair
immediately poured over
the wreckage, collecting
souvenirs.

Don’t incinerate a spray can. A hot dense gas tends to burst its container.

THE IDEAL GAS LAW
The pressure of a gas is equal to the Boltzmann constant times the particle density
times the absolute temperature.

Helium isn’t the only “lighter-than-air” gas. Hydrogen gas, which is half as dense as
helium, is also used to make balloons float. However, don’t expect hydrogen to lift twice as
much weight as helium. A balloon’s lifting capacity is the difference between the upward
buoyant force it experiences and its downward weight. Although the gas in a hydrogen balloon weighs half that in a similar helium balloon, the balloons experience the same buoyant
force. Thus the hydrogen balloon’s lifting capacity is only slightly more than that of the
helium balloon. Hydrogen’s main advantage is that it’s cheap and plentiful, while helium is
scarce (see 1 ). Hydrogen is also dangerously flammable, so it’s avoided in situations where
safety is important. However, even helium-filled airships can have problems (see 2 ).
Check Your Understanding #6: What Not to Put in a Balloon
A carbon dioxide molecule is heavier than an average air particle. If you pour carbon dioxide gas from
a cup, which way does it flow in air, up or down?
Answer: It flows down.
Why: Carbon dioxide, found in carbonated beverages, dry ice, and fire extinguishers, is heavier than
air because its molecules are heavier than air particles. The carbon dioxide you pour from the cup
has the same pressure and temperature as the air around it and thus the same particle density.
However, each carbon dioxide molecule weighs more, so the carbon dioxide is the denser gas (it has
a higher mass density) and flows down in air. This tendency to flow along the floor makes carbon
dioxide very good at extinguishing low-lying flames by depriving them of oxygen.

Water Distribution

131

Check Your Figures #2: Popped Out of the Refrigerator
When you take an air-filled plastic container out of the refrigerator, it warms from 2 °C to 25 °C. How
much does the pressure of the air inside it change?
Answer: It increases by 8.4%.
Why: To use Eq. 5.1.3 to determine the pressure change, we need temperatures measured on an
absolute scale, such as the Kelvin scale. Since 0 °C is about 273 K, 2 °C is about 275 K and 25 °C
is about 298 K. We can write Eq. 5.1.3 twice, once for each temperature:
pressure298 K = Boltzmann constant · particle density · 298 K,
pressure275 K = Boltzmann constant · particle density · 275 K.
The particle density of the air in the container can’t change as it warms up because its volume is
fixed. Therefore we can divide the upper equation by the lower one and cancel out the Boltzmann
constant and particle density on the right-hand side, giving:
pressure298 K
298 K
=
pressure275 K
275 K
= 1.084.
The pressure in the container thus increases by a factor of almost 1.084, or about 8.4%. This elevated
pressure will cause the container to emit a pop sound when you open it.

Water Distribution

S E C TIO N 5 . 2

Water
tower

Questions to Think About: Why is the water pressure higher in
the basement than it is in the attic? Why does a deep water
well require a pump at the bottom? If a water tower is only a
storage device, why is it so tall? Why do skyscrapers have complicated plumbing systems that include reservoirs at various
levels in the building? What causes water to flow up through a
drinking straw to your mouth?

Water
tower

Pump
Reservoir

and turbulence, and we’ll let the water flow steadily most of
the time.

Meter

Meter

Pump
Meter

Pipe

Now that we’ve explored the behavior of objects in fluids, let’s
turn to the behavior of fluids in objects. In this section, as we
examine how plumbing distributes water, we’ll see that pressure, density, and weight are just as important in plumbing as
they are in ballooning. To keep things simple, we’ll focus on
the causes of water’s motion through plumbing and leave the
many complications of that motion itself for the next chapter.
For the rest of this section, we’ll ignore friction-like effects

Experiments to Do: To see the effects of pressure and weight
on water, try these simple experiments with a drinking straw.
First, suck water up the straw from a glass to your mouth. Are
you exerting an attractive force on the water, or is some other
force pushing it upward toward your mouth? With the straw
full of water, seal the top with your finger; keeping the seal
tight, remove the straw from the glass. What happens to the
water inside? What happens to the water when you release the
seal? Now blow into one end of a straw full of water while
sealing the far end with your finger. When you release the seal
on the far end, what happens to the water? What forces are
responsible for this effect?

Water Pressure
Water distribution systems require two things: plumbing and water pressure. Plumbing is
what delivers the water, and water pressure is what starts that water flowing. Water pressure
is important because, like everything else, water has mass and accelerates only when
pushed. If nothing pushed on the water when you opened a faucet, the water simply

132

CHAPT ER 5 Fluids

Fig. 5.2.1 (a) If the water in a horizontal pipe
is exposed to a uniform pressure, it will not
accelerate. (b, c) If the pressure along the pipe is
not uniform, however, the imbalance will create
a net force on each portion of the water and the
water will accelerate toward the side with the
lower pressure.

(a)
Pressure

Water

Pressure

(b)
Pressure

Acceleration Pressure

Pressure

Acceleration Pressure

(c)

wouldn’t budge. Since the pushes that send water through pipes come principally from
differences in water pressure, we need to look carefully at how this pressure is created and
controlled.
We begin our study of water distribution by ignoring gravity. As we’ve seen with the
atmosphere, gravity creates downward pressure gradients in stationary fluids—their pressures increase with depth and decrease with altitude. These downward pressure gradients
complicate plumbing in hilly cities and skyscrapers. However, if all our plumbing is in a
level region—for example, a single-story house in a very flat city—our job is much simpler.
With no significant changes in height, the pressure gradients due to gravity produce negligible effects. In fact, we can neglect gravity altogether.
In this simplified situation, water accelerates only in response to unbalanced pressures.
Just as unbalanced forces make a solid object accelerate, so too do unbalanced pressures
make a fluid accelerate. If the water pressure inside a pipe is uniform, then each portion of
water feels no net force and doesn’t accelerate; it either remains stationary or coasts at
constant velocity (Fig. 5.2.1a). If the pressure is out of balance, however, then each portion
of water experiences a net force and accelerates toward the region of lowest pressure
(Figs. 5.2.1b,c).
This acceleration doesn’t mean that the water will instantly begin moving toward the
lowest pressure. Because of its inertia, water changes velocity gradually; it speeds up,
slows down, or turns to the side, depending on where the lowest pressure is located. A
complicated arrangement of high and low pressures can steer water through an intricate
maze of pipes, and that is exactly how water reaches your home from the city pumping
station. Every change in its velocity during its trip through the plumbing is caused by a
pressure imbalance.
You can create a pressure imbalance in water simply by squeezing parts of it. The
pressure in a squeezed portion will rise and it will accelerate toward lower pressures elsewhere. Since this sort of pressure change isn’t caused by the water’s motion, it’s a static
variation in pressure. The water’s motion can also affect its pressure and such dynamic
variations in pressure can be complicated and fascinating. As we’ll see in the next chapter,
they contribute to such diverse effects as the spray of a garden hose nozzle, the lift on an
airplane’s wing, and the curve of a curve ball.
Check Your Understanding #1: Under Pressure in the Garden
With the water faucet open and the nozzle at the end of your garden hose shut tightly, the hose is full
of high-pressure water. Why doesn’t this water accelerate?
Answer: The water pressure (force on a unit of surface area) inside the hose is uniform throughout,
so the water experiences no net force and doesn’t accelerate.
Why: In the absence of gravity, fluids accelerate only when they experience pressure imbalances.
Since water throughout the hose is at the same pressure, there is no pressure imbalance and no
acceleration. When you open the nozzle, the pressure at that end of the hose drops and the water
accelerates toward it.

Water Distribution

Creating Water Pressure with Water Pumps
To start water flowing through the plumbing in a level house or city, you need a water
pump, a device that uses mechanical work to deliver pressurized water through a pipe. At
its most basic level, a water pump squeezes a portion of water to raise its local pressure so
that it accelerates toward regions of lower pressure. The pump continues to squeeze that
water as it flows out through the plumbing.
To understand how a pump works, picture a sealed plastic soda bottle full of water.
When you don’t squeeze the bottle, the pressure inside it is atmospheric and uniform
(remember that we’re neglecting gravity). But when you squeeze the sides of the bottle and
push inward on the water, the water responds by pushing outward on you—Newton’s third
law—and it does this by increasing its pressure. The harder you push, the harder the water
pushes back and the greater its pressure becomes.
Water, like all liquids, is incompressible; that is, it experiences almost no change in
volume as its pressure increases. Although the bottle won’t get smaller as you squeeze, the
water pressure inside it can increase substantially. It doesn’t take much force, exerted with
your thumb on a small area of the bottle, to increase the pressure in the bottle from atmospheric to twice that value or more.
The pressure increases uniformly throughout the water bottle, an observation known
as Pascal’s principle: a change in the pressure of an enclosed incompressible fluid is conveyed undiminished to every part of the fluid and to the surfaces of its container. This uniform pressure rise leads to a large upward force on the bottle’s cap. If the cap were wider
and had more surface area, the upward force on it might be large enough to blow it off the
bottle. That effect is the basis for hydraulic systems and lifts, where pressure produced in
an incompressible fluid by a small force exerted on a small area of the fluid’s container
results in a large force exerted on a large area of the fluid’s container (Fig. 5.2.2). It also
explains why plastic drinking bottles usually have small caps and why wide-mouth plastic
containers are better suited for candies, cookies, and nuts.

PASCAL’S PRINCIPLE
A change in the pressure of an enclosed incompressible fluid is conveyed undiminished to every part of the fluid and to the surfaces of its container.

It’s time to remove the cap from the water bottle. Now when you squeeze the bottle
and increase the local water pressure, the water can move. As its pressure increases inside
the bottle, the water begins to accelerate toward the lower pressure outside the bottle’s open
top and the result is a fountain. You are pumping water!
You are also doing work; as the water flows out of the bottle, your hands move inward.
Since you are pushing inward on the water and the water is moving inward, you are doing
work on the water. Pumps do work when they deliver pressurized water, and pressurized
water carries with it the energy associated with that work.
Although a water bottle can act as a pump briefly, it soon runs out of water. A more
practical pump appears in Fig. 5.2.3. In this pump, a piston slides back and forth in the open
end of a hollow cylinder, making a watertight seal. Pushing inward on that piston squeezes
any water in the cylinder and increases the local water pressure. Water begins to flow.
In contrast to our simple bottle, this pump’s cylinder is easy to refill. The cylinder
actually has two openings, each with a valve that permits water to flow in only one direction. Water can leave the cylinder only through the top opening and can enter only through
the bottom opening. As you push the pump’s piston into the water-filled cylinder, the water
pressure in the cylinder rises and water accelerates and flows out through the top valve. As
you pull the pump’s piston out of the water-filled cylinder, the water pressure inside the

133

Weight of an
automobile
Force from
your hands

Large
force

Small
force

Fluid
Fig. 5.2.2 The force a
pressurized fluid exerts on
a piston is proportional to
the surface area of that
piston. This fact underlies
hydraulic systems, in which
a small force exerted on a
small piston pressurizes
a trapped liquid so that it
exerts a large force on a
large piston. In this figure,
your gentle downward
push on the small piston
is balanced by a gentle
upward force exerted on
that small piston by the
pressurized fluid. At the
same time, the strong
downward push of an
automobile on the large
piston is balanced by a
strong upward force exerted
on that large piston by
the pressurized fluid. If
the small piston descends
quickly at constant velocity,
the large piston will rise
slowly at constant velocity
and you’ll be doing the
work of lifting the heavy
car a short distance by
pushing the small piston
down gently for a large
distance. The hydraulic
system is providing you
with mechanical advantage
and allowing you to raise
something that’s too heavy
for you to lift unaided.

134

CHAPT ER 5 Fluids

(a)
High
pressure
One-way
valve closed
Lowpressure
water

Piston moves

Check Your Understanding #2: Working a Water Pump

outward

Which normally requires more work: pulling the piston of a water pump out of the cylinder or pushing
it back in?

Water
ﬂows in

Answer: Pushing it back in usually requires more work.

Low
pressure
(b)
High
pressure
Water
ﬂows out
Highpressure
water

cylinder drops and water accelerates and flows in through the bottom valve. In fact, as you
withdraw the piston, the pressure inside the cylinder drops below atmospheric pressure, so
even water in an open reservoir nearby will accelerate toward the partial vacuum in the
cylinder and refill it.

Piston moves
inward

One-way
valve closed
Low
pressure

Fig. 5.2.3 Water is
pumped from a region of
low pressure to a region
of high pressure by a
reciprocating piston pump.
(a) As the piston is drawn
outward, water flows into
the cylinder from the lowpressure region. (b) As the
piston is pushed inward,
the inlet one-way valve
closes and water is driven
out of the cylinder and into
the high-pressure region.

Why: When you pull the piston out of the cylinder, you are moving air out of the way and creating a
partial vacuum inside the cylinder. This action requires a modest amount of work because the air
doesn’t push terribly hard on the back of the piston and pressure from the water flowing into the
cylinder assists you. But as you push the piston back into the cylinder, you are pressurizing the water.
Depending on the pressure of water in the outlet hose, the water in the cylinder may exert a very large
force on the piston. In that case, you must do a great deal of work on the water as you push the
piston inward and drive the water out of the cylinder.

Moving Water: Pressure and Energy
The pump of Fig. 5.2.3 can draw low-pressure water from a pond and fill a hose with highpressure water. If the nozzle at the other end of the hose is open, the water will accelerate
toward lower pressure outside the nozzle and spray toward the garden with considerable
kinetic energy. From where does this kinetic energy come?
The energy comes from you and the pump. As you push the piston into the cylinder,
pressurizing the water and squeezing it out through the top valve, you’re doing work on the
water—you’re exerting an inward force on the water, and the water is moving a distance in
the direction of your force. The inward force you exert on the water is equal to the water
pressure times the surface area of the piston, or
force = pressure · surface area,
and the distance the water moves is equal to the volume of water pumped divided by the
surface area of the piston, or
distance =

volume
.
surface area

Since work equals force times distance, the work you do pumping water is equal to the
water pressure times the volume of water you pump, or
work = pressure · volume.
As you pump high-pressure water through the hose, high-speed water sprays out of its
nozzle. Since water is incompressible, water enters and exits the hose at equal rates and the
work you do pumping 1 liter of water into the hose becomes kinetic energy in 1 liter of
water leaving the nozzle. That energy travels directly from the pump to the nozzle, and the
water doesn’t actually store any of it along the way. Nonetheless, we can imagine that the
water’s kinetic energy after it reaches the nozzle was stored in that water’s pressure before
the nozzle. We create a useful fiction—pressure potential energy. Water that’s under pressure has a pressure potential energy equal to the water’s volume times its pressure.
Because pressure potential energy actually comes from the pump, it vanishes as soon
as you break the link between the pressurized water and the pump that pressurizes it; you
can’t save a bottle of high-pressure water and expect it to retain this potential energy. The

Water Distribution

135

concept of pressure potential energy is meaningful only if the water is flowing steadily, so
that water leaving the plumbing is replaced exactly by water from the pump or something
equivalent. The ideal situation in which to use the concept of pressure potential energy is
also the simplest type of water flow—flow in which nothing ever changes. In keeping with
its constancy, this situation is known as steady-state flow.
In steady-state flow, a fluid flows continuously and steadily through a stationary environment. When you watch steady-state flow, you can’t detect the passage of time in either
the fluid or its environment, and a video of steady-state flow looks exactly like a still photograph. With small allowances for the inevitable imperfections of real life, water traveling
steadily through plumbing in your home, a soft wind blowing smoothly across your
motionless cheek, and a gentle current flowing silently between the motionless banks of a
lazy river are all cases of steady-state flow in fluids.
Although pumps and other devices with moving components aren’t allowed in steadystate flow, they can be connected to it so long as they operate steadily. For example, if you
pump water as steadily as you can through a motionless hose and nozzle, the water will
exhibit steady-state flow from where it enters the hose to well after it sprays out of the
nozzle.
The beauty of steady-state flow is in how it handles energy along streamlines. A
streamline is the path taken by a tiny portion of water in the flow, a portion that I refer to
here as a “drop.” In steady-state flow, an endless series of identical drops travels that same
unchanging streamline, like the cars of an infinite train on a stationary track. In steady-state
flow with no friction-like effects, a drop’s ordered energy remains constant as it travels
along its streamline. Moreover, since all the drops along that streamline are identical, the
ordered energy per drop is constant everywhere along that streamline. As we’ll soon see,
those observations are surprisingly useful.
A drop’s ordered energy can take three different forms: kinetic energy, pressure potential energy, and gravitational potential energy. Since we’re still considering plumbing in a
level region, we’ll omit gravitational potential energy for now. We’ve already seen that the
drop’s pressure potential energy is equal to its pressure times its volume. The drop’s kinetic
energy is given by Eq. 2.2.2 as one-half its mass times the square of its speed. Since a
drop’s mass is its density times its volume, the drop’s ordered energy is
ordered energy = pressure potential energy + kinetic energy
= pressure · volume + 12 · density · volume · speed2
= constant (along a streamline).

(5.2.1)

If we divide both sides of this expression by the drop’s volume, we can obtain another
useful form of this relationship:
ordered energy
pressure potential energy
kinetic energy
=
+
volume
volume
volume
= pressure + 12 · density · speed2
= constant (along a streamline).

(5.2.2)

Equation 5.2.2 is called Bernoulli’s equation, after Swiss mathematician Daniel Bernoulli 3 ,
whose work led to its development, although Swiss mathematician Leonhard Euler
(1707–1783) actually completed it. It applies only to incompressible fluids such as water
and assumes no ordered energy is wasted by friction-like effects.
According to Eq. 5.2.2, water that’s in steady-state flow can exchange pressure for
speed or speed for pressure as it flows along a streamline. As water accelerates out of a
nozzle, for example, its pressure drops but its speed increases because it’s converting pressure potential energy into kinetic energy. And as that moving water sprays against the car

3 As a professor in
Basel, Daniel Bernoulli
(Swiss mathematician,
1700–1782) taught not
only physics but also
botany, anatomy, and
physiology. He correctly
proposed that the pressure
a gas exerts on the walls
of its container results
from the countless
impacts of tiny particles
that make up the gas. He
also derived an important
relationship among the
pressure, motion, and
height of a fluid—
Bernoulli’s equation.

136

CHAPT ER 5 Fluids

you’re washing, it slows down but its pressure increases because it’s converting kinetic
energy back into pressure potential energy. In both cases, the water’s ordered energy is
constant.
Check Your Understanding #3: How Does Your Garden Grow?
Water in your garden hose has considerable pressure and arcs several meters through the air as you
water your plants. What is the water pressure in the falling water once it leaves the nozzle at the end
of the hose?
Answer: It is atmospheric pressure.
Why: As the water accelerates out of the nozzle, its pressure drops. It is converting pressure potential
energy into kinetic energy. The water pressure drops until it reaches the pressure of the surrounding
air, which is atmospheric pressure.

Gravity and Water Pressure

Pressure = 100,000 Pa

0m

–10 m
Pressure = 200,000 Pa

–20 m
Pressure = 300,000 Pa

–30 m
Pressure = 400,000 Pa

Fig. 5.2.4 The pressure
of stationary water in pipes
increases with depth by
about 10,000 Pa per meter
of depth. The shape of the
pipes doesn’t matter. For
plumbing that’s open on
top and connected near
the bottom, as shown here,
water will tend to flow
until its height is uniform
throughout the plumbing.

Gravity creates a downward pressure gradient in water; the deeper the water, the more
weight there is overhead and the greater the pressure. Since water is much denser than air,
water pressure increases rapidly with depth. In a vertical pipe that’s open on top, the water’s
surface is at atmospheric pressure (about 100,000 Pa). Only 10 m (33 feet) below the
water’s surface, however, the pressure has already doubled to 200,000 Pa. At that modest
depth, the water overhead weighs as much as the air overhead, even though the atmosphere
is many kilometers thick.
The shape of the pipe doesn’t affect the relationship between pressure and depth. No
matter how complicated the plumbing, the pressure of stationary water inside it increases
with depth by 10,000 Pa per meter, or 10,000 Pa/m (Fig 5.2.4). This uniform downward
pressure gradient creates an upward buoyant force on anything immersed in the water. In
fact, that buoyant force is what supports the water itself (Fig. 5.2.5).
The dependence of water pressure on depth has a number of important implications for
water distribution. First, water pressure at the bottom of a tall pipe is substantially higher
than at the top of that same pipe. Consequently, if only a single pipe supplies water to a
skyscraper, then the water pressure on the ground floor will be dangerously high while the
pressure in the penthouse will be barely enough for a decent shower. Tall buildings must
therefore handle water pressure very carefully; they can’t simply supply water to every
floor directly from the same pipe.
Second, pressure in a city water main does more than just accelerate water out of a
showerhead; it also supports water in the pipes of multistory buildings. Lifting water to the
third floor against the downward force of gravity requires a large upward force, and that
force is provided by water pressure. The higher you want to lift the water, the more water
pressure you need at the bottom of the plumbing. Lifting the water also requires energy,
which is often provided by a water pump.
Third, as water travels up and down the streets of a hilly city, its pressure varies with
height. In the valleys the pressure can be very large, and at the tops of hills the pressure can
be very small. Water mains in valleys must therefore be particularly strong to keep from
bursting. The large pressure in a valley is quite useful because it helps push the water back
uphill on the other side of the valley (Fig. 5.2.6). Nonetheless, a hilly city must have pumping stations and other water-pressure-control systems located throughout to provide reasonable water pressures to all the buildings, regardless of their altitudes.
Apart from those pressure-control systems, even a hilly city’s plumbing often involves
steady-state flow and can be explained using a version of Bernoulli’s equation that includes
gravity. Before we explore that topic, though, let’s take a look at the non-steady-state flow
that occurs when water in an isolated section of plumbing has free surfaces that can move
up or down so that you see things change with time.

Check Your Understanding #4: What’s the Water Pressure?
If all the water to a 400-m-tall skyscraper were delivered from a single pipe, how much higher would
the water pressure be on the ground floor than on the top floor?
Answer: It would be about 4,000,000 Pa (40 atmospheres) higher.

© The Granger Collection, New York

Why: The weight of water inside the pipe would create an enormous excess pressure near the bottom
of the building. Water spraying from an open faucet on the first floor at this enormous pressure could
accelerate to 319 km/h (200 mph), as it does in some high-pressure jet washing and cutting machines.

Fig. 5.2.6 Los Angeles receives much of its water from
Owens Valley, 300 km to the north. The water negotiates
the mountains and valleys in between, driven by gravity
alone. Giant pipes allow pressure to build during downhill
stretches to push the water back uphill later on. Parts of
the 1913 aqueduct support so much pressure that the
steel pipe used in them has to be more than an inch thick.

Pressure

Pressure

137

Weight

(b)

Pressure

(a)

Acceleration

Water
Pressure
Weight

Acceleration
Pressure
Weight

When all of those free surfaces are at atmospheric pressure, there are no pressure
imbalances and the water accelerates only in response to gravity. The water’s only potential
energy is gravitational and, like any object, it accelerates in the direction that lowers that
gravitational potential as quickly as possible. If the water’s free surface is higher in one
place than another, it can reduce its average height and, therefore, its gravitational potential
energy by letting its highest water fill in its lowest valley. After some sloshing about, the
water settles down in stable equilibrium with all its free surfaces smooth and level at a
single uniform height. No matter how complicated the plumbing, water that is open to the
air on top always “seeks its level.” The natural flow associated with this leveling effect is
often used in water delivery (see 4 ).
Remarkably, the leveling effect works even when some of the water-filled plumbing is
located above the water’s free surfaces. For example, water can seek its level between two
open containers through an elevated pipe known as a siphon (Fig. 5.2.7). In such cases, the
pressure of water in those elevated segments of plumbing is less than atmospheric pressure.
If you seal off part of the isolated plumbing and reduce the pressure above one of the
water’s free surfaces, that surface will rise higher than all of the others. It will rise until the
added pressure produced by the taller column of water replaces the missing pressure above
the water’s free surface. The less pressure there is above that surface, the higher the water
must rise to make up for the missing pressure. This effect lifts water in a drinking straw and
allows it to travel between two open containers in a siphon.
However, removing all the air pressure above the water’s free surface inside a long
straw or siphon will raise its height only about 10 m (33 feet) above the level of the water
elsewhere in an open container. Even with no pressure above it, this 10-m column of elevated water completely replaces the absent air pressure and thus prevents water in the rest
of the plumbing from lifting it any higher. It’s therefore impossible to draw water from a
deep well simply by lowering a pipe into that well and reducing the air pressure in the pipe;
the water will rise no more than 10 m upward. Instead, a pump must be attached to the
bottom of the pipe to pressurize the water and push it all the way to the top of the pipe.

Pressure

Water Distribution

(c)

Fig. 5.2.5 When a pipe
is oriented vertically,
gravity affects the motion
of water in the pipe. (a)
If the water’s pressure
doesn’t change with depth,
the water will accelerate
downward (fall) because of
its weight. (b) If the water’s
pressure increases with
depth by 10,000 Pa/m,
the water won’t accelerate.
(c) If the water’s pressure
increases with depth by
more than that amount,
the water will accelerate
upward.

4 The Romans used
gravity to convey water
to Rome from sources up
to 90 km away. A very
gradual slope in the
aqueducts kept the water
moving in spite of
frictional effects that
opposed the water’s
progress. Poisoning from
the lead pipes used in
some of the aqueducts is
blamed in part for the
decay of the Roman
Empire.

138

CHAPT ER 5 Fluids

Fig. 5.2.7 The two open containers of water are
connected by a siphon. This U-shaped tube permits water
to flow until its level is equal in both containers. The
sturdy tube permits the water pressure in the siphon to
drop below atmospheric pressure.

Pressure = 80,000 Pa

2m

0m
Pressure = 100,000 Pa

Moving Water Again: Gravity
As we’ve seen, it takes pressure and energy to lift water to the third floor of a building. We
can now expand our description of fluids undergoing steady-state flow to include gravity
and gravitational potential energy.
A drop’s gravitational potential energy is given by Eq. 1.3.2 as its mass times the
acceleration due to gravity times its height. The water’s gravitational potential energy per
volume is thus its density times the acceleration due to gravity times its height.
If we include gravitational potential energy in Eq. 5.2.2 and recognize that, for fluids
in steady-state flow along a streamline, the energy per volume is constant, we obtain a
relationship that can be written as a word equation:
ordered energy
pressure potential energy
kinetic energy
=
+
volume
volume
volume
+

gravitational potential energy
volume

= pressure + 12 · density · speed2
+ density · acceleration due to gravity · height
= constant (along a streamline),

(5.2.3)

in symbols:
p + 12 · ρ · v2 + ρ · g · h = constant (along a streamline),
and in everyday language:
When a stream of water speeds up in a nozzle or flows uphill in a pipe,
its pressure drops.
This is a revised version of Bernoulli’s equation, one that includes gravity. It correctly
describes steady-state flow in streamlines that change height. As before, it applies only
to incompressible fluids such as water and assumes no ordered energy is wasted by
friction-like effects.

BERNOULLI’S EQUATION
For an incompressible, frictionless fluid in steady-state flow, the sum of its pressure
potential energy, its kinetic energy, and its gravitational potential energy is constant
along a streamline. Equation 5.2.3 expresses this law as a formula.

139

© Steve Lewis/The Image Bank/Getty Images

Water Distribution

Fig. 5.2.8 Many buildings in New York City have water towers on their roofs. These towers maintain
water pressure in the plumbing and help in firefighting.

Because energy is conserved, water that’s in steady-state flow can exchange the energies associated with its speed, pressure, and height for one another. Thus as water
flows downward, its speed or pressure or both increase; if it falls from an open faucet,
its speed increases; and if it descends steadily inside a uniform pipe, its pressure
increases. The reverse happens as water flows upward. Water rising from a fountain
loses speed as it ascends, while water rising steadily in a uniform pipe loses pressure
on its way up.
This interchangeability of height, pressure, and speed makes it possible to pressurize
plumbing by connecting a tall column of water to the pipes. That’s why cities, communities, and even individual buildings have water towers (Fig. 5.2.8). A water tower is
built at a relatively high site within the region it serves. A pump fills the water tower
with water, and then gravity maintains a constant high pressure throughout the plumbing that connects to it (Fig. 5.2.9). The water is at atmospheric pressure at the top of
the water tower, but the pressure is much higher at the bottom; at the base of a 50-m-high
water tower, for example, the pressure is about 600,000 Pa, or six times atmospheric
pressure.
In addition to providing a fairly steady pressure in the water mains, a water tower
stores energy efficiently and can deliver that energy quickly. When water is drawn out of
the water tower, its gravitational potential energy at the top becomes pressure potential
energy at the bottom. The water tower replaces a pump, supplying a steady flow of water at
an almost constant high pressure. Unlike a pump, however, the water tower can supply this
high-pressure water at an enormous rate. As long as the water level doesn’t drop too far,
high-pressure water keeps flowing.

Check Your Understanding #5: Water Power
A hydroelectric power plant extracts energy from water that has descended from an elevated reservoir
in a pipe. In the reservoir, this energy takes the form of gravitational potential energy. Just before the
power plant, what form does the energy take?
Answer: It takes the form of pressure potential energy (and some kinetic energy).
Why: As the water descends inside the pipe, its gravitational potential energy is converted into pressure potential energy. The water reaching the power plant is under enormous pressure, and it’s this
pressure that exerts the forces needed to turn the turbines that run the generators. Work is required
to turn the turbines, so the water gives up much of its energy in the power plant. This energy leaves
the power plant via the electric power lines.

Air
Lowpressure
water

From
reservoir

Pump

HighTo
pressure
water customers

Fig. 5.2.9 A water tower
uses the weight of water
to create a large water
pressure near the ground.
The higher the tower, the
greater the pressure near
the ground. The water
tower is able to maintain
the water pressure
passively and doesn’t
require constant pumping.
Even during periods of
peak water consumption,
it maintains a fairly steady
pressure. When the water
level in the water tower
drops below a certain set
point, a pump refills the
tower.

140

CHAPT ER 5 Fluids

Check Your Figures #1: Up or Out
If the water pressure at the entrance to a building is 1,000,000 Pa, how high can the water rise
inside the building and how fast will it flow out of a faucet right at the entrance? (A liter of water
inside a pipe has a mass of 1 kg.)
Answer: It can rise about 100 m or emerge from the faucet at about 45 m/s (101 mph).
Why: As the water flows through the pipe (a streamline), its pressure potential energy can become
gravitational potential energy or kinetic energy. At the start, the water’s energy is all pressure potential energy so, from Eq. 5.2.3, the water’s energy per volume is 1,000,000 Pa. If the water flows up
the pipe, that energy will become gravitational potential energy. We can rearrange Eq. 5.2.3 to find
the height it can reach:
energy
1
·
volume density · acceleration due to gravity
1
= 1,000,000 Pa ·
= 102 m.
1000 kg/m3 · 9.8 m/s2

height =

If the water flows out of the faucet, that energy will become kinetic energy. We can also rearrange
Eq. 5.2.3 to find the speed it will attain:
speed =
=

energy
2
·
B volume density
2,000,000 Pa
= 45 m/s.
B 1000 kg/m3

Epilogue for Chapter 5
In this chapter we have investigated some of the basic concepts associated with fluids.
In Balloons, we explored the concept of pressure and the way in which air pressure
structures and supports Earth’s atmosphere. We saw that increased air pressure beneath
an object produces an upward buoyant force on that object and that this buoyant force
can float objects, such as hot-air and helium balloons, that are less dense than the
surrounding air.
In Water Distribution, we examined how water pressure causes water to accelerate
through plumbing, from high pressure to low pressure. We then focused on ways to produce water pressure, either using pumps or using gravity. By studying the forms of energy
in water, we were led to Bernoulli’s equation, which describes the interconversion of a
fluid’s ordered energy among pressure potential energy, kinetic energy, and gravitational
potential energy. Although the most dramatic applications of Bernoulli’s equation are
ahead of us, we’ve already used it to understand the changes in pressure and speed that
accompany water’s movement up and down in pipes and in fountains.

Explanation: A Cartesian Diver
The diver floats because its average density—that is, the mass of the vial and its contents
divided by the volume of space those two components occupy—is less than the density
of water. Since the upward buoyant force on the diver exceeds its downward weight, the
diver floats upward toward the top of the bottle. When the diver begins to stick out of the
water, it displaces less water and more air and the buoyant force it experiences decreases.
Eventually it experiences zero net force and floats without accelerating at the water’s
surface.
When you squeeze the soda bottle, you increase the pressure inside it. Because water
is incompressible, its density doesn’t change as the pressure goes up. However, the air

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations

141

bubble inside the vial is compressed and takes up less space inside the vial. Water flows
into the vial and increases the average density of the vial and its contents. When the average
density of the diver finally exceeds the density of water, the diver sinks.
To keep the diver hovering in the water, you must adjust the water pressure until the
diver’s average density is exactly that of water. This adjustment is impossible to make
without looking at the diver. Even the slightest overpressure or underpressure will cause the
diver to drift slowly down or up.

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Balloons Work: A hot-air balloon floats because its total weight (basket, envelope, and
hot air) is less than that of the cooler air it displaces. By heating the air in the envelope with
a flame, the pilot reduces its density. As the air warms up, fewer particles are needed to fill
the envelope, the extra particles flow out of the envelope through the opening at its bottom,
and the balloon becomes lighter.
A helium balloon also weighs less than the air it displaces. However, its lower weight is
due to the lightness of the individual helium atoms, each of which weighs much less than
the air particle it replaces. By filling a balloon with helium, the balloon’s weight is dramatically reduced. Since the buoyant force exerted on the balloon by the surrounding air exceeds
the balloon’s weight, the balloon accelerates upward.
How Water Distribution Works: Water distribution begins when a pump transfers low-pressure
water from a reservoir to high-pressure plumbing. Along a level path, water accelerates
toward regions of lower pressure, such as open hoses or showerheads. Pressure imbalances
allow the water to negotiate bends in the pipes en route to its destination. During its travels,
the water may rise or fall in height; as it does, its pressure changes, decreasing as the water
moves upward and increasing as the water moves downward. In low-lying regions, where the
water pressure may be too high to use directly, a pressure regulator may have to be added to
the plumbing. In high-lying regions, where the water pressure may be too low to be practical,
an additional pump may have to be employed to boost its pressure.

1. Archimedes’ principle: An object partially or wholly

immersed in a fluid is acted on by an upward buoyant force
equal to the weight of the fluid it displaces.
2. Ideal gas law: The pressure of a gas is equal to the Boltz-

mann constant times the particle density times the absolute
temperature, or
pressure = Boltzmann constant · particle density
· absolute temperature
(5.1.3)

energy, and its gravitational potential energy is constant along a
streamline, or
ordered energy
pressure potential energy
kinetic energy
=
+
volume
volume
volume
+

gravitational potential energy
volume

= pressure + 12 · density · speed2

3. Pascal’s principle: A change in the pressure of an enclosed

+ density · acceleration due to gravity

incompressible fluid is conveyed undiminished to every part of
the fluid and to the surfaces of its container.

· height

4. Bernoulli’s equation: For an incompressible fluid in steady-

state flow, the sum of its pressure potential energy, its kinetic

= constant (along a streamline).

(5.2.3)

6

Fluids and Motion
luids are fascinating when they move. Stationary water and air may be essential to life, but
they’re also fairly simple; only their pressures vary from place to place, and even these are
determined primarily by gravity. Rushing rivers or gusts of wind, however, with their wonderful
variety of simple and complicated behaviors, are much more exciting. The motions of fluids aren’t
just interesting; they’re also important, since our world is filled with objects and machines that work
in whole or part because of the behaviors of moving fluids. In this chapter, we look at a variety of
situations in which fluid motion contributes to the way things work.

F 
ACTIVE LEARNING
EXPERIMENTS

A Vortex Cannon
it, build a vortex cannon, a device that sends rings of air
sailing across a room. Although a serious vortex cannon
is best constructed from a large drum or crate, you can
make a simple one from an empty cardboard cereal box.
Seal the rectangular box on all edges with tape, and
cut a circular hole 5 cm. (2 in.) in diameter in the center
of one face. To use your cannon, just tap hard on the other
face of the box. Rings of air will leap out of the hole and
sail across the room at about 5 m/s (11 mph).

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Fluids are real; they exist independently of any solids that
might move through them. That notion is easy to accept
in reference to water, since we can see that water doesn’t
wait for a boat to pass before moving in interesting ways.
Air is harder to visualize in this fashion because we seldom see it by itself, apart from its effects on buildings or
airplanes or our skin.
To begin seeing air as something tangible and to
demonstrate the rich possibilities of motion available to

142

Garden Watering

Although you can’t see these rings, you can follow
their motion by looking for their effects on objects they
encounter. The rings can easily blow out candles or rustle
light window drapes across a small room. If you have a
friend blow some rings at you, you’ll feel exactly where
they hit on your face or shirt.
To see these rings directly, fill the cereal box with
smoke, mist, or dust. What do you think the rings will
look like when they emerge from the hole? Will the
smoke in each ring be stationary, or will it be swirling
about the ring in some manner? How will the ring’s size

143

and speed of travel depend on the size of the hole from
which it emerges? Will it depend on how hard you tap the
cereal box? Will the ring’s size and speed change in
flight?
Now tap the box and watch the smoke rings. What
motions do you see? Change the hole size and see how
this change affects the rings and their motion. As you can
see, the air can execute some very complicated movements all by itself. In this chapter, we will examine how
moving air, water, and other fluids affect our everyday
lives.

Chapter Itinerary
In particular, we explore (1) garden watering, (2) balls sports:
air, and (3) airplanes. In Garden Watering, we look at how
water’s pressure and speed vary as it flows through a faucet, a
hose, and a nozzle. In Ball Sports: Air, we investigate the effects
of air on the motions of balls. In Airplanes, we study the ways in
which moving air supports and propels airplanes in flight. A
more complete preview can be found in the Chapter Summary
and Important Laws and Equations at the end of the chapter.

SECTION 6.1

This chapter continues to develop the concept of energy
conservation along a streamline that was introduced in
Chapter 5. It also brings up several new types of forces that
are present when fluids move past one another or past solid
objects. These ideas are present in a vast array of commonplace activities, from washing windows with a hose to pumping water with a windmill.

Garden Watering
faucets, hoses, and nozzles—are simple and unsophisticated,
the principles behind them are not. All three make elegant use
of the laws of fluid flow and will introduce us to several important complications, notably friction-like effects and turbulence, that we had previously chosen to ignore.

Mounting bracket
Handle
Stem

Nozzle

Washer
Spigot
Seat
Valve

Questions to Think About: What determines the rate at
which water flows through a hose? If honey ran through your
hose instead of water, how would that affect the flow? Why
does water make noise as you sprinkle your garden? Why
does a nozzle make the water spray so fast and so far?
Why do the pipes sometimes clank when you abruptly close
the faucet?

Hose

Tending a flower garden often involves watering. While this
once meant walking the garden’s paths with a watering can,
modern plumbing has made such effort unnecessary. With a
hose and nozzle attached to a faucet, you can do your job
without leaving your lawn chair. Although the tools involved—

Experiments to Do: Open a faucet gradually and watch the
water begin to flow. What’s pushing the water out of the faucet? What happens to the flow rate and speed of the water as
you open the faucet further? Look below or behind the faucet
and try to determine how the water enters and exits the faucet.
When do you hear the water flowing?
Attach a hose to the faucet. Does the water flow as
quickly from the open end of the hose as it did from the
faucet alone? Cover most of the hose end with your thumb
and watch the water spray out into the air. Why does the

144

CHAPT ER 6 Fluids and Motion

water travel so much farther when you almost stop its flow?
Do you feel the water pressing against your thumb? Attach a
nozzle to the hose and see how the flow rate affects the

strength of the spray. Fill a bucket with the open hose and
then again while using the nozzle. Which method fills the
bucket faster?

Water’s Viscosity
1 Your car’s engine is
protected by motor oil
with a carefully chosen
viscosity. If that oil were
too thin, it would flow out
from between surfaces
and wouldn’t keep them
from rubbing against one
another. If that oil were
too thick, the engine
would waste power
moving its parts through
the oil. Years ago, you had
to change your motor oil
for the season. Thick
40-weight motor oil was
used in summer because
hot weather made it
thinner; thin 10-weight oil
was used in winter
because cold weather
made it thicker. Now, a
modern multigrade oil
maintains a nearly
constant viscosity over a
wide range of temperatures and need not be
changed with the seasons.
This oil contains tiny
molecular chains that ball
up when cold but
straighten out when hot.
These chains thicken hot
oil so that 10W-40 oil
resembles 10-weight oil in
winter and 40-weight oil
in summer.

Having brought water to your home in the previous chapter, we’re already well on our way
to watering your garden. However, to reach the garden, water must first travel through a
long stretch of hose that’s lying straight on level ground. Does the length of this hose have
any effect on the water delivery process?
The answer is yes, longer hoses generally deliver less water. However, according to
what we learned in Chapter 5, water should coast through a straight, level hose at a constant
velocity and constant pressure, and the length of that hose shouldn’t matter. We evidently
overlooked something important—friction. Moving water doesn’t slide freely through a
stationary hose. In reality, it experiences frictional forces that oppose its motion relative to
the hose.
This friction is unusual, though, because most of the water in the hose never actually
touches the hose itself. If water deep inside the hose is going to experience any forces due
to relative motion, then those forces are going to have to occur within the water. Water must
exert frictional forces on itself!
Sure enough, water does experience internal frictional forces. They’re called viscous
forces, forces that appear whenever one layer of a fluid tries to slide across another layer of
that fluid. Viscous forces oppose relative motion, and you can observe their effects easily
when you pour honey out of a jar. The honey at the jar’s surface is stuck there by chemical
forces and remains stationary. But even honey that’s far from the walls can’t move easily;
it experiences viscous forces as it tries to move relative to nearby honey. Since honey is a
“thick,” or viscous, fluid, viscous forces act quite effectively to keep all the honey moving
with nearly the same velocity. Since the honey at the walls can’t move, viscous forces tend
to prevent any of the honey from moving.
Water isn’t as thick as honey (Table 6.1.1), so it’s less resistant to relative motion. The
measure of this resistance to relative motion within a fluid is called viscosity, and water’s
viscosity is less than that of honey. In fact, if you heat the water up, it will become even less
viscous and thus flow more easily. Typical of most liquids, this decrease in viscosity with
increasing temperature reflects the molecular origins of viscous forces: the molecules in a
liquid stick to one another, forming weak chemical bonds that require energy to break. In a
hot liquid, the molecules have more thermal energy, so they break these bonds more easily
to move past one another (see 1 ).

TABLE 6.1.1 Approximate Viscosities of a Variety of Fluids

†

Fluid

Viscosity†

Helium (2 K)

0 Pa · s

Air (20 °C)

0.0000183 Pa · s

Water (20 °C)

0.00100 Pa · s

Olive oil (20 °C)

0.084 Pa · s

Shampoo (20 °C)

100 Pa · s

Honey (20 °C)

1000 Pa · s

Glass (540 °C)

1012 Pa · s

The pascal-second (abbreviated Pa · s and synonymous with kg/m · s) is the SI unit of viscosity. Only the superfluid
portion of ultracold liquid helium exhibits zero viscosity.

Garden Watering

145

Check Your Understanding #1: Keeping Warm on a Windy Day
A loosely woven wool sweater has many tiny air passages between the wool fibers, yet it dramatically
reduces the rate at which air flows through to your skin when you stand in a breeze. Why doesn’t air
flow easily through the gaps between the fibers?
Answer: The air at the surfaces of the fibers is stationary, and the air’s viscosity slows the motion of
air in the vicinity of the fibers.
Why: Although air trying to pass through the gaps may not directly touch the fibers, viscous forces
tend to keep all the air moving together at the same velocity. As soon as some air is held up by a fiber,
the air nearby is slowed by viscous forces. The fibers of a sweater are close enough together that
viscous forces slow all the air trying to pass through the sweater. Imagine trying to pour honey
through a sweater.

Flow in a Straight Hose: The Effect of Viscosity
Viscosity slows the flow of water through your hose. Chemical forces between the hose and
the outermost layer of water hold that layer of water stationary, and this motionless layer
exerts viscous forces on the layer of moving water inside it. As this second layer slows, it
exerts viscous forces on yet another layer. Layer by layer, viscous forces hold back the
moving water until even water at the center of the hose feels viscosity’s slowing effects
(Fig. 6.1.1). Although water at the center of the hose moves faster than water in any other
layer, it’s still affected by the stationary hose.
These viscous forces impede water delivery. Instead of coasting effortlessly through
the straight, level hose, real water needs a pressure gradient to push it steadily forward.
Like the file cabinet sliding on the sidewalk in Section 2.2, water must be pushed through
the hose if it’s to maintain a continuous flow. Also like that file cabinet, the water becomes
hotter as the work done pushing it forward is wasted and becomes thermal energy.
However, unlike the forces of ordinary sliding friction—which don’t depend on relative
velocities—viscous forces become larger as the relative velocities within a fluid increase.
That’s because as two layers of water slide past one another faster, their molecules collide
harder and more frequently. Since it experiences stronger viscous forces, fast-moving water
wastes more energy per meter and needs a larger pressure gradient to keep it moving steadily through a hose than does slow-moving water.
Because of viscous forces, the amount of water flowing steadily through a hose has
four properties:
1.
2.
3.

4.

It’s inversely proportional to the water’s viscosity. The more viscous the water, the
more difficulty it has flowing through the hose.
It’s inversely proportional to the length of the hose. The longer the hose, the more
opportunity viscous forces have to slow the water down.
It’s proportional to the pressure difference between the hose’s inlet and its outlet.
This pressure difference determines the water’s pressure gradient and thus how
hard the water is pushed forward through the hose.
It’s proportional to the fourth power of the diameter of the hose. Tripling the
hose’s diameter provides the water with nine times as much room and also allows
water near the hose’s center to move nine times faster.

We can turn these four proportional relationships into an equation by adding the correct
numerical constant (π/128). The final relationship is called Poiseuille’s law and can be
written as a word equation:
volume =

π · pressure difference · pipe diameter4
,
128 · pipe length · fluid viscosity

(6.1.1)

Velocity

Fig. 6.1.1 The speed of
water flowing through a
pipe is not constant across
the pipe. The water near
the walls is stationary,
while the water at the
center of the pipe moves
the fastest. The differences
in velocity are the result of
viscous forces.

146

CHAPT ER 6 Fluids and Motion

in symbols:
π · Δp · D4
ΔV
=
,
Δt
128 · L · 𝜂
and in everyday language:
It’s hard to squeeze honey through a long, thin tube.

POISEUILLE’S LAW
The volume of fluid flowing through a cylindrical pipe each second is equal to (𝜋/128)
times the pressure difference (Δp) across that pipe times the pipe’s diameter to the
fourth power, divided by the pipe’s length times the fluid’s viscosity (ƞ).

2 To deliver large
amounts of water at high
pressure or velocity, fire
hoses must have large
diameters. When filled
with high-pressure water,
these wide hoses become
stiff and heavy, making
them difficult to handle.
Chemical additives that
decrease water’s viscosity
allow firefighters to use
narrower, lighter, and
more flexible hoses.
3 Very large diameter
pipes are required to
transport crude oil across
the Alaskan wilderness.
The distances are long,
and the fluid is viscous,
although it is heated to
lower its viscosity.

It’s hardly surprising that the flow rate depends in this manner on the pressure difference, pipe length, and viscosity; we’ve all observed that low water pressure or a long hose
lengthens the time needed to fill a bucket with water and that viscous syrup pours slowly
from a bottle. However, the dependence of the flow rate on the fourth power of pipe diameter is unexpected. Even a small change in the diameter of a hose significantly changes the
amount of water that hose delivers each second. The two most common garden hoses in the
United States have diameters of 58 inch and 34 inch, and while these hoses differ by a seemingly insignificant 20% or a factor of 1.2 in diameter, the 34-inch hose can carry about 1.24
or two times as much water as the 58-inch hose (see 2 and 3 ).
We can also look at viscous forces in terms of ordered energy. By opposing the flow of
water through a hose, viscous forces do negative work on it and reduce its ordered energy—
the energy considered in Bernoulli’s equation, which doesn’t include thermal energy. Just
how much ordered energy the water retains depends on how fast it moves inside the hose.
If you allow lots of water to leave the hose, water will move through it quickly and encounter large viscous forces. In the process, most of the water’s ordered energy will be wasted
as thermal energy and the water will pour gently out of the end of the hose.
However, if you partially block the hose’s opening with your thumb and reduce the
flow, water will travel slowly through the hose and encounter smaller viscous forces. As a
result, the water will retain most of its ordered energy and will still be at high pressure
when it reaches your thumb. This high-pressure water will then accelerate to enormous
speed as it passes through the narrow opening and sprays out into the air.
We can now explain why water delivery systems normally use the widest pipes that are
practical and affordable. In contrast to a narrow hose, wide pipes can carry large amounts of
water while letting that water travel slowly, experience weak viscous forces, and waste little
of its ordered energy. In such energy-efficient water delivery systems, friction is insignificant
and Bernoulli’s equation (Eq. 5.2.4) accurately predicts water’s properties throughout its trip.
Check Your Understanding #2: Air Ducts
The long air ducts used to ventilate homes and businesses usually have very large diameters. These
ducts are often visible near the ceilings of modern warehouse-style stores and restaurants as pipes
roughly 0.5 m across. Why must the ducts be so large in diameter?
Answer: Air’s viscosity slows its flow through ductwork. Moving large volumes of air rapidly without a
large pressure difference between inlet and outlet requires a large diameter pipe.
Why: The airflow through long ductwork is dominated by viscous forces. The volume of air moved
through ductwork is often enormous, and the pressure difference between the inlet and outlet is
normally only a fraction of an atmosphere. To allow the air to move quickly through the ducts, their
diameters must be large.

Garden Watering

Check Your Figures #1: Old Plumbing
When your friend’s house was new, the kitchen faucet could deliver 0.50 liter per second (0.50 L/s).
Over the years, mineral deposits have built up in the pipes and reduced their effective diameters by
20%. How much water can the faucet deliver now?
Answer: It can deliver about 0.20 L/s.
Why: Water flow in pipes obeys Poiseuille’s law (Eq. 6.1.1) and is proportional to the pipe diameter
to the fourth power. Reducing the diameter by 20%, a factor of 0.8, while leaving the pipe length,
pressures, and viscosity unchanged, will reduce the volume flow rate by a factor of 0.84 or 0.41. The
pipes now deliver about 0.20 L/s (0.50 L/s times 0.41). It clearly doesn’t take much mineral accumulation to dramatically reduce the flow through a pipe.

Flow in a Bent Hose: Dynamic Pressure Variations
Let’s suppose that on reaching your garden the hose bends toward the right and the flowing
water bends with it. That water is accelerating as it turns, and as we observed in Chapter 5,
water accelerates horizontally only in response to unbalanced pressures. Since the hose is
motionless, the unbalanced pressures inside it must be caused by the water itself; the water
is experiencing dynamic pressure variations.
To understand these dynamic pressure variations, let’s follow the streamlines as water
traverses this bend. Although we’ve just introduced viscous forces, we’re going to ignore
them here for clarity and simplicity. Viscous forces are certainly important in the long narrow hose; however, the bend is so short that viscous forces have little effect on what happens to the water passing through it.
Neglecting viscous forces, the water’s ordered energy is constant along each streamline
and we can observe the interchanges of energy allowed by Bernoulli’s equation (Eq. 5.2.4).
However, since the hose rests on level ground, water’s gravitational potential energy can’t vary
and the only interchanges we’ll see are between pressure potential energy and kinetic energy.
Figure 6.1.2 shows the water’s steady-state flow pattern near the bend. We’re looking
down on the hose in this calculated drawing and, as indicated by the black streamlines,
water that is initially flowing straight ahead arcs rightward at the bend and eventually continues directly toward the right.
Water approaches the bend through a straight section of hose in which its streamlines
are straight and parallel. Water flows at constant velocity along these streamlines—the
High pressure
Low speed

Low pressure
High speed

Hose

Fig. 6.1.2 Water in a bent hose
experiences changes in speed and
pressure. The black streamlines show
the paths the water takes as it flows
around the bend. The spacing between
streamlines indicates flow speed (a
wider space is a slower flow), and the
background color indicates pressure
(violet is higher pressure; red is lower
pressure).

147

148

CHAPT ER 6 Fluids and Motion

water’s direction is fixed and it can’t change its speed. If it tried to speed up, it would leave
a gap behind it; if it tried to slow down, it would cause a “traffic jam.” The water’s pressure
must be uniform throughout this straight section because it would accelerate if there were
any differences in pressure.
The water’s constant velocity and uniform pressure are represented visually in
Fig. 6.1.2. Local water velocities are revealed by the directions and separations of the
streamlines. Water’s velocity always points along its streamline, and its speed is inversely
proportional to the streamline spacing. Streamlines that become more widely spaced denote
decreasing speed—water that slows down spreads out sideways and its streamlines separate from one another. Streamlines that become more narrowly spaced denote increasing
speed—water that speeds up stretches out along its path and its streamlines draw toward
one another. Since the streamlines leading up to the bend are straight and evenly spaced, we
know that water moves along each streamline at constant velocity.
Local water pressure is displayed in Fig. 6.1.2 as the colors of the rainbow. Colors
toward the violet end of the spectrum denote higher pressures, while those toward the red
end of the spectrum denote lower pressures. Since the straight section has a uniform bluegreen color, the water there has a uniform, moderate pressure.
Once the water starts bending toward the right, however, its velocities and pressures
begin to vary. Since the water is accelerating toward the inside of the bend, there must be a
pressure imbalance pushing it in that direction. Sure enough, the turning stream of water
develops higher local pressure (violet) near the outside of the bend and lower local pressure
near the inside of the bend (red). A similar pressure imbalance accompanies any bend in a
fluid’s path; the pressure is always higher on the outside of the bend than it is on the inside
of that bend. After all, that pressure imbalance is what causes the fluid flow to bend!

BENDS AND PRESSURE IMBALANCES
When the path of a fluid in steady-state flow bends, the pressure on the outside of the
bend is always higher than the pressure on the inside of the bend.

To keep the ordered energy constant along a streamline, each decrease in the water’s
local pressure is accompanied by an increase in the water’s local speed, and the opposite is
also true. Water arcing around the outside of the bend slows down (the streamline spacing
widens) as its pressure rises, while the water arcing around the inside of the bend speeds up
(the streamline spacing narrows) as its pressure drops.
As the hose straightens out beyond the bend, the water’s pressures and speeds return
to what they were before the bend. Water from the outside of the bend speeds up and its
pressure drops, while water from the inside of the bend slows down and its pressure rises.
In the straight section following the bend, water’s velocity is once again constant along
each streamline and its pressure is uniform.
Odd as these pressure and speed changes may seem, they are quite real and have real
consequences. If your hose were clear and you could introduce thin threads of dye into
the flowing water, you’d see these dyed streamlines arc around the bend just as they do
in Fig. 6.1.2. If the hose were weak and couldn’t tolerate excessive pressure, it would be
most likely to burst on the outside of the bend, where the local water pressure is highest.
You might wonder which causes which: Does each pressure change cause a speed
change, or does each speed change cause a pressure change? The answer is that they occur
together and are equally entitled to be called cause and effect. Once the steady-state flow
pattern has established itself, water following a particular streamline experiences rises and
falls in pressure at the same time that it experiences decreases and increases in speed. The
two effects—pressure changes and speed changes—simply go hand in hand.

Garden Watering

Check Your Understanding #3: Washing Your Shirt with a Spoon
You’re washing dishes when the stream of water falling from the kitchen faucet follows the curve of
a spoon and sprays up onto your shirt. As the stream bent upward, where was its pressure greatest?
Answer: Pressure was greatest at the surface of the spoon.
Why: The pressure in the stream of water must be higher on the outside of the bend—at the spoon’s
surface—than on the inside of the bend.

Flow through a Nozzle: From Pressure to Speed
When water finally flows through the nozzle at the end of your hose, it exchanges its remaining pressure potential energy for kinetic energy and sprays out into the garden. The nozzle’s
narrowing channel initiates this energy transformation so that low-speed, high-pressure water
entering the nozzle becomes fast-moving, atmospheric-pressure water leaving the nozzle.
Figure 6.1.3 shows that, as water passes through the nozzle, the narrowing channel
herds all the streamlines together, so the water’s local speed increases. The water following
each streamline is speeding up to squirt through the bottleneck without causing a backup.
This increase in water’s local speed is accompanied by a decrease in water’s local pressure,
as indicated by the color shift toward the red end of the spectrum.
By the time the water leaves the hose nozzle, its pressure has dropped all the way to
atmospheric pressure and it has turned all its available pressure potential energy into
kinetic energy. It emerges as a narrow stream of fast-moving water and arcs gracefully
through the air. No wonder you can reach the farthest parts of your garden with water when
you use a nozzle.

COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS: Speed and Pressure in Fluids
Misconception: A fast-moving fluid always has a low pressure.
Resolution: The pressure of a specific portion of fluid depends on its circumstances and can
take any value, high or low. However, if a fluid speeds up without descending as it flows along
a streamline in steady-state flow, its pressure will decrease. In that special context, the faster
moving fluid has a lower pressure.

Nozzle

Low pressure
High speed

Medium pressure
Medium speed

Fig. 6.1.3 Water flowing through a nozzle
speeds up and its pressure drops. The
narrowing spacing between streamlines
indicates that the flow speed is increasing,
while the color shift from violet toward red
indicates that the pressure is dropping.

149

150

CHAPT ER 6 Fluids and Motion

Check Your Understanding #4: Cleaning House
As air rushes steadily into the narrow opening of a vacuum cleaner attachment, it accelerates to high
speed and its pressure drops well below atmospheric pressure. From where does the air’s newfound
kinetic energy come?
Answer: Even at atmospheric pressure, air has pressure potential energy. As it accelerates toward
even lower pressure in the attachment, air converts some of that pressure potential energy into
kinetic energy.
Why: Vacuum cleaners employ nozzles to get air moving very quickly. Fast-moving air rushing into the
vacuum cleaner draws dust with it and cleans your home.

The Onset of Turbulence

Fig. 6.1.4 Water flows
slowly past rocks in the
stream on the left, and its
viscosity keeps it smooth
and laminar. Water flows
quickly past rocks in the
stream on the right, and
its inertia separates it into
swirling, splashing pockets
of turbulence.

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

As you direct the stream of water at the plants in your garden, you notice two interesting phenomena: first, the stream pushes on any surface that slows it down, and second,
it tends to break up into fragments as it flows around obstacles. The pushing effect is
another Bernoulli result: when the stream collides with a surface and bends away, its
pressure at the surface rises to cause the bend and that rising pressure pushes the
surface forward.
The breakup effect, however, is something new. In trying to go around the obstacle,
the stream of water loses its orderly structure and disintegrates into a swirling, hissing
froth. Actually, the hiss you hear is familiar; you heard it as you opened the faucet to start
water flowing through the hose. That faucet uses a movable stopper to control the flow of
water into the hose; as you opened the faucet, you gradually removed this stopper from the
water pipe to allow water to flow more freely into the hose and the faucet hissed. Whether
water encounters a plant or a faucet stopper, there is something about high speeds and
obstacles that upsets the smoothly flowing fluid.
Up until now, we’ve discussed only laminar flow, the smooth, silent flow that’s characterized by simple streamlines. In laminar flow, adjacent regions of a fluid always remain
adjacent. For example, if you place two drops of dye near one another in a smoothly flowing stream, they will remain close together indefinitely as they follow streamlines in the
laminar flow (Fig. 6.1.4, left). Laminar flow is the orderly result of viscous forces, which
tend to bring adjacent portions of fluid to the same velocity. When viscosity dominates a
fluid’s motion, the flow is usually laminar.
However, as the stream flows swiftly past rocks and obstacles, its streamlines break up
into the eddies and churning “white water” that make rafting exciting (Fig. 6.1.4, right).
The dye is quickly dispersed in this frenzied turbulence. The stream is experiencing
turbulent flow, a roiling, noisy flow in which adjacent regions of fluid soon become separated from one another as they move independently in unpredictable directions. Turbulent
flow is the disorderly consequence of inertia, which tends to propel each portion of fluid
independently according to its own momentum. When inertia dominates a fluid’s motion,
the flow is usually turbulent.

Garden Watering

The plants and faucet stopper are evidently initiating turbulence in what had been
laminar flows; flows that were dominated by viscous forces are suddenly dominated by
inertia instead. Whether a flow is laminar or turbulent depends on several characteristics of
the fluid and its environment:
1.
2.

3.

4.

The fluid’s viscosity. Viscous forces tend to keep nearby regions of fluid moving
together, so high viscosity favors laminar flow (Fig. 6.1.5).
The fluid’s speed past a stationary obstacle. The faster the fluid is moving, the
more quickly two nearby regions of fluid can become separated and the harder it
is for viscous forces to keep them together.
The size of the obstacle the fluid encounters. The larger the obstacle, the more
likely that it will cause turbulence because viscous forces will be unable to keep
the fluid ordered over such a long distance.
The fluid’s density. The denser the fluid, the less it responds to viscous forces and
the more likely it is to become turbulent.

Rather than keeping track of all four physical quantities independently, English mathematician and engineer Osborne Reynolds (1842–1912) found that they could be combined
into a single number that permits a comparison of seemingly different flows. The Reynolds
number is defined as
Reynolds number =

density · obstacle length · flow speed
.
viscosity

(6.1.2)

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

The units on the right side of Eq. 6.1.2 cancel one another, so the Reynolds number is
dimensionless; that is, it’s just a simple number, such as 10 or 25,000. As the Reynolds
number increases, the flow goes from viscous-dominated to inertia-dominated and therefore from laminar to turbulent. In his experiments, Reynolds found that turbulence usually
appears when the Reynolds number exceeds roughly 2300. You can observe this transition
by moving a 1-cm-thick (0.4-in-thick) stick through still water. If you move the stick
slowly, about 10 cm/s (4 in/s), the Reynolds number will be about 1000 and the flow around
the stick will be laminar. But if you speed the stick up to about 50 cm/s (20 in/s), the Reynolds number will rise to about 5000 and the flow will become turbulent.

Fig. 6.1.5 Honey’s large viscosity keeps it flowing smoothly (laminar flow) when you pour it. Water’s
small viscosity allows it to splash about (turbulent flow) in a fountain. In both cases, the effective
obstacle length is the width of the flowing fluid, about 1 cm.

151

152

CHAPT ER 6 Fluids and Motion

One of the most common features of turbulent flows is the vortex, a swirling region of
fluid that moves in a circle around a central cavity. A vortex resembles a miniature tornado,
with its cavity created by inertia as the fluid spins. Vortices are easily visible behind a canoe
paddle, in a mixing bowl, or in a cup of coffee stirred rapidly with a spoon. Once an object
moves fast enough through a fluid to create turbulence, these vortices begin to form. Each
vortex builds up behind the object but is soon whisked away to form a wake of shed vortices, vortices that have broken free of the object that made them.
While laminar flow is fully predictable, turbulent flow exhibits chaotic behavior or
chaos; you can no longer predict exactly where any particular drop of water will go.
The study of chaos is a relatively new field of science. Because a chaotic system, that
is, a system exhibiting chaos, is exquisitely sensitive to initial conditions, even the
slightest change in those conditions may produce profound changes in its situation
later on.
Even when you can’t see turbulent water flow, you can usually hear it. The churning
motion of turbulence converts some of the water’s ordered energy into thermal energy and
sound. The turbulence near the faucet slightly reduces the water’s ordered energy as it
enters the hose and therefore its speed as it emerges from the nozzle and sprays toward
your garden.
A different sound occurs when you abruptly close the nozzle and stop the flow of
water. Moving water has momentum, and stopping it suddenly requires an enormous backward force. Since the slowing flow is not steady state, Bernoulli’s equation doesn’t apply
and the pressure can surge to astronomical values near the front of the moving water. This
pressure surge is what accelerates the water backward to slow it down and what leads to the
loud “thump” sound you hear as the water stops. Known as water hammer, the surging
pressure in front of stopping water jerks the nozzle, swells the hose, and may even rattle the
pipes in your home.

Check Your Understanding #5: Urban Windstorms
On a windy day in a city with many tall buildings, leaves and papers can be seen swirling about in
the air or on the sidewalks. What causes these whirling air currents?
Answer: The air flowing through the “canyons” created by the buildings becomes turbulent and forms
vortices that swirl the leaves and papers.
Why: Whether an object moves through a fluid or a fluid moves past an object, a Reynolds number is
associated with the situation. When the Reynolds number becomes high enough that viscosity is
unable to keep the fluid flowing in an orderly fashion, turbulence appears. In wind blowing through
a big city, turbulence and its whirling vortices are everywhere.

Check Your Figures #2: Wind on the Open Road
Is the flow of air around a convertible laminar or turbulent as the convertible cruises down the highway? (Air’s viscosity is given in Table 6.1.1.)
Answer: Turbulent.
Why: To calculate the Reynolds number for the airflow around the car, you need air’s viscosity from
Table 6.1.1 (0.0000183 Pa ∙ s, or 0.0000183 kg/m ∙ s), air’s density from Section 4.1 (1.25 kg/m3),
the car’s size (roughly 3 m), and its speed through the air (roughly 55 mph or 25 m/s). You can then
calculate its approximate Reynolds number using Eq. 6.1.2:
Reynolds number =

1.25 kg/m3 · 3 m · 25 m/s
= 5.1 million.
0.0000183 kg/m · s

The convertible’s Reynolds number is far above the threshold for turbulence (2300), so the air swirls
chaotically around the vehicle. That explains why your hair flies around wildly.

Ball Sports: Air

153

Ball Sports: Air

S E C TIO N 6 . 2

wouldn’t have to worry about hooks or slices. In this section, we
will investigate how air affects the flight of balls and other
related objects.
Spin

Turbulent
wake

Lift
Drag

Much of the subtlety and nuance in games such as baseball
and golf come from the way balls interact with air. If baseball
were played on the moon, which has no air, the only pitches
would be the fastball and the not-so-fastball. Moon golfers

Questions to Think About: Why can you throw a real baseball so
much farther than a hollow plastic one? Why does a long fly ball
appear to drop straight down when you try to catch it in deep
center field? What kind of force could make a curveball curve?
What makes a well-hit golf ball hang in the air before falling to
the green? How can a knuckleball or spitball jitter about in flight?
Experiments to Do: To make air’s effects most apparent, you
need a ball that weighs little but has lots of surface area. A beach
ball is ideal, but a whiffle ball or hollow plastic ball will also do
nicely. See how far you can throw it. How does it stop? Does it
slow down and lose height gradually, or does it stop rapidly and
fall to the ground? Now make the ball spin as you throw it. Why
does the ball curve in flight? Does a faster spin make the ball
curve more or less? Which way is the ball spinning, and how is
the spin related to the direction of its curve? Change the direction of spin. Which way does the ball curve now?

When a Ball Moves Slowly: Laminar Airflow
One of the first things you might notice if you joined a new baseball franchise on the moon
is that pitched balls reach home plate faster than back at home. Since the moon has no
atmosphere, there is no air resistance to slow a ball down. In the previous section, we saw
how objects affect moving fluids. Now as we study aerodynamics, the science of air’s
dynamic interactions, we’ll see how fluids affect moving objects.
In air, a moving ball experiences aerodynamic forces—that is, forces exerted on it by
the air because of their relative motion. These consist of drag forces that push the ball
downwind and lift forces that push the ball to one side or the other (Fig. 6.2.1). We’ll begin
our study of ball aerodynamics with drag forces, commonly called air resistance, and we’ll
start with a slow-moving ball. The reason for starting slow is that at low speeds viscous
forces are able to organize the air as it flows around the ball; viscosity dominates over inertia, and the airflow around the slow-moving ball is laminar.
Figure 6.2.2 shows the pattern of laminar airflow around a slow-moving ball. Actually,
the pattern is the same whether the ball moves slowly through the air or the air moves
slowly past the ball. For simplicity, let’s move along with the ball and study the airflow
from the ball’s inertial frame of reference. In that inertial frame, the ball appears stationary
with the air flowing past it.
The slow-moving air separates neatly around the front of the ball and comes back
together behind it. It produces a wake, an air trail behind the ball, that’s smooth and free of
turbulence. However, the air’s speed and pressure aren’t uniform all the way around the
ball. The airflow bends several times as it travels around the ball and, as we saw in the
previous section, such bends always involve pressure imbalances. Since the air pressure far
from the ball is steadfastly atmospheric, those pressure imbalances are always caused by
pressure variations near the ball’s surface. Whenever air bends away from the ball, so
that the ball is on the outside of a bend, the pressure near the ball must be higher than
atmospheric. Whenever the air bends toward the ball, so that the ball is on the inside of a
bend, the pressure near the ball must be lower than atmospheric.

Lift

Airstream

Drag

Fig. 6.2.1 The two types
of aerodynamic forces
exerted on objects by air
are drag and lift. Drag
is exerted parallel to the
onrushing airstream and
slows the object’s motion
through the air. Lift is
exerted perpendicular to
that airstream so that it
pushes the object to one
side or the other. Lift is not
necessarily in the upward
direction.

154

CHAPT ER 6 Fluids and Motion

Low pressure
High speed

High pressure
Low speed

High pressure
Low speed

Fig. 6.2.2 The airflow around a slowly moving ball is laminar. Air slows down in front of and behind
the ball (widely spaced streamlines), and its pressure increases (shifts toward the violet end of the
spectrum). Air speeds up at the sides of the ball (narrowly spaced streamlines), and its pressure
decreases (shifts toward the red end of the spectrum). However, the pressure forces on the ball balance
one another perfectly, and it experiences no pressure drag. Only viscous drag is present to affect the ball.

4 When the airflow
around an object is
laminar, the pressure
forces on it cancel
perfectly and it experiences no drag due to
pressure imbalances—no
pressure drag. The
absence of pressure drag
was a great puzzlement to
early aerodynamicists,
who knew that the airflow
around dust is laminar and
that it experiences a drag
force. This mystery was
named d’Alembert’s
paradox, after Jean Le
Rond d’Alembert
(1717–1783), the French
mathematician who first
recognized it. D’Alembert
and his contemporaries
didn’t know about the
viscous drag force, which
is what really slows dust’s
motion through the air.

With that introduction, let’s examine the slow-moving airflow around the ball. Air
heading toward the ball’s front bends away from it, so the pressure near the front of the ball
must be higher than atmospheric. This rise in air pressure is accompanied by a decrease in
airspeed, the air’s speed relative to the ball. Figure 6.2.2 indicates the pressure rise by a
color shift toward the violet end of the spectrum and the decrease in airspeed by the widening separation of the streamlines.
The air rounding the ball’s sides bends toward it, so the pressure near those sides of the
ball must be below atmospheric. This drop in air pressure is accompanied by an increase in
airspeed. Figure 6.2.2 indicates the pressure drop by a color shift toward the red end of the
spectrum and the increase in airspeed by the narrowing separation of the streamlines.
The laminar airflow continues around to the back of the ball and then trails off behind
it. Since the departing air again bends away from the ball, the pressure near the back of the
ball must be higher than atmospheric. As before, the shift toward violet in Figure 6.2.2
indicates this pressure rise and the widening separation of the streamlines points out the
accompanying decrease in airspeed.
It may seem strange that the air pressure can be different at different points on the ball,
but that’s what happens in a flowing stream of air. It’s particularly remarkable that lowpressure air at the sides of the ball is able to flow around to the back of the ball, where the
pressure is higher. This air is experiencing a pressure imbalance that pushes it backward,
opposite its direction of travel. But a pressure imbalance causes acceleration, not velocity,
and the low-pressure air flowing past the sides of the ball has enough ordered energy and
forward momentum to carry it all the way to the back of the ball. Although this air slows as
it flows into the rising pressure, it manages to complete its journey.
The airflow around the ball is symmetrical, and the forces that air pressure exerts on
the ball are also symmetrical. These pressure forces cancel one another perfectly, so the
ball experiences no overall force due to pressure. Most important, the high pressure in
front of the ball is balanced by the high pressure behind it. As a result of this symmetrical
arrangement, the only aerodynamic force acting on the ball is viscous drag, the downstream frictional force caused by layers of viscous air sliding across the ball’s surface
(see 4 ).

Ball Sports: Air

We’ll soon see that viscous drag is only a small fraction of the air resistance experienced by sports balls. It is also the force that suspends dust in the air for hours and is an
important issue for airplane wings. Moreover, it’s a force that we’ve encountered before:
viscous drag slowed water in your garden hose in the previous section!

amline
Stre

155

Veloc
ities

Boundary layer

Check Your Understanding #1: Smooth Flow in a Stream
When water in a stream flows slowly past a small rock, the water in front of the rock slows down and
its increased pressure lifts the water level slightly. The water level behind the rock also rises slightly.
Explain.
Answer: The slow flow of water around the rock is laminar, so its pressure is highest at the front and
back of the rock. The increased pressure behind the rock lifts the water level there.
Why: Laminar flow around an obstacle tends to create high-pressure regions at the front and back,
and low-pressure regions on the sides. In the case of our small rock, the pressure differences are
visible as changes in the water level. At the front and back of the rock, the relatively high pressures
push the water level upward, while at the sides of the rock, the water level is depressed.

Fig. 6.2.3 As air flows
past a surface, a thin
layer of it is slowed
by viscous drag forces.
This boundary layer is
laminar at low Reynolds
numbers and doesn’t
become turbulent until the
Reynolds number exceeds
about 100,000.

When a Ball Moves Fast: Turbulent Airflow
Balls don’t always experience laminar airflow. Turbulence is common, particularly in
sports, and brings with it a new type of drag force. When the air flowing around a ball is
turbulent, the air pressure distribution is no longer symmetrical and the ball experiences
pressure drag, the downstream force exerted by unbalanced pressures in the moving air.
These unbalanced pressures exert an overall force on the ball that slows its motion
through the air.
A ball can experience turbulent airflow and pressure drag when the Reynolds number
exceeds about 2000. The Reynolds number, introduced in the previous section, combines
the ball’s size and speed with the air’s density and viscosity to give an indication of whether
the airflow is dominated by viscosity or inertia. At low Reynolds numbers, the air’s viscosity
dominates over its inertia and the airflow is laminar. At high Reynolds numbers, however,
air’s inertia dominates over its viscosity and the airflow tends to become turbulent. This
turbulence, however, won’t start until something triggers it, and viscosity provides that
trigger.
To understand viscosity’s role, we must look at the air near the ball’s surface. Even in
a strong wind, viscous forces slow down a thin boundary layer of air near the ball’s
surface (Fig. 6.2.3). Discovered by Ludwig Prandtl 5 with help from Gustave Eiffel
(Fig. 6.2.4), this boundary layer moves more slowly and has less ordered energy than the
freely flowing air farther from the surface.
As air flows toward the back of the ball, it travels through an adverse pressure gradient, a region of rising pressure that pushes backward on the air and causes it to decelerate.
While the freely flowing airstream outside the boundary layer has enough energy and forward momentum to continue onward and reach the back of the ball on its own, air in the
boundary layer does not. It needs a forward push.
At low Reynolds numbers, the entire airstream helps to push that boundary layer all
the way to the back of the ball and the airflow remains laminar. At high Reynolds numbers, however, viscous forces between the freely flowing airstream and the boundary
layer are too weak to keep the boundary layer moving forward into the rising pressure
behind the ball.
Without adequate help, the boundary layer eventually stalls; that is, it comes to a stop
and thereby spoils steady-state flow. More horrible still, this stalled boundary layer air is
pushed backward by the adverse pressure gradient and returns all the way to the ball’s
sides. As it does, it cuts like a wedge between the ball and the freely flowing airstream. The

5 Among Ludwig
Prandtl’s (German
engineer, 1875–1953)
many pivotal contributions to aerodynamic
theory is the concept of
boundary layers in fluid
motion. Prandtl was so
engrossed in establishing
Göttingen as the world’s
foremost aerodynamic
research facility that he
did not have time to court
a wife. Deciding he
should be married, Prandtl
wrote his former advisor’s
wife, asking to marry one
of her two daughters but
not specifying which one.
The family selected the
eldest daughter, and the
wedding took place.

156

CHAPT ER 6 Fluids and Motion

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Fig. 6.2.4 Early
experiments in aerodynamics
were performed by Gustave
Eiffel (French engineer,
1832–1923), who designed
the tower that bears his
name. In the 1890s, Eiffel
dropped objects of various
sizes and shapes from his
tower and measured the drag
that they experienced. His
work was used by Prandtl
to explain the reduction in
drag that accompanies the
appearance of turbulent
boundary layers.

result is an aerodynamic catastrophe—the airstream separates from the ball, leaving a huge
turbulent wake or air pocket behind the ball (Fig. 6.2.5).
Because of this turbulent wake, air no longer bends smoothly away from the back of
the ball and there is no rise in pressure there. Instead, the pressure behind the ball is
roughly atmospheric. The absence of a high-pressure region behind the ball spoils the
symmetry of pressure forces on the ball, and those forces no longer cancel. The ball experiences an overall pressure force downwind—the force of pressure drag. In effect, the ball
is transferring forward momentum to the air in its turbulent wake and dragging that wake
along with it.
Pressure drag slows the flight of almost any ball moving faster than a snail’s pace. The
pressure drag force is roughly proportional to the cross-sectional area of the turbulent air
pocket and to the square of the ball’s speed through the air. Area times speed is the volume
of air the ball affects per second. The second factor of speed recognizes how much the air’s
speed changes as the ball drags it along in its air pocket. For a ball moving at a moderate
speed, the air pocket is about as wide as the ball and the ball experiences a large pressure
drag force.

Check Your Understanding #2: Leaving No Trace
When your canoe coasts extremely slowly across the water of a still lake, it leaves almost no trail in
the water behind it. When you paddle it swiftly through the water, however, the canoe leaves a swirling wake. Explain this difference.
Answer: The slow-moving canoe experiences laminar flow in the water, while the fast-moving canoe
experiences turbulent flow.
Why: If the canoe’s speed is less than about 1 cm/s, its Reynolds number will be less than 2000 and
the water flow around it will be laminar. The water will pass smoothly around the canoe’s sides and
join back together behind it. However, when the canoe is moving fast enough that its Reynolds number exceeds 2000, the water flow becomes turbulent and the canoe leaves a churning wake in the
water behind it. This wake produces pressure drag on the canoe and extracts energy from it. Anyone
who has paddled a canoe knows that overcoming this pressure drag can be exhausting.

Low pressure
High speed

Reversed flow

Turbulent
wake

High pressure
Low speed

Fig. 6.2.5 When a ball’s speed gives it a Reynolds number between about 2000 and 100,000, its
laminar boundary layer stalls in the rising pressure behind the ball. The resulting reversed flow causes
the main airflow to separate from the ball’s surface, leaving a large, turbulent wake. The average
pressure behind the ball remains low, and the ball experiences a large pressure drag.

Ball Sports: Air

Low pressure
High speed

Turbulent
wake

Fig. 6.2.7 When a ball travels fast
enough that its Reynolds number exceeds
100,000, its boundary layer becomes
turbulent. This turbulent layer travels
much of the way around the back of the
ball before it separates from the surface.
The freely flowing air follows it, and the
two leave a relatively small turbulent
wake. The ball experiences only a modest
pressure drag.

High pressure
Low speed

The Dimples on a Golf Ball
If this were the whole story, you would never hit a home run at a baseball game or a
250-yard drive on the golf course. But inertia has yet another card to play.
At very high Reynolds numbers, the boundary layer itself becomes turbulent
(Fig. 6.2.6). It loses its laminar streamlines and begins to mix rapidly within itself and with
the freely flowing airstream nearby. This mixing brings additional ordered energy and forward momentum into the boundary layer and makes it both harder to stop and more resistant to reversed flow. Although this turbulent boundary layer still stalls before reaching the
back of the ball, the stalled air flows upstream only a short distance. The freely flowing
airstream still separates from the ball; however, that separation occurs far back on the ball
and the resulting turbulent wake is relatively small (Fig. 6.2.7).
As a result of this smaller air pocket, the pressure drag is reduced from what it would
be without the turbulent boundary layer. The effect of replacing the laminar boundary layer
with a turbulent one is enormous; it’s the difference between a golf drive of 70 yards and
one of 250 yards! The effects of the Reynolds number on the airflow around a ball are
summarized in Table 6.2.1.
Delaying the airflow separation behind the back of the ball is so important to distance
and speed that the balls of some sports are designed to encourage a turbulent boundary
layer (Fig. 6.2.8). Rather than waiting for the Reynolds number to exceed 100,000, the
point near which the boundary layer spontaneously becomes turbulent, these balls “trip”
the boundary layer deliberately (Fig. 6.2.9). They introduce some impediment to laminar
flow that causes the air near the ball’s surface to tumble about and become turbulent. The
drop in pressure drag more than makes up for the small increase in viscous drag, which is
why a golf ball has dimples. A tennis ball’s fuzz, however, evidently creates more drag than
it eliminates; shaving a tennis ball would actually help it maintain its speed.
TABLE 6.2.1

Effects of Reynolds Number on the Airflow around a Ball or Other Object

Reynolds Number

Boundary Layer

Type of Wake

Main Drag Force

<2000
2000–100,000

Laminar

Small laminar

Viscous

Laminar

Large turbulent

Pressure

>100,000

Turbulent

Small turbulent

Pressure

Stre

es
amlin

157

Veloc
itie
s

Boundary layer

Fig. 6.2.6 When the
Reynolds number exceeds
about 100,000, the
boundary layer of air
flowing past a surface
becomes turbulent. This
whirling fluid brings in
extra ordered energy and
forward momentum from
the freely flowing airstream
and can travel deep into
a region of increasing
pressure.

CHAPT ER 6 Fluids and Motion

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

158

Fig. 6.2.8 Early golf balls were handmade of leather and stuffed with feathers. Golf became
popular when cheap balls made of a hard rubber called gutta-percha became available. New, smooth
“gutties” (top-left) didn’t travel very far, though; they flew better when they were nicked and worn.
Manufacturers soon began to produce balls with various patterns of grooves (top-right) or bumps
(bottom-left) on them, and those balls traveled dramatically farther than smooth ones. Modern golf
balls (bottom-right) have dimples instead of grooves or bumps.

Boundary layer

Fig. 6.2.9 The boundary
layer can be made
turbulent at Reynolds
numbers below 100,000
by “tripping” it with
obstacles such as fuzz or
dimples.

How much does drag affect balls in various sports? For those that involve rapid movements through air or water, the answer is quite a bit. Drag forces increase dramatically with
speed; as soon as a turbulent wake and pressure drag appear, the drag force increases as the
square of a ball’s speed. As a result, baseball pitches slow significantly during their flights
to home plate, and the faster they’re thrown, the more speed they lose. A 90-mph fastball
loses about 8 mph en route, while a 70-mph curveball loses only about 6 mph.
A batted ball fares slightly better because it travels fast enough for the boundary layer
around it to become turbulent, an effect that appears at around 160 km/h (100 mph). While
the resulting reduction in drag explains why it’s possible to hit a home run, the presence of
air drag still shortens the distance the ball travels by as much as 50%. Without air drag, a
routine fly ball would become an out-of-the-park home run. To compensate for air drag, the
angle at which the ball should be hit for maximum distance isn’t the theoretical 45° above
horizontal discussed in Section 1.2. Because of the ball’s tendency to lose downfield velocity, it should be hit at a slightly lower angle, about 35° above horizontal (Fig. 6.2.10).
Since the ball loses much of its horizontal component of velocity during its trip to the
outfield, a long fly ball tends to drop almost straight down as you catch it. Gravity causes it
to move downward, but drag almost stops its horizontal motion away from home plate.
Drag also limits the downward speed of a falling ball to about 160 km/h (100 mph). That’s
the baseball’s terminal velocity, the downward velocity at which the upward drag force
exactly balances its downward weight and it stops accelerating. Even if the ball is dropped
from a plane, its velocity won’t exceed this value.

Height (m)

Streamlines

60
40
20
0
0

45°
35°
50
100
150
Distance downfield (m)

200

Fig. 6.2.10 Air drag slows the flight of a batted ball so
that the ideal angle at which to hit it isn’t the theoretical
45° of Fig. 1.2.7. An angle of roughly 35° above horizontal
will achieve the maximum distance.

Ball Sports: Air

Check Your Understanding #3: Designing a Great Sports Car
As an automobile designer, your job is to minimize the aerodynamic drag experienced by the car on
which you are working. Where should you try to locate the point at which the airflow separates from
the car?
Answer: The point should be located as far back on the car as possible.
Why: As for all large, fast-moving objects in air, pressure drag is the main source of air resistance.
You want to minimize this drag by keeping the air flowing smoothly over the car until it leaves the
rear around a small turbulent wake. The smaller the air pocket behind a car, the better. Aerodynamically designed production cars leave a turbulent wake that is only about one-third as large in area as
the thickest cross section of the car. Although there is still room for improvement, these cars experience far less drag than the boxy cars of earlier times.

Curveballs and Knuckleballs
The drag forces on a ball push it downstream, parallel to the onrushing air. In some cases,
though, the ball may also experience lift forces—forces that are exerted perpendicular to
the airflow (Fig. 6.2.1). To experience drag, the ball only has to slow the airflow down; to
experience lift, the ball must deflect the airflow to one side or the other. Although its name
implies an upward force, lift can also push the ball toward the side or even downward.
Curveballs and knuckleballs both use lift forces. In each of these famous baseball pitches,
the ball deflects the airstream toward one side and the ball accelerates toward the other. Again
we have action and reaction—the air and the ball push off one another. Getting the air to push
the ball sideways is no small trick. Explaining it isn’t easy either, but here we go.
A curveball is thrown by making the ball spin rapidly about an axis perpendicular to
its direction of motion. The choice of this axis determines which way the ball curves. In
Fig. 6.2.11, the ball is spinning clockwise, as viewed from above. With this choice of rotation axis, the ball curves to the pitcher’s right because the ball experiences two lift forces
to the right. One is the Magnus force, named after the German physicist H. G. Magnus
(1802–1870) who discovered it. The other is a force we will call the wake deflection force.
The Magnus force occurs because the spinning ball carries some of the viscous air around
with it (Fig. 6.2.11a). The steady-state flow pattern that forms around this ball is asymmetric:
the airstream that moves with the turning surface is much longer than the airstream that moves
opposite that surface. Since the longer airstream bends mostly toward the baseball, the average
pressure on that side of the ball must be below atmospheric. The shorter airstream bends
mostly away from the ball, so the average pressure on that side of the ball must be above
atmospheric. Because the pressure forces on the ball’s sides don’t balance one another, the ball
experiences the Magnus force toward the low-pressure side—the side turning toward the
pitcher—and deflects in that direction. The airflow deflects in the opposite direction.
In laminar flow, the Magnus force is the only lift force acting on a spinning object.
However, a pitched baseball has a turbulent wake behind it and is also acted on by the wake
deflection force. This force appears when the ball’s rapid rotation deforms the wake that
develops behind it at high Reynolds numbers. When the ball isn’t spinning, the freely flowing
airstream separates from the ball approximately at its side and that separation is symmetrical all the way around the ball’s middle (Fig. 6.2.5). However, when the ball is spinning
(Fig. 6.2.11b), the moving surface pushes on the airstream with viscous forces. As a result,
airstream separation is delayed on one side of the ball and hastened on the other. The overall wake of air behind the ball is thus deflected to one side, and the ball experiences the
wake deflection force toward the opposite side—the side turning toward the pitcher. The
wake deflection force and the Magnus force both push the ball in the same direction.
Of these two forces, the wake deflection force is probably the more important for a
curveball, although the Magnus force is usually given all the credit. A skillful pitcher can
make a baseball curve about 0.3 m (12 in) during its flight from the mound to home plate—

159

160

CHAPT ER 6 Fluids and Motion

Fig. 6.2.11 A rapidly
rotating baseball
experiences two lift forces
that cause it to curve in
flight. (a) The Magnus
force occurs because air
flowing around the ball in
the direction of its rotation
bends mostly toward it,
while air flowing opposite
its rotation bends mostly
away from it. (b) The wake
deflection force occurs
because air flowing around
the ball in the direction
of its rotation remains
attached to the ball longer
and the ball’s wake is
deflected.

Aerodynamic
forces
Rotation

(a)

Magnus force

Rotation

(b)

Wake deﬂection force

Rotation

Wa
ke

the more spin, the more curve. The pitcher counts on this change in direction to confuse the
batter. The pitcher can also choose the direction of the curve by selecting the axis of the
ball’s rotation. The ball will always curve toward the side of the ball that is turning toward
the pitcher. When thrown by a right-handed pitcher, a proper curveball curves down and to
the left, a slider curves horizontally to the left, and a screwball curves down and to the right.
When the pitcher throws a ball with backspin, so that the top of the ball turns toward
the pitcher, the ball experiences an upward lift force. In baseball this force isn’t strong
enough to overcome gravity, but it does make the pitch hang in the air for an unusually long
time and appear to “hop.” Not surprisingly, a fastball thrown with strong backspin is called
a hanging fastball. A fastball thrown with relatively little spin falls naturally and is called a
sinking fastball. In golf, where the club can give the ball enormous backspin, the ball really
does lift itself upward so that it flies down the fairway like a glider.
There are, however, some interesting cases when a ball’s behavior stems from its lack
of spin. In baseball, for example, a knuckleball is thrown by giving the ball almost no rotation. The ball’s seams are then very important. As air passes over a seam, the flow is disturbed so that the ball experiences a sideways aerodynamic force, a lift force. The ball
flutters about in a remarkably erratic manner. Releasing the ball without making it spin is
difficult and requires great skill. Pitchers who are unable to throw a knuckleball legally
sometimes resort to lubricating their fingers so that the ball slips out of their hands without
spinning. Like its legal relative, this so-called spitball dithers about and is hard to hit. The
same is true for a scuffed ball.
Check Your Understanding #4: Center Court
One of the most difficult and effective strokes in tennis is the topspin lob, in which the top of the
ball spins away from the player who hit it. Which way is the lift force on this ball directed?
Answer: The lift force is directed downward, so the ball accelerates downward faster than it would by
gravity alone.
Why: A ball with topspin falls faster than it would without a spin. In tennis, the topspin strokes
appear to dive downward once they cross the net. Their downward curve means that they can travel
very fast and still remain inside the court and are thus very hard to return.

Airplanes

SECTION 6.3

Airplanes
Fin
Rudder

Fuselage
Aileron
Trailing edge
Spoiler
Flap
Antenna

Elevator

Windshield
Wing

Nose

Door
Weather radar

Main
landing
gear

Nose landing gear

upside down? Why do most fast commercial aircraft employ jet
engines and not propellers?

Tail

Horizontal stabilizer

Anticollision light

Window

161

Engine
mounting
pylon

Wingtip
extension

Slat
Leading edge

Turbofan
engine

We have now set the stage for the ultimate aerodynamic
machines—airplanes. Freed from contact with the ground, airplanes are affected only by aerodynamic forces and gravity,
hopefully in that order. Despite their complex appearances,
airplanes employ physical principles that we have already successfully examined. This section revisits many familiar concepts, but it also explores new territory. For example, you may
have already figured out what type of aerodynamic force holds
an airplane up, but what type of aerodynamic force keeps it
moving forward?
Questions to Think About: Why are the wings of small, propeller-driven aircraft relatively large and bowed compared to
those of jets? Why does a commercial airplane extend slats
and flaps from its wings during takeoffs and landings? What
pushes airplanes forward in flight? How can some airplanes fly

Experiments to Do: The best experiment for this section is to
take a plane flight or at least to visit the airport and watch the
planes.
As you sit in the plane during takeoff, feel the plane accelerating forward. If you’re on a commercial jet, notice that the
slats and flaps on the airplane’s wings are extended during
takeoff, making the wings wider and more curved. How could
this increased width and curvature help the plane take off? The
pilot holds the plane on the ground until it reaches the proper
speed, then quickly tips it upward into the air. An invisible
vortex of air peels away from the trailing edge of the wing, and
the plane lifts off the ground.
Once airborne, the airplane retracts its landing gear, slats,
and flaps. Watch the trailing edge of each wing as the plane
turns or changes altitudes; you’ll see various surfaces there
move up or down. Similar motions occur on the tail. How do
these surfaces control the plane’s orientation?
Near its destination, the airplane prepares for landing.
Again the slats and flaps are extended. Watch as spoilers on
the tops of the wings pop up and down noisily. How do these
surfaces affect the drag force on the plane? The plane’s landing gear extends, and it touches down on the runway. The propellers or jet engines abruptly begin to slow the airplane,
assisted by the spoilers on the wings. Feel the plane accelerating backward. Another invisible vortex of air peels away from
the trailing edge of the wing, rotating in the opposite direction
from the first vortex, and the flight is over.

Airplane Wings: Streamlining
By now you’ve probably realized that an airplane is supported in flight by an upward lift
force on its wings and that this lift force comes from deflecting the passing airflow downward. Each wing is an airfoil, an aerodynamically engineered surface that’s designed to
obtain particular lift and drag forces from the air flowing past it. More specifically, each
wing is shaped and oriented so that, during flight, the airstream flowing over the wing bends
downward toward its top surface while the airstream under the wing bends downward away
from its bottom surface. These bends are associated with pressure changes near the wing
itself and are responsible for the upward lift force that suspends the airplane in the sky.
However, to get a more complete understanding of how the wing develops this lift, let’s
go for a flight. Imagine yourself in an airplane that has just begun rolling down the runway.
From your perspective, air is beginning to flow past each of the airplane’s wings. When this
moving air encounters the wing’s leading edge, it separates into two airstreams: one traveling over the wing and the other under it (Fig. 6.3.1). These airstreams continue onward until
they leave the wing’s trailing edge. Since the airplane’s nose is still on the ground, the wing
is essentially horizontal and the airflow around it is simple and symmetrical.
Since the wing isn’t deflecting the airflow yet, it’s experiencing no lift, only drag.
However, while this drag pushes the airplane downwind, opposite its forward motion along

162

CHAPT ER 6 Fluids and Motion

Fig. 6.3.1 An airplane wing is a
streamlined airfoil, and the airflow
around it is laminar. This horizontal
wing is symmetric, top and bottom, and
the airflow splits evenly into airstreams
above and below it. Since it doesn’t
deflect the airflow, it experiences no lift.

the runway, the effect is weak. The wing produces almost no turbulent wake and thus experiences almost no pressure drag. What little drag it does experience is mostly viscous drag,
essentially surface friction with the passing air.
Although the wing’s near lack of air resistance should surprise you, you probably take
it for granted. That’s because you’ve often observed that such “streamlined” objects cut
through the air particularly well. Having a long, tapered tail allows the wing to avoid the
flow separation and turbulent wake that occur behind an unstreamlined ball.
What makes the horizontal wing streamlined is the extremely gradual rise in air pressure after its widest point. Although this gently rising pressure pushes the wing’s boundary
layer backward, opposite the direction of flow, the force it exerts is so weak that the layer
doesn’t stall. Driven onward by viscous forces from the freely flowing airstream, the wing’s
boundary layer manages to keep moving forward all the way to the wing’s trailing edge and
never triggers flow separation. The wing produces almost no turbulent wake and experiences almost no pressure drag.
Check Your Understanding #1: Slicing through the Air
The fastest bicycles are those with fairings, streamlined shells that reduce air resistance dramatically. How do those fairings work?
Answer: A fairing delays airstream separation in the airflow around a bicycle and thereby reduces
pressure drag.
Why: Without a fairing, a bicycle racer must struggle against severe pressure drag. The sharply rising
pressure gradients that follow wide parts of his body trigger flow separation, and he develops a huge
turbulent wake. A fairing makes the vehicle streamlined; the gently rising pressure gradient following
its widest part doesn’t trigger flow separation.

Airplane Wings: Producing Lift
With so little air resistance, the airplane accelerates forward rapidly and soon reaches takeoff speed. The pilot then raises the airplane’s nose so that its wings are no longer horizontal,
and they begin to experience upward lift forces. The airplane’s total lift soon exceeds its
weight, and it begins to accelerate upward into the air. The airplane is flying!
Let’s take a closer look at the moment of takeoff. If you could see the airflow and were
paying close attention, you’d notice a remarkable sequence of events that begins when the
wings tilt upward.

Airplanes

(a)

(c)

(b)

Vortex

No lift

Shedding a vortex

Lift

Fig. 6.3.2 (a) Although this wing’s leading edge has been tipped upward, giving it a positive angle
of attack, the airflow around it is relatively symmetric and produces no lift. (b) The kink at the trailing
edge of the wing is unstable and is blown away or shed as a horizontal vortex. (c) The resulting airflow
is deflected downward and the wing experiences an upward lift force.

At first, the airflow around the tilted wings continues to travel horizontally on average,
although it develops a peculiar shape (Fig. 6.3.2a). The two airstreams, one over the tilted wing
and one under it, each bend twice—once up and once down. As we saw while studying balls,
when an airstream bends toward the wing, the pressure near the wing is less than atmospheric
and when an airstream bends away from the wing, the pressure near the wing is greater than
atmospheric. Since each airstream bends equally toward and away from the wing, the average
pressures above and below the wing are equal and the wing experiences no lift.
The lower airstream, however, is making a sharp bend around the wing’s trailing edge,
essentially an upward kink. Air’s inertia makes such a kink unstable, and it soon blows
away from the wing’s trailing edge as a swirling horizontal vortex of air (Fig. 6.3.2b). After
shedding that vortex, the wing establishes a new, stable flow pattern in which both airstreams glide smoothly away from the wing’s trailing edge (Fig. 6.3.2c), a situation named
the Kutta condition after the German mathematician M. Wilhelm Kutta (1867–1944).
In this new pattern, the airstream flowing over the wing is longer than the airstream
flowing under it and both airstreams bend downward (Fig. 6.3.3). The upper airstream bends
primarily toward the wing, so the air’s pressure just above the wing is less than atmospheric
(a shift toward red) and its speed is increased (narrowly spaced streamlines). In contrast, the
lower airstream bends primarily away from the wing, so the air’s pressure just below the
wing is greater than atmospheric (a shift toward violet) and its speed is decreased (widely
spaced streamlines). The air pressure is now higher under the wing than over it, so this new
flow pattern produces upward lift. The air now supports your plane and up you go.
Another way to think about this lift is as a deflection of the airflow. Air approaches the
wing horizontally but leaves heading somewhat downward. To cause this deflection, the
wing must push the airflow downward. In reaction, the airflow pushes the wing upward and
produces lift. In other words, the wing transfers downward momentum to the air and is left
with upward momentum. These two explanations for lift—the Bernoullian view that lift is
caused by a pressure difference above and below the wing, and the Newtonian view that lift
is caused by a transfer of momentum to the air—are perfectly equivalent and equally valid.
However, the overall aerodynamic force on the wing isn’t quite perpendicular to the
onrushing air; it tilts slightly downwind. The perpendicular component of this aerodynamic force is lift, but the downwind component is a new type of drag force—induced
drag. Induced drag is a consequence of energy conservation; in addition to transferring
momentum to the passing air, the wing also transfers some energy to it. The air extracts
that energy from the wing by pushing the wing downwind with induced drag and thereby
doing negative work on it. Since induced drag is undesirable, the airplane minimizes it by
using as much air mass as possible to obtain its lift. A larger mass of air carries away the

163

164

CHAPT ER 6 Fluids and Motion

(a)
Induced drag

Lift

(b)

Aerodynamic force

High pressure
Low speed

Angle of attack

Fig. 6.3.3 (a) This airplane wing is shaped and oriented so that both airstreams, over it and under
it, bend downward. The wing experiences a large aerodynamic force that points upward and slightly
downstream. The upward component of this force is lift. The downstream component is induced drag.
(b) Smoke trails in a wind tunnel show the airflow past a wing.

(a) Horizontal virtual wind
20°
10°
0°
(b) Rising virtual wind
20°
10°
0°
(c) Descending virtual wind
20°
10°
0°
Virtual
wind

Angle
of attack

Fig. 6.3.4 (a) When flying
horizontally through calm
air, an airplane’s wing
encounters a horizontal
virtual wind. The wing’s
angle of attack is measured
relative to that wind.
(b) When flying through
a rising virtual wind, the
wing’s angle of attack
is greater than its angle
above horizontal. (c) When
flying through a descending
virtual wind, the wing’s
angle of attack is less than
its angle above horizontal.

airplane’s unwanted downward momentum while moving downward less quickly and
with less kinetic energy. Since larger wings obtain their lift from larger air masses, they
experience less induced drag.
Unfortunately, larger wings also have more surface area and experience more viscous
drag, so bigger isn’t always better. Also, because wing shape and airspeed affect aerodynamic forces, too, wings must be carefully matched to their airplanes. Small propeller airplanes that move slowly through the air need relatively large, highly curved wings to support them. Those wings are often asymmetrical—more curved on top than on bottom to
make maximum use of the limited, low-speed air they encounter each second. Commercial
and military jets fly faster and encounter far more high-speed air each second, so they can
get by with relatively small, moderately curved wings.
Even at constant airspeed, a wing’s lift can be adjusted by varying its angle of attack,
the angle at which it approaches the onrushing air. The larger the angle of attack, the more
the two airstreams bend and the greater the wing’s lift. Because the wings are rigidly attached
to the plane, the pilot has no choice but to tip the entire plane to adjust its lift. The pilot tips
the nose of the plane upward to increase the lift and downward to reduce the lift. That’s why
raising the plane’s nose during takeoff is what finally makes the plane leap up into the air.
Since lift depends so strongly on a wing’s angle of attack, some planes can be flown
upside down. As long as the inverted wing is tilted properly, it obtains upward lift and supports the plane. This feat is easiest when a plane’s wing has the same curvature, top and
bottom. That’s why stunt fliers who regularly fly upside down often use sport aircraft that
have symmetrical or nearly symmetrical wings.
When a plane is in level flight through calm air, the wing’s angle of attack is simply its
angle above horizontal (Fig. 6.3.4a). As viewed from the plane’s inertial frame of reference,
the air’s velocity is directed horizontally toward the plane and acts as a horizontal virtual
wind as it approaches the wings. The angle of attack is measured relative to that virtual wind.
When the plane is not in level flight or when the air itself is moving up or down, however, the virtual wind is no longer horizontal. While descending or flying through rising air,
the plane encounters a rising virtual wind—the onrushing air’s velocity is tilted upward (Fig.
6.3.4b). The wing’s angle of attack, still measured relative to that virtual wind, is greater
than its angle above horizontal and its lift increases. While ascending or flying through

© Omikron/SPL/Photo Researchers, Inc.

Low pressure
High speed

Airplanes

descending air, the plane encounters a descending virtual wind—the onrushing air’s velocity
is tilted downward (Fig. 6.3.4c). The wing’s angle of attack is less than its angle above horizontal and its lift decreases. When a plane flies through bad weather, with air that is moving
alternately up and down, the rapid changes in virtual wind direction lead to fluctuations in
lift and exciting accelerations. No wonder there are air sickness bags in the seat pockets.
Check Your Understanding #2: Blowing in the Wind
The sail of a small sailboat bows forward and outward so that wind traveling around the sail’s outside
surface bends toward the sail, while wind traveling across its inside surface bends away from the sail.
How does this arrangement propel the sailboat across the water?
Answer: The air traveling around the outside of the sail has a lower pressure than that traveling across
the inside of the sail. The sail experiences a lift force that pushes it and the boat across the water.
Why: Sails experience both lift and drag forces. The sail experiences an aerodynamic force that
pushes it outward (lift) and slightly downwind (drag) just as an airplane wing experiences an aerodynamic force upward (lift) and slightly downwind (drag). The sailboat’s keel, or centerboard, and its
rudder provide additional forces so that the net force on the sailboat can be controlled and it can
travel in a variety of directions.

Lift Has Its Limits: Stalling a Wing
There’s a limit to how much lift the pilot can obtain by increasing the wing’s angle of attack
because tilting the wing gradually transforms it from streamlined to blunt—that is, to having a rapid rise in air pressure after its widest point. As we saw for balls, blunt objects
generally experience airflow separation and pressure drag. Indeed, beyond a certain angle
of attack, the airstream over the top of a wing separates from its surface and the wing stalls.
This separation starts when air in the upper boundary layer is brought to a standstill by the
rapidly rising pressure beyond the wing’s widest point. Once this boundary layer stalls, it
shaves most of the airstream away from the wing’s upper surface.
The separated airstream over the top of the stalled wing leaves a billowing storm of
turbulence beneath it (Fig. 6.3.5). This airstream separation is an aerodynamic catastrophe

© Gary S. Settles and Jason Listak/Photo Researchers, Inc.

(a)

Aerodynamic force

(b)

Lift
Pressure drag

High pressure
Low speed

Turbulent
wake

Angle of attack

Fig. 6.3.5 (a) A wing stalls when the airstream over the top of the wing separates from its surface.
A turbulent air pocket forms above the wing, making it much less efficient. The wing’s lift decreases
because the average pressure above the thickest part of the wing becomes higher, and the drag increases
because the average pressure above the trailing edge becomes lower. (b) Smoke trails in a wind tunnel
show that the air separates from the surface and becomes turbulent as it flows over a stalled wing.

165

166

CHAPT ER 6 Fluids and Motion

(a)

(b)

(c)
Vane
Slat
Flap

Fig. 6.3.6 At cruising
speed, an airplane’s wings
are moderately curved
airfoils (a). During takeoffs
(b) and landings (c), slats
are extended from the
leading edges and flaps
from the trailing edges.
The airfoils become much
more highly curved,
generating more lift at low
speeds. During landing, a
vane is also extended for
boundary layer control to
prevent stalling.

6 Airplane designers can
reduce the dangers of
stalling by adding special
boundary layer control
devices to their aircraft.
Narrow metal strips called
vortex generators, which
stick up from the surfaces
of wings, introduce
turbulence into the
boundary layers over the
wings. This turbulent flow
allows higher-energy air
to mix with the boundary
layers so that they can
continue forward into
rising pressure. This
process helps keep the
airstreams attached to the
surfaces.

for the airplane. Because the average pressure above the wing increases, the wing loses
much of its lift. Also, the appearance of a turbulent wake heralds the arrival of severe pressure drag. The plane slows dramatically and begins to fall.
To avoid stalling, pilots keep the angle of attack within a safe range. The possibility of
stalling also limits the minimum speed at which the airplane will fly. As the airplane slows
down, the pilot must increase its angle of attack to maintain adequate lift. Below a certain
speed, the airplane can’t obtain that lift without tilting its wings until they stall. It can no
longer fly.
To avoid stalling, a plane must never fly slower than this minimum speed, particularly
during landings and takeoffs. For a small, propeller-driven plane with highly curved wings,
the minimum flight speed is so low that it’s rarely an issue. For a commercial jet, however,
the minimum airspeed is about 220 km/h (140 mph). Airplanes taking off or landing this
fast would require very long runways on which to build up or get rid of speed. Instead,
commercial jets have wings that can change shape during flight. Slats move forward and
down from the leading edges of the wings, and flaps move back and down from the trailing
edges (Fig. 6.3.6). With both slats and flaps extended, the wing becomes larger and more
curved, similar to the wings of a small propeller plane, and the minimum safe airspeed
drops to a reasonable 150 km/h (95 mph). Vanes near the flaps also emerge during landings
to direct high-energy air from beneath the wings onto the flaps. These jets of air keep the
boundary layers moving downstream and help prevent stalling. (For another approach to
stall prevention, see 6 ).
Once a commercial jet lands, flat panels on the top surfaces of its wings are tilted
upward and cause the airflow to separate from the tops of the wings. The resulting
turbulence created by these spoilers reduces the lift of the wings and increases their
drag so the plane doesn’t accidentally start flying again. Even before landing, the
spoilers are sometimes used to slow the plane and help it descend rapidly toward an
airport.
In flight, a wing does more than just push the passing air downward; it also twists the
air near its tip. Since the air pressure below the wing is greater than the air pressure above
it, air tends to flow around the wing’s tip from bottom to top. The plane soon leaves this
air behind, but not before the air has acquired lots of angular momentum and kinetic
energy.
A swirling vortex thus emerges from each wingtip and trails behind the plane for several kilometers, like an invisible tornado. You can occasionally see them behind a plane
that’s landing or taking off in humid air. A wingtip vortex from a jumbo jet can flip over a
small aircraft that flies through it or give passengers in a much larger plane an unexpected
thrill. Entered from behind, one of these vortices feels like a horizontal blender; from the
side, it feels like a speed hump that you might drive over in a car.
For safety, air traffic controllers are careful to keep planes from flying through one
another’s wakes and schedule them at least 90 seconds apart on runways. Many modern
airplanes have vertical wingtip extensions that reduce these vortices, both to save energy
and to diminish the hazard (Fig. 6.3.7).

Check Your Understanding #3: Stunt Flying
A pilot normally tips the plane’s nose upward to gain altitude. If the pilot tries to make the plane rise
too quickly, the plane will suddenly begin to drop. What is happening?
Answer: The plane’s wings are stalling.
Why: Tipping the plane’s nose upward increases the wings’ angle of attack. While this action increases
lift up to a point, it can also cause the airflow to separate from the top surface of the wing. The
sudden reduction in lift and increase in drag that accompany stalling can cause the plane to drop. A
stall during takeoff or landing is extremely dangerous.

Airplanes

167

© Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Fig. 6.3.7 This vertical
wingtip keeps air from flowing
around the end of the wing, a
motion that would otherwise
leave a powerful vortex in the
air trailing behind the plane.
Such wingtip vortices waste
energy and are hazardous for
other aircraft.

Propellers
For a plane to obtain lift, it needs airspeed; air must flow across its wings. And since drag
forces push it downwind, a plane in level flight can’t maintain its airspeed unless something
pushes it upwind. That’s why a plane has propellers or jet engines, to push the air backward
so that the air pushes the plane forward—action and reaction.
A propeller is an assembly of rotating wings. Extending from its central hub are two
or more blades that together form a sophisticated fan (Fig. 6.3.8). These blades have airfoil
cross sections and are designed to create forward lift forces when the propeller turns and
the blades move through the air.
As a propeller blade slices through the air, the airstreams bending around that blade
experience pressure variations (Fig. 6.3.9). The forward airstream bends toward the blade’s
front surface, so the pressure in front of the blade drops below atmospheric. The rearward
airstream bends away from the blade’s rear surface, so the pressure behind the blade rises
above atmospheric. The resulting pressure difference produces a forward force on the blade
and propeller, a thrust force.
The propeller blades have all the features, good and bad, of airplane wings. Their
thrust increases with size, front-surface curvature, pitch (that is, angle of attack), and
airspeed; in other words, the larger the propeller, the faster it turns, and the more its
blades are angled into the wind, the more thrust it produces. The blades themselves have
a twisted shape to accommodate the variations in airspeed along their lengths, from hub
to tip.
Like a wing, a propeller stalls when the airflow separates from the front surfaces of
its blades; it suddenly becomes more of an air mixer than a propeller. This stalled-wing

Rotation

Front

Rear

Fig. 6.3.9 As the propeller blade rotates, the flow of air around it
creates a low pressure in front of it (left) and a high pressure behind
it (right). The blade experiences a lift force that pushes the propeller
and plane forward (toward the left). Induced drag tends to slow the
rotation of the propeller.

Force
on air

Thrust
Engine

Fig. 6.3.8 A propeller
behaves like a rotating
wing. As the propeller
turns, its blades create lift
in the forward direction.
This lift pushes the
propeller and the aircraft
forward through the air, so
it’s called thrust.

168

CHAPT ER 6 Fluids and Motion

The Granger Collection, New York

Fig. 6.3.10 The Wright brothers were
accomplished aerodynamicists, using
this wind tunnel to study and perfect
wings and propellers for their airplanes.

8 In addition to achieving
the first self-propelled
flight of an airplane in
1903, Orville (1871–1948)
and Wilbur (1867–1912)
Wright (American
aviators) were exceptionally accomplished
aerodynamicists. In 1902,
Wilbur was the first
person to recognize that a
propeller is actually a
rotating wing. Propellers
up until his time were
little more than rotating
paddles, more effective at
stirring the air than
propelling the plane.
Wilbur’s aerodynamically
redesigned propeller made
flight possible and
dominated aircraft design
for a decade.

behavior was the standard operating condition for air and marine propellers (see 7 ) before
the work of Wilbur Wright in 1902 (see 8 ). The Wrights were among the first people to
study aerodynamics using a wind tunnel (Fig. 6.3.10), and their methodical and scientific
approach to aeronautics allowed them to achieve the first powered flight (Fig. 6.3.11).
Since the Wrights’ work, propellers have experienced almost no pressure drag.
A propeller does, however, experience induced drag. As the propeller’s thrust pushes
the plane through the air, induced drag extracts energy from the propeller. To keep the propeller turning steadily, an engine must do work on the propeller. Propellers are driven by
high-performance reciprocating (piston-based) engines, like those found in automobiles, or
by the turbojet engines that we’ll discuss later.
Propellers aren’t perfect; they have three serious limitations. First, a propeller exerts a
torque on the passing air, so that air exerts a torque on the propeller. This reaction torque
can flip a small plane. To minimize torque problems, some planes use pairs of oppositely
turning propellers and single-propeller planes usually locate their propellers in front so that
the spinning air can return angular momentum to them while passing over their wings.
A second problem with a propeller is that its thrust diminishes as the plane’s forward
speed increases. When the airplane is stationary, a propeller blade moves through motionless air (Fig. 6.3.12a). When the airplane is traveling fast, though, the air approaches that
same propeller blade from the front of the plane (Fig. 6.3.12b). To retain its thrust at higher
airspeeds, the propeller blade must increase its pitch—that is, its angle of attack. It must
swivel forward to meet the onrushing air.

Fig. 6.3.11 The era of
powered flight began at 10:35
a.m. on Dec. 17, 1903, when
the Wright Flyer lifted Orville
Wright into the air over Kitty
Hawk, North Carolina. His
brother Wilbur stands beside
him in this unique photograph
of that first powered flight.

The Granger Collection, New York

7 One of the principal
sources of noise in
submarines is the
turbulence created by their
propellers. To reduce this
turbulence, the propellers
of modern nuclear
submarines are designed
to avoid water flow
separation and stalling.

Airplanes

The third and most discouraging problem with propellers, especially in high-speed
aircraft, is drag. To keep up with the onrushing air at high airspeeds, the propellers must
turn at phenomenal rates. The tips of the blades must travel so fast that they exceed the
speed of sound, the fastest speed at which a fluid such as air can convey forces from one
place to another. When the blade tip exceeds this speed, the air near the tip doesn’t accelerate
until the tip actually hits it. Instead of flowing smoothly around the tip, the air forms a
shock wave, a narrow region of high pressure and temperature caused by the supersonic
impact, and the propeller stalls. That’s why propellers aren’t useful on high-speed aircraft.

(a)

169

ion

tat

Ro

Pitch

Check Your Understanding #4: Circulating the Air
Low airspeed

The only difference between a fan and a propeller is what moves—the air or the object. Which side
of each fan blade experiences the lowest air pressure, the inlet or the outlet side?

(b)

Answer: The inlet side of each fan blade experiences the lowest air pressure.

ion

tat

Why: Air blowing toward you from a fan is like the air blown back by a propeller. The lowest pressures
experienced by a propeller are on its forward surfaces. Similarly, the lowest pressures experienced by
a fan are on its inlet side surfaces. This pressure imbalance pushes the fan away from you while the
fan pushes the air toward you.

Ro

Jet Engines
Unlike propellers, jet engines work well at high speeds. While a propeller tries to operate
directly in the high-speed air approaching the plane, a jet engine first slows this air down to
a manageable speed. To achieve this change in speeds, the jet engine makes wonderful use
of the energy transformations allowed by Bernoulli’s equation. Strictly speaking, Bernoulli’s
equation applies only to incompressible fluids such as water. Nonetheless, it’s often usable
for compressible fluids such as air, especially when the speed and pressure variations are
relatively small.
A turbojet engine is depicted in Fig. 6.3.13. During flight, air rushes into the engine’s
inlet duct or diffuser at about 800 km/h (500 mph), the airspeed of the plane. Once inside
that diffuser, the air slows down and its pressure increases, leaving its ordered energy
unchanged. The air then passes through a series of fanlike compressor blades that push it
deeper into the engine, doing work on it and increasing both its pressure and its ordered
energy. By the time the air arrives at the combustion chamber, its pressure is many times
atmospheric.
Combustion
chamber

Diffuser

Nozzle

Exhaust
jet

Air
inlet

Low-pressure
compressor

High-pressure
compressor

Fuel
inlet

Turbines

Fig. 6.3.13 The turbojet engine operates by compressing incoming air with a series of fanlike blades.
Fuel is mixed with the high-pressure air, and the mixture is ignited. The high-energy, high-pressure air
accelerates out the rear of the jet, does work on the turbines, and leaves at a greater speed than it had
when it arrived. The engine has accelerated the air backward and experiences a thrust forward.

Pitch
High airspeed

Fig. 6.3.12 At low
airspeeds (a), the propeller
blade approaches nearly
stationary air as it rotates.
At high airspeeds (b), air
rushes past the propeller,
so the blade must swivel
forward to meet it. The
blade’s angle of attack is
called its pitch.

170

CHAPT ER 6 Fluids and Motion

Fan duct
Combustion
chamber

Diffuser

Nozzle

Exhaust
jet

Air
inlet

Low-pressure
compressor
Fan

9 Ramjets are jet engines
that have no moving parts.
Air that approaches the
engine at supersonic
speeds interacts with
carefully tapered surfaces
so that its own forward
momentum compresses it
to high density. The
engine then adds fuel to
this pressurized air, ignites
the mixture, and allows
the hot burned gas to
expand out of a nozzle.
The engine pushes this
exhaust backward, and the
exhaust propels the engine
and airplane forward.
Although the air enters the
engine at supersonic
speeds, it passes through
the combustion chamber
much more slowly. In a
supersonic combustion
ramjet, or “scramjet,” the
fuel and air mixture flows
through the combustion
chamber at supersonic
speeds. This motion
makes it extremely
difficult to keep the fuel
burning because the flame
tends to flow downstream
and out of the engine. The
flame can’t advance
through the mixture faster
than the speed of sound,
so it won’t spread
upstream fast enough to
stay in the engine on its
own.

Fuel
inlet

Turbines

High-pressure
compressor

Fig. 6.3.14 The turbofan engine adds a giant fan to the shaft of a normal turbojet engine. Most of
the air passing through the fan bypasses the turbojet and returns directly to the airstream around the
engine. Because the fan does work on this air, it leaves the engine at a higher speed than it had when
it arrived. The air has transferred forward momentum to the engine and the plane.

Now fuel is added to the air, and the mixture is ignited. The pressure of this gaseous
mixture doesn’t increase as it burns; instead, it expands to occupy more volume. Furthermore, combustion subdivides the fuel molecules into smaller pieces that, therefore, take up
still more volume. This extremely hot, high-pressure exhaust gas pours out of the combustion chamber through a wider channel than the one it entered.
The exhaust gas then streams through windmill-like turbine, doing work on that turbine and thereby powering the compressor for the incoming air. After the turbine, the still
high-pressure gas finally accelerates and expands through the engine’s outlet nozzle and
emerges into the open sky at atmospheric pressure, moderately high temperature, and
extraordinarily high speed.
Overall, the engine slows the air down, adds energy to it, and then lets it accelerate back
to high speed. Because the engine has added energy to the air, the air leaves the engine traveling faster than when it arrived. The air’s increased backward velocity means that the jet
engine has pushed it backward and the air has reacted by exerting a forward thrust force on
the jet engine. In other words, the airplane has obtained forward momentum by giving the
departing air backward momentum.
The turbojet is less energy efficient than it could be. Since it gives backward momentum to a relatively small mass of air, that air ends up traveling overly fast and with excessive kinetic energy. To make the engine more efficient, it should give backward momentum
to a larger mass of air.
The turbofan engine solves this problem by using a turbojet engine to spin a huge fan
(Fig. 6.3.14). Since this fan is located in the engine’s inlet duct, the air’s speed decreases
and its pressure increases before it enters the fan. The fan then does work on the air and
further increases its pressure. While about 5% of this air then enters the turbojet engine, the
vast majority of it accelerates out the back of the fan duct and emerges into the open sky at
atmospheric pressure and increased speed. Overall, the fan has pushed the air backward
and the air has pushed the fan forward, producing forward thrust.
Like a turbojet, the turbofan slows air down, adds energy to it, and then lets it accelerate
back to high speed. However, because the turbofan engine moves more air than a turbojet
engine, it gives that air less energy and uses less fuel. Because of their increased efficiency,
turbofans are used in all modern commercial jets. (For another type of jet engine, see 9 .)

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations

Check Your Understanding #5: Energy and a Jet Engine
A jet engine somehow slows the air down, adds energy to it at low speed, and then returns the air to
high speed. Why doesn’t slowing the air down waste lots of energy?
Answer: As the air is slowed down, its pressure increases. The air’s ordered energy remains constant.
Why: The remarkable result of Bernoulli’s effect is that you can slow the air down without squandering its kinetic energy. That energy becomes pressure potential energy, and it passes through the jet
engine in that form. As the air leaves the jet engine, its pressure potential energy becomes kinetic
energy once again, so no energy is wasted.

Epilogue for Chapter 6
In this chapter, we have looked at a number of objects that use moving fluids to perform
their tasks. In Garden Watering, we saw how water moves through openings and channels.
We looked at the effects of viscosity and the importance of Bernoulli’s equation in describing the conversion of pressure potential energy into kinetic energy and vice versa. Two
types of fluid flow appeared: laminar and turbulent. While laminar flow is smooth and
predictable, turbulent flow involves unpredictability and chaos, a common behavior in our
complicated universe.
In the section on Ball Sports: Air, we examined the ways in which moving air exerts
forces on larger objects, both in the downstream direction as drag and in a perpendicular
direction as lift. We learned about two different types of drag forces and how these can be
controlled or reduced by choosing the shapes or motions of the balls.
Finally, in Airplanes, we explored the aerodynamics of those remarkable machines.
We saw how they use air to support and propel themselves. We also examined the limitations of wings and saw what can go wrong if those limitations are exceeded. We studied
propulsion in propeller planes and in jet aircraft, and saw that these systems involve
Bernoulli’s equation and the forward force that comes from pushing air backward.

Explanation: A Vortex Cannon
The vortex cannon creates ring vortices, tiny tornadoes that are bent into loops and so have
no beginnings or ends. Air swirls forward in the middle of each ring and backward on its
outer edge. This circular tornado structure is created when air flows through the hole of the
vortex cannon. Air flows forward in the middle of the hole, while the hole’s edges create
the backward flow around the outside of the ring. After it leaves the cannon, each ring vortex crawls forward through the surrounding air until its kinetic energy has been exhausted
and it slows to a stop. It finishes its existence swirling in place until viscous forces bring its
moving air to rest.

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Garden Watering Works: As water flows through a hose, viscous forces in the hose limit
its speed, particularly near the walls of the hose. Each time the hose bends, the water pressure rises on the outside of the bend and drops on the inside of the bend. When the water
reaches the nozzle, it accelerates through the narrow opening, increasing in speed and
decreasing in pressure until it emerges at atmospheric pressure and arcs gracefully into the
garden. Whenever the water flows rapidly around obstacles, both in the garden and at the
faucet leading the hose, the flow becomes turbulent and noisy.
How Balls and Air Work: A ball traveling through the air experiences two major types of
aerodynamic force: drag and lift. For a nonspinning ball traveling very slowly, the only drag

171

172

CHAPT ER 6 Fluids and Motion

force is viscous drag; it experiences no lift force. As the ball’s speed through the air increases, a large turbulent wake appears behind the ball and the ball experiences pressure
drag. At a still higher speed, the boundary layer of air near the ball’s surface becomes turbulent and the size of the wake behind the ball shrinks. A ball with a turbulent boundary layer
experiences less drag than one with a laminar boundary layer, which is why some balls are
designed to encourage turbulent boundary layers.
Rotating balls experience lift forces. These forces occur because bending and deflecting
airstreams push asymmetrically on these balls. Lift forces can cause a ball to curve in flight
or take surprisingly long to fall.
How Airplanes Work: An airplane is supported in flight by air passing across its wings. Air
bending toward the top surface of a wing experiences a drop in pressure, while air bending
away from the bottom surface of a wing experiences a rise in pressure. As a result of this
pressure difference, the wing experiences an upward lift force. The airplane also experiences
drag, which tends to slow it down. To keep the airplane moving forward, the plane employs
propellers or jet engines. These devices push the air backward, and the air reacts by pushing
them forward. A propeller works directly in the oncoming air, increasing the air’s energy and
pushing it backward with rotating blades. A jet engine first slows the air, then increases its
energy by burning fuel in it, and finally lets it accelerate backward to high speed.

1. Poiseuille’s law: The volume of fluid flowing through a pipe
each second is equal to (𝜋/128) times the pressure difference
across that pipe times the pipe’s diameter to the fourth power,
divided by the pipe’s length times the fluid’s viscosity, or

volume =

π · pressure difference · pipe diameter4
. (6.1.1)
128 · pipe length · fluid viscosity

2. Bends and pressure imbalances: When the path of a fluid

in steady-state flow bends, the pressure on the outside of the

bend is always higher than the pressure on the inside of the
bend.
3. Reynolds number: A measure of the relative importance of
inertia and viscosity in the fluid flow around an obstacle is given
by the Reynolds number:

density · obstacle length · flow speed
.
viscosity

(6.1.2)

7

Heat and Phase Transitions

e can’t see all the motion that takes place around us. Some of it is hidden deep inside each
object, where thermal energy keeps the individual atoms and molecules jiggling back and
forth in an endless flurry of activity. We’re usually aware of this thermal energy only because
it determines an object’s temperature; the more thermal energy an object contains, the higher its
temperature and the hotter it feels.
Nevertheless, thermal energy plays an important role in everyday life. In addition to moving
from one place to another, thermal energy can transform a substance from a solid to a liquid to a
gas. What you’re feeling when you touch a hot object is actually its thermal energy flowing into your
comparatively colder hand and raising the temperature of your skin. When thermal energy is flowing
in this manner, from a hotter object to a colder one, we call it heat. In this chapter, we examine
temperature, heat, and the phases of matter to understand more about our hot and cold world.

W
 

A Ruler Thermometer

One effect that a change in temperature has on a typical
object is to change its size. Although this size change is
tiny and easily overlooked, you can use mechanical
advantage to make it quite visible. Here’s how to make
a size-change thermometer using only a clear plastic
ruler, a pin, a small weight, a piece of stiff paper, and
some tape.
Lay the plastic ruler along the edge of a table and
tape one end of it securely to the table. Cut a thin strip of
stiff paper, about 3 mm (0.1 in) wide and 15 cm (6 in)
long, and push the pin carefully through one end of the
strip. Use a dot of tape to stick the pin’s head to the paper.
When you’re done, the paper strip should be securely
attached to the pin so that as the pin turns, the strip turns.
This strip is your thermometer’s pointer.
Now slide the pin under the free end of the ruler, and
place the small weight above it. The weight is there to
push the ruler and pin together so they experience plenty

of static friction. That way, as the free end of the ruler
moves left or right, the pin will rotate and turn the pointer.
Your thermometer is now complete. If you turn the
pin and pointer carefully by hand so that the pointer is
horizontal, you can “read” the thermometer by its angle
relative to the tabletop. If you heat the plastic ruler by
breathing on it, laying your hands on it, or warming
it gently with a hair dryer, the ruler will become longer.
Its free end will move away from its fixed end and will
cause the pin to rotate. You will see a small change in the
pointer’s orientation as your thermometer reports its new
temperature.
You can also make the needle turn the other way by
cooling the ruler. If you place a few ice cubes on the ruler,
the ruler will contract and the needle will turn in the
opposite direction. As you can see, the ruler is slightly
shorter on a cold day than on a hot one, a fact that limits
the ruler’s accuracy in measuring distance.

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

ACTIVE LEARNING
EXPERIMENTS

173

174

CHAPT ER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions

Chapter Itinerary
In this chapter, we examine thermal energy, temperature, and
heat in the context of three common types of objects: (1)
woodstoves; (2) water, steam, and ice; and (3) clothing, insulation, and climate. In Woodstoves, we look at ways to produce
thermal energy and the three principal means by which thermal energy is transferred as heat from hotter objects to colder
ones: conduction, convection, and radiation. In Water, Steam,

S E C TIO N 7 . 1

Woodstoves
burned when you touch a hot object? Why does your hand feel
hotter when you hold it above a hot surface than when you
hold it next to that hot surface? Why does your skin feel warm
when you face a campfire, even if the air around you is cold?
Why does it take time to warm up a cold object?

Stove pipe
Thermometer
Bypass
damper

Combustor
air control

Viewing
window

Side
loading
door

Air inlet
vents

Firebox

Air inlet
shutter
Front loading
door

Air inlet
shutter

Primary
air control
lever

and Ice, we look at the effects of heat and temperature on the
three material phases of water and at the ways transformations
occur between those phases. In Clothing, Insulation, and Climate, we examine heat transfer more closely and find out how
to control it. For a more detailed preview, look ahead at the
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations at the end
of the chapter.

Handle
storage

Winter would be pretty unpleasant for most of us were it not for
heating. Heating keeps our rooms warm even when the weather
outside is cold. One of the most fashionable types of heating is
a woodstove, which burns logs in its firebox and sends thermal
energy out into the room. In this section, we’ll look at how a
woodstove produces thermal energy and how this thermal
energy flows out of the stove to keep us warm.
Questions to Think About: What happens to the chemical
potential energy in a log when you burn it? Why do you get

Experiments to Do: A burning candle produces thermal
energy, providing both light and warmth to a small room.
Where does this thermal energy come from and how does it
flow into its surroundings?
Light a short candle and look first at how it releases
thermal energy. The flame slowly consumes the wax, but it
also needs air. Cover the candle with a tall glass, one that
won’t be touched or damaged by the flame. The glass should
prevent room air from reaching the candle. How does the
newly sealed environment affect the candle flame? Try to
explain this result.
Relight the candle and consider the ways in which heat
flows from the flame to you. Carefully pass your hand over the
flame, keeping a safe distance above it to avoid being burned.
Why does the flame warm your skin so quickly when your hand
is directly above it? Now hold your hand beside the flame at a
safe distance. You should again feel warmth from the flame.
How is heat flowing from the flame to your hand now?
Take a wooden pencil and hold it a few centimeters above
the flame for no more than 2 seconds. Then carefully touch the
pencil’s surface with your fingers. It should warm your fingers.
How is heat flowing from the pencil to your hand in this case?
Why would it be a painful mistake to try this experiment with a
metal pencil? Why should you hold it above the flame for only
2 seconds?

A Burning Log: Thermal Energy
A woodstove produces thermal energy and distributes it as heat to the surrounding room
(Fig. 7.1.1). We’ve encountered thermal energy before: in a file cabinet sliding along the
sidewalk, in an old tennis ball bouncing inefficiently off the floor, and in honey pouring
slowly from a jar. In each case, ordered energy—energy that could easily be used to do
work—became disordered thermal energy and the temperatures of the objects increased.
Now that we’re going to study devices that are intended to provide heat, let’s reexamine
thermal energy and temperature to see how thermal energy moves from one object to another.

Woodstoves

When you burn a log in the fireplace or woodstove, you’re turning the log’s ordered
chemical potential energy into disordered thermal energy—energy contained in the kinetic
and potential energies of individual atoms and molecules. The presence of thermal energy
in the log, the woodstove, or the room air is what gives it a temperature; the more thermal
energy it has, the higher its temperature.
The nature of thermal energy depends somewhat on what it’s in. In the hot burning log,
thermal energy is mostly in the wood’s atoms and molecules, which jitter back and forth
rapidly relative to one another. When each of these particles moves, it has kinetic energy.
When it pushes or pulls on its neighbors, it has potential energy.
In the air near the burning log, thermal energy is again mostly in the atoms and molecules. However, since those particles are essentially free and independent, most of this
thermal energy is kinetic energy. The air particles store potential energy only during the
brief moments when they collide with one another.
In the metal poker that you use to stir the fire, thermal energy is not only in the atoms
and molecules but also in the mobile electrons that move about the metal and allow it to
conduct electricity. As I noted in Chapter 2, thermal energy is the portion of internal energy
that’s associated with temperature. Internal energy excludes any energy due to external
forces or overall motion, so lifting the poker to increase its gravitational potential energy or
waving it to increase its kinetic energy does not affect either its internal energy or its thermal energy. Furthermore, some of the poker’s internal energy, including most of its chemical and nuclear potential energy, is not associated with temperature and is not part of its
thermal energy.

175

© Peter Anderson/Dorling
Kindersley/Getty Images, Inc.

Fig. 7.1.1 This wood-stove
transfers heat to the room by
conduction through its metal
walls, convection of air past
its surfaces, and radiation
from its black exterior.

(a)

Check Your Understanding #1: A Warm-Up Pitch
If you drop a ball, will its thermal energy increase as it falls? (Neglect air resistance.)

Attractive
forces

Answer: No, its thermal energy will remain constant.
Why: As it falls, the ball’s gravitational potential energy is transformed into kinetic energy. However,
both energies enable the ball to do work, so they aren’t included in its thermal energy.

(b)

Forces between Atoms: Chemical Bonds
To understand how a burning log produces thermal energy, let’s take a look at bonds
between atoms and the chemical potential energy that’s stored in those bonds. Since both
result from the forces between atoms, that’s where we’ll begin.
As you bring two atoms close together, they exert attractive forces on one another (Fig.
7.1.2a). These chemical forces are primarily electromagnetic in origin and grow stronger
as the atoms approach. The attraction diminishes, however, when the atoms start to touch
and is eventually replaced by repulsion when the atoms are too close (Fig. 7.1.2b). The
separation between atoms at which the attraction ends and the repulsion begins is their
equilibrium separation—that is, the separation at which the atoms exert no forces on one
another (Fig. 7.1.2c). Since atoms are tiny, this equilibrium separation is also tiny, typically
only about a ten-billionth of a meter.
Imagine holding two atoms in tweezers and slowly bringing them together. They pull
toward one another as they approach, doing work on you and increasing your energy. Since
energy is conserved, their energy must be decreasing. They’re giving up chemical potential energy, energy stored in the chemical forces between atoms.
Once the atoms reach their equilibrium separation, you can let go of them and they
won’t come apart. Since they’ve given up some of their chemical potential energy,
they can’t separate unless that energy is returned to them; it takes work to drag them
apart. Without that energy, the atoms are held together by an energy debt known as a
chemical bond.

Repulsive
forces
(c)

Equilibrium
(d)

Vibration
Fig. 7.1.2 (a) Two atoms
attract one another at
moderate distances but
(b) repel when they’re too
close. (c) In between is their
equilibrium separation, at
which they neither attract
nor repel and are thus in
equilibrium. (d) Pairs of
atoms with excess energy
tend to vibrate about their
equilibrium separations.

176

CHAPT ER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions

The bound atoms have become a molecule. The strength of their bond is equal to the
amount of work the atoms did when they drew together or, equivalently, the work required
to separate them. Bond strengths range from extremely strong in the case of two nitrogen
atoms to extremely weak in the case of two neon atoms.
If they have a little extra energy, bound atoms can vibrate back and forth about their
equilibrium separation (Fig. 7.1.2d). Whenever the atoms are moving quickly toward or
away from one another, most of their energy is kinetic. Whenever the atoms are traveling
slowly while turning around, most of their energy is chemical potential. Overall, the molecule’s total energy remains constant, and it vibrates back and forth until it transfers its extra
energy elsewhere.
Many molecules have more than two atoms. In a large molecule, many pairs of atoms
have chemical bonds and equilibrium separations. If you give this molecule excess energy,
it will vibrate in a complicated manner as the energy moves among the various atoms and
chemical bonds. The atoms in the molecule will continue to jiggle until something removes
the excess energy from the molecule.
Like all liquids and solids, our burning log is just a huge assembly of atoms and molecules, held together by chemical bonds of various strengths. These particles push and pull
on one another as they vibrate about their equilibrium separations. Their motion is thermal
motion, and the energy involved in this disorderly jiggling is thermal energy. Because thermal energy is fragmented among the atoms and exchanged between them unpredictably, it
can’t be used directly to do work.
Check Your Understanding #2: When Atoms Collide . . .
As two independent nitrogen atoms collide with one another, what forces do they experience?
Answer: At first, the atoms experience attractive forces. When the atoms come too close, the forces
become repulsive and they bounce. As they subsequently separate, the forces again become attractive.
Why: As they approach one another, the two nitrogen atoms experience attractive forces and a chemical bond begins to form between them. They accelerate toward one another, converting chemical
potential energy into kinetic energy. However, when they are very close together, the forces become
repulsive and they bounce off one another. They head apart and the forces again become attractive,
but their kinetic energy breaks the bond and they separate forever.

Heat and Temperature
Everything contains thermal energy, from the hot burning log to the cold metal poker you
use to stir the fire. However, that doesn’t mean that the thermal energy is equitably distributed. What happens to thermal energy when you push the log with the poker?
When they touch, the poker and the log begin to exchange thermal energy. In effect,
the two objects become one larger object, and thermal energy that has been moving
about randomly among the particles in each individual object begins to move about
randomly among the particles of both objects. Well, not quite randomly. Although tiny
portions of thermal energy move in both directions between the two objects, those
exchanges don’t cancel. Overall, there is a net flow of thermal energy from the hot log
to the cold poker.
To allow us to predict the direction of this flow, we define a temperature for each of
the objects. Their temperatures indicate which way, if any, thermal energy will naturally
flow between two objects. If no thermal energy flows when two objects touch, then
those objects are in thermal equilibrium and their temperatures are equal. But if thermal energy flows from the first object to the second, then the first object is hotter than
the second.
A temperature scale classifies objects according to which way thermal energy will
flow between any pair. An object with a hotter temperature will always transfer thermal

Woodstoves

energy to an object with a colder temperature, and two objects with the same temperature
will always be in thermal equilibrium. Thus the hot burning log will transfer thermal energy
to the cold poker. We say that the burning log is hot because it tends to transfer thermal
energy to most objects, while the poker is cold because most objects tend to transfer thermal energy to it.
Energy that flows from one object to another because of a difference in their temperatures is called heat. Heat is thermal energy on the move. Strictly speaking, the burning log
doesn’t contain heat; it contains thermal energy. However, when that log transfers energy
to the cold poker because of their temperature difference, it’s heat that flows from the log
to the poker. (For a historical note about the understanding of heat, see 1 .)
Our present definition of temperature can order the objects around us from hottest to
coldest, but it doesn’t quantify temperature in any unique way. You could make your own
temperature scale by comparing every pair of objects to see which way heat flows between
them, but you probably wouldn’t enjoy it. You would do better with a standard temperature
scale such as Celsius, Fahrenheit, or Kelvin.
Standard temperature scales are based on an object’s average thermal kinetic energy
per atom. The more kinetic energy each atom has, on average, the more vigorous the
object’s thermal motion and the more thermal energy it transfers to the atoms in a second
object by way of microscopic portions of work. Microscopic work is what actually passes
heat between objects—a teeny shove here, a tiny yank there, all at the atomic scale. Since
an object with more average thermal kinetic energy per atom will pass heat to an object
with less, it makes sense to assign temperatures according to average thermal kinetic energies per atom.
The Celsius, Fahrenheit, and Kelvin scales all measure temperature in this manner.
In each scale, a 1-degree, or unit, increase in temperature reflects a specific increase in
average thermal kinetic energy per atom. The relationship between average thermal kinetic
energy per atom and assigned temperature is based on several standard conditions: absolute
zero, water’s freezing temperature, and water’s boiling temperature. (Recall from Section
5.1 that absolute zero is the temperature at which all thermal energy has been removed
from an object.) Once specific temperatures have been assigned to two of these standard
conditions, the whole temperature scale is fixed. For example, the Celsius scale is built
around 0 °C being water’s freezing temperature and 100 °C being water’s boiling temperature. Temperatures for the three standard conditions appear in Table 7.1.1.

Check Your Understanding #3: Frozen Fingers
If you pick up an ice cube, your hand suddenly feels cold. Which way is heat flowing?
Answer: From your hotter hand to the colder ice cube.
Why: Heat naturally flows from a hotter object to a colder object. Since the ice cube is colder
than your hand, heat flows out of your hand and into the ice cube. Since your hand is losing
thermal energy, its temperature drops and you sense cold. Although it’s tempting to think of
cold as something that flows out of an ice cube, the only thing that really moves about is heat.
Ice cubes are wonderful absorbers of heat and cool our drinks by reducing the drinks’ thermal
energies.

TABLE 7.1.1 Temperatures of Several Standard Conditions, as Measured in Three
Temperature Scales: Celsius, Kelvin, and Fahrenheit
Standard Condition

Celsius (°C)

Absolute zero

−273.15
0
100

Freezing water
Boiling water

Kelvin (K)
0
273.15
373.15

Fahrenheit (°F)
−459.67
32
212

177

1 Before the time of
Benjamin Thompson, Count
Rumford (American-born
British physicist and
statesman, 1753–1814),
heat was believed to be a
fluid called caloric that
was contained within
objects. Thompson
disproved the caloric
theory by showing that the
boring of cannons
produced an inexhaustible
supply of heat. Among his
scientific and technological contributions,
Thompson improved
cooking and heating
methods. He reshaped
fireplaces and developed
the damper as ways to
reduce smoking and
improve heat transfer to
the room. Thompson also
had a life of sensational
escapades and great rises
and falls in fortune. He
fled New Hampshire in
1775 because he was a
British loyalist, he fled
London in 1782 under
suspicion of being a
French spy, and he was, at
the time of his studies of
heat, among the most
powerful people in
Bavaria.

178

CHAPT ER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions

Open Fires and Woodstoves
Suppose you needed an easy way to heat your room. The oldest and simplest method would
be to start a campfire in the middle of the floor. The burning wood would produce thermal
energy, which would flow as heat into the colder room. But how does burning wood produce thermal energy?
This thermal energy is released by a chemical reaction between molecules in the
wood and oxygen in the air. Recall that atoms do work as they join together in a chemical
bond and that the amount of work done depends on which atoms are being joined. For
example, while carbon and hydrogen atoms can bond with one another to form hydrocarbon molecules, these atoms form much stronger bonds with oxygen atoms. Thus, although
it may take work to disassemble a hydrocarbon molecule, the work done by its hydrogen
and carbon atoms as they bind to oxygen atoms more than makes up for that investment. As
a hydrocarbon molecule burns in oxygen, new, more tightly bound molecules are formed
and chemical potential energy is released as thermal energy. The reaction products produced by burning hydrocarbons in air are primarily water and carbon dioxide.
Wood is composed mostly of cellulose, a long carbohydrate molecule. Carbohydrates
contain carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms. Despite the presence of a few oxygen atoms,
carbohydrates still burn nicely to form water and carbon dioxide. When you light the wood
with a match, you’re supplying the energy needed to break the old chemical bonds so that
the new bonds can form. This starting energy is called activation energy, the energy
needed to initiate the chemical reaction. Heat from the match flame gives the wood enough
thermal energy to break chemical bonds between various atoms and start the reaction.
Unfortunately, wood isn’t pure cellulose. It also contains many complex resins that
don’t burn well and that create smoke. If you plan to breathe the air in which you burn
fuel, wood is an awful choice. You’d be better off with kerosene or natural gas, both of
which are nearly pure hydrocarbons and burn cleanly. Actually, wood can be converted to
a cleaner fuel by baking it in an airless oven to remove all its volatile resins. This process
converts the wood into charcoal, which burns to form nearly pure carbon dioxide, water
vapor, and ash.
However, even with clean-burning fuels, the direct fire-in-the-room heating concept
has its disadvantages—it consumes the room’s oxygen and presents a safety hazard. Nonetheless, fires have heated dwellings for thousands of years. While fireplaces that burn wood
or peat have chimneys that carry away their noxious fumes, the rising smoke also takes
with it much of the fire’s thermal energy and some of the room’s air. That’s why a room
that’s heated by a fireplace often feels drafty away from the fireplace itself—cold outside
air is seeping in through cracks to replace air drawn up the chimney. Even when
clean-burning fuels are used without a chimney, there are no simple solutions to the oxygen
-loss or safety problems.
Like a fireplace, a woodstove sends fumes from its burning wood up a chimney. But
before its thermal energy can follow the fumes outside, a well-designed woodstove transfers most of that energy into the room. A woodstove is an example of a heat exchanger, a
device that transfers heat without transferring the hot molecules themselves. Its smoke
never enters the room, but heat from that smoke does. Most combustion furnaces, such as
those fueled by natural gas, propane, oil, and coal, also employ heat exchangers.
The burning coals and hot gases inside the woodstove contain a great deal of thermal
energy and are much hotter than the room air. Because of this temperature difference,
heat tends to flow from the fire to the room. What is not so clear yet is how that heat is
transferred.
There are three principal mechanisms by which heat moves from the fire to the room:
conduction, convection, and radiation. The woodstove makes wonderful use of all three so
that most of the thermal energy released by the burning wood is transferred to the room.
Let’s examine these three mechanisms of heat transport, beginning with conduction.

Woodstoves

179

Check Your Understanding #4: Feeling the Heat
You can make a heat pack by wrapping hot wet towels in a plastic sheet. This pack will warm an
injured muscle but will not get it wet. Is thermal energy moving in this case?
Answer: Yes, thermal energy is flowing from the hot towels, through the plastic, to the muscle.
Why: The plastic sheet is acting as a heat exchanger, allowing heat to flow from the hot towels to the
cooler muscle but preventing any movement of the hot water itself.

Heat Moving through Metal: Conduction
Conduction occurs when heat flows through a stationary material. The heat moves from a
hot region to a cold region, but the atoms and molecules don’t. For example, if you place
the tip of a metal poker in the fire, the poker’s handle will gradually become warm as the
metal conducts heat.
Some of this heat is conducted by interactions between adjacent atoms. The vibrating
atoms frequently push on one another, doing microscopic work in the process and exchanging miniscule amounts of thermal kinetic energy. In this fashion, thermal energy flows
randomly from atom to neighboring atom.
However, when the poker’s tip is hotter than its handle, the flow is no longer completely random. The atoms at the hot tip have more thermal kinetic energy to exchange with
their neighbors than atoms at the cold handle. The exchanges statistically favor the flow of
thermal energy away from the hot tip and toward the cold handle. This flow of thermal
energy from hot to cold through the poker is conduction (Fig. 7.1.3).
This atom-by-atom bucket brigade isn’t the only way in which materials conduct heat.
In a metal, the primary carriers of heat are actually mobile electrons, the tiny negatively
charged particles that make up the outer portions of atoms. When atoms join together to
form a metal, some of the electrons stop belonging to particular atoms and travel almost
freely throughout the metal. These mobile electrons can carry electricity (as we’ll discuss
in Chapter 10) and are also good at transporting heat.
Mobile electrons participate in the bucket brigade of heat conduction because they,
too, can push on vibrating atoms and exchange thermal kinetic energy with them. However,
while atoms can pass thermal energy only from one neighbor to the next, mobile electrons
can travel great distances between exchange partners and can move thermal energy quickly
from one place to another.
The ease with which electrons move heat about a metal explains why metals generally
have higher thermal conductivities than nonmetals. Thermal conductivity is the measure
of how rapidly heat flows through a material when it’s exposed to a difference in temperatures. The best conductors of electricity—copper, silver, aluminum, and gold—are also the
best conductors of heat. Poor conductors of electricity—stainless steel and insulators such
as plastic and glass—are also poor conductors of heat. There are a few exceptions to this
rule. Diamonds, for example, are terrible conductors of electricity but wonderful conductors of heat.
Conduction is what moves thermal energy from the woodstove’s inside to its outside.
No atoms move through the metal walls of the stove, just heat. So conduction serves as a
filter, separating desirable thermal energy from the unwanted smoke and noxious gases that
then go up the chimney.
Thus conduction makes the outside surface of the woodstove hot, allowing heat to flow
from it to the colder room. What carries that heat into the room? If you touch the stove,
conduction will immediately transfer a huge amount of heat to your skin and you’ll be
burned. Even without touching the stove, you’re aware of its high temperature. It transfers
heat into the room by convection and radiation.

at

He

Cold
end

Hot
end

Fig. 7.1.3 When one end
of a metal poker is hotter
than the other, the atoms
at the hot end vibrate more
vigorously than those at the
cold end. The poker then
conducts heat from the hot
end to the cold end. Some
of this heat is conducted
by interactions between
adjacent atoms. In the
metal poker, however, most
of the heat is conducted
by mobile electrons, which
carry thermal energy long
distances from one atom to
another.

180

CHAPT ER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions

Check Your Understanding #5: Too Hot to Handle
Some pot handles remain cool during cooking while others become unpleasantly hot. What determines which handles remain cool and which become hot?
Answer: It’s determined by the handle’s thermal conductivity.
Why: Some handles are made of plastics or stainless steel, which are poor conductors of both electricity and heat. These handles normally remain cool unless hot gases from the stove directly heat
them. Other handles are made from aluminum, copper, or cast iron, which are good conductors of
electricity and heat. These handles often become unbearably hot.

Heat Moving with Air: Convection
Convection occurs when a moving fluid transports heat from a hotter object to a colder
object. The heat moves as thermal energy in the fluid so that the two travel together. The
fluid usually follows a circular path between the two objects, picking up heat from the
hotter object, giving it to the colder object, and then returning to the hotter object to begin
the cycle again.
This circulation often develops naturally. As the fluid warms near the hotter object, its
density decreases and it floats upward, lifted by the buoyant force. When the fluid cools
near the colder object, its density increases and it sinks downward.
Thus air heated by contact with the woodstove rises toward the ceiling and is replaced
by colder air from the floor (Fig. 7.1.4). Eventually, this heated air cools and descends.
Once it reaches the floor, it’s drawn back toward the hot woodstove to start the cycle over.
This moving air is a convection current, and the looping path that it follows is a convection cell. Within the room, convection currents carry heat up and out from the woodstove
to the ceiling and walls. When you put your hand over the stove, you feel this convection
current rising as it transfers heat to your hand.
Natural convection is good at heating the air above the woodstove, but most of that hot
air ends up near the ceiling. Although some of it will eventually drift downward to where
you’re standing, convection sometimes needs help. Adding a ceiling fan will help move the
hot air around the room and make the woodstove more effective. This forced convection
still transfers heat from the hot stove to the colder occupants of the room, but it doesn’t rely
on the buoyant force to keep the air circulating. The faster the air moves, the more heat it
can transport from hot objects to cold objects.
Hot air
rising
Cold air
descending

Check Your Understanding #6: Heat and Wind
When sunlight warms the land beside a cool body of water, a breeze begins to blow from the water
toward the land. Explain.
Answer: Convection occurs, with warmed air rising over the land and being replaced by cooler air
from above the water. The air moving from over the water to over the land creates the breeze.

Fig. 7.1.4 When the
woodstove is hot, convection
carries heat from its
surfaces to the ceiling and
walls of the room. Warm
air rises upward, supported
by the buoyant force, and
is replaced by cooler air
from the floor. The warmed
air eventually cools and
descends. It then returns
toward the stove to repeat
the cycle.

Why: Winds are giant convection currents caused by solar heating. Air rises over warm spots on
Earth’s surface, and surface winds blow toward those warm spots to replace the missing air.

Heat Moving as Light: Radiation
There is one more important mechanism of heat transfer—radiation. As the particles inside
a material jitter about with thermal energy, they emit and absorb electromagnetic radiation.
This radiation consists of electromagnetic waves, which include radio waves, microwaves,
and infrared, visible, and ultraviolet light.
We’ll study electromagnetic radiation later in this book. For now, what’s most important is that this radiation can carry thermal energy. When heat flows from a hot object to a

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Woodstoves

Fig. 7.1.5 A hot charcoal briquette glows brightly in the dark (left). However, a flash photograph
reveals that its surface is actually gray and thus a partial absorber of light (right). If it weren’t for the
white ash, the briquette’s black carbon would make it a nearly ideal emitter of blackbody radiation and
absorber of light.

cold object as electromagnetic radiation, we say that heat is being transferred by thermal
radiation or simply radiation. Unlike conduction and convection, which depend on atoms,
molecules, or electrons to carry the heat, radiation occurs directly through space. Radiative
heat transfer happens even when two objects have nothing at all between them.
The types of electromagnetic waves in an object’s thermal radiation depend on its
temperature. While a colder object emits only radio waves, microwaves, and infrared light,
a hotter object can also emit visible or even ultraviolet light. The red glow of a hot coal in
the woodstove is that coal’s thermal radiation.
Since our eyes are sensitive only to visible light, we can’t see all the thermal radiation
emitted by an object, even when it’s hot. However, whether we see it or not, electromagnetic radiation contains energy and transfers heat to whatever absorbs it. While everything
emits thermal radiation, the amount of that emission depends on temperature: the hotter an
object, the more thermal radiation it emits. When two objects face one another, thermal
radiation will travel in both directions between them. However, the hotter object will dominate this radiant exchange of thermal energy, resulting in a net transfer of thermal energy
to the colder object. Exchanges of thermal energy via radiation always transfer heat from a
hotter object to a colder one.
Radiation transfers a great deal of heat from the woodstove’s surface to the surrounding objects. The stove bathes the room in infrared light, which warms everything it reaches.
To encourage such radiative heat transfer, the metal woodstove and its chimney are often
painted black. Black not only absorbs light well, but it’s also particularly good at emitting
thermal light (Fig. 7.1.5). If you heat a black poker red hot, it will glow much more brightly
than one that’s white, silvery, or transparent.
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS: Black Objects and Light
Misconception: A black object never emits light.
Resolution: Although a black object absorbs all light that strikes it, it still emits thermal radiation
and will glow brightly if it’s hot enough.

Even if air in the room is cold, you can usually feel the invisible infrared light from a
woodstove on your face. When you block this light with your hands, your face suddenly
feels colder because less heat is reaching your skin. This thermal radiation effect is even
more pronounced with a fireplace or campfire, where thermal radiation from the hot coals
and flames is the primary mechanism for heat transfer to the surroundings.

181

182

CHAPT ER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions

Overall, a modern woodstove is an excellent heat exchanger. As convection draws
hot smoke up the long black chimney pipe, the smoke heats the stove and the pipe.
These metal components conduct heat to their outer surfaces, which then distribute it
around the room by convection and radiation. Although the stove consumes some room
air, it controls the airflow with dampers so that it draws in only enough air to completely
burn the wood. Overall, the stove extracts heat efficiently, cleanly, and safely from the
burning wood.
Check Your Understanding #7: Keeping Warm
When you stand under a heat lamp, you feel warm even though the lamp emits little visible light. How
is heat reaching your skin?
Answer: Radiation transfers heat from the lamp’s filament to your skin.
Why: A heat lamp emits large amounts of invisible infrared radiation. Although you can’t see this
radiation, you can feel it on your skin.

Warming the Room
You light the woodstove, and its heat begins flowing out into the cold room. Moving always
from a hotter object to a colder object, heat enters each item in the room and gradually
raises its temperature. For example, a once-frigid brass bowl near the woodstove is soon
pleasantly warm to the touch.
Let’s take a look at the relationship between the heat added to that bowl and its temperature rise. Because the bowl’s temperature increases steadily when heat is flowing
into it steadily, its overall temperature rise must be proportional to the added heat.
The constant of proportionality is called the bowl’s heat capacity and is the amount of
heat that must be added to the bowl to cause its temperature to rise by 1 unit. In effect,
the bowl’s heat capacity is the measure of its thermal sluggishness, its resistance to
temperature changes.
Now suppose that you have an assortment of bowls near the woodstove, each a different material. If you keep track of their temperatures, you’ll find that some of them warm
faster than others. Even when you take into account differences in their masses and in how
much heat each one is receiving from the woodstove, you’ll find that bowls made of different materials respond differently to added heat. Some materials are more thermally sluggish than others.
We can characterize each material by its heat capacity per unit mass, a quantity known
as specific heat. To find the specific heat of the material from which a particular bowl is
made, you divide that bowl’s heat capacity by its mass, or
specific heat =

heat capacity
.
mass

The SI unit of specific heat is the joule per kilogram-kelvin (abbreviated J/kg ∙ K).
Table 7.1.2 contains the specific heats for a number of common materials. The wide
range of values indicates that different materials respond quite differently to added heat.
Each material’s specific heat depends principally on the number of microscopic ways it can
store thermal energy per kilogram. Known as a degree of freedom, each independent way
of handling thermal energy stores an average thermal energy equal to one-half the Boltzmann constant times the absolute temperature (½ kT). The Boltzmann constant, which we
first encountered in Section 5.1, has a measured value of 1.381 × 10−23 J/K, and its units
here are equivalent to those that appeared in Section 5.1.
Brass’s relatively small specific heat explains why the brass bowl heats up so quickly
when you place it directly on the woodstove; the bowl has relatively few degrees of

Woodstoves

TABLE 7.1.2 Specific Heats Measured near Room Temperature (293 K) and
Atmospheric Pressure
Material

Specific Heat

Lead

128 J/kg ∙ K

Brass

380 J/kg ∙ K

Copper

386 J/kg ∙ K

Air (at constant volume)

715 J/kg ∙ K

Glass

840 J/kg ∙ K

Aluminum
Air (at constant pressure)
Wood

900 J/kg ∙ K
1001 J/kg ∙ K
∼1100 J/kg ∙ K

Plexiglas or Lucite

1349 J/kg ∙ K

Steam (at constant pressure)

2027 J/kg ∙ K

Ice

2220 J/kg ∙ K

Water

4190 J/kg ∙ K

freedom in which to store its thermal energy. But if you add even a modest amount of water
to the bowl, the water’s astonishingly large specific heat will dramatically slow the bowl’s
temperature rise. Water has a remarkable capacity for thermal energy.
Like brass or water, air also has a specific heat. However, air’s specific heat depends
on how you measure it. That’s because gases tend to expand as they warm up. If you seal
the air in a bottle, so that its volume doesn’t change, it warms relatively easily; air’s specific
heat at constant volume is 715 J/kg ∙ K. But if you allow the air to expand as its temperature
rises, so that its pressure doesn’t change, it’s harder to warm. That’s because it needs extra
energy to push the surrounding air out of its way as it expands; air’s specific heat at constant
pressure is 1001 J/kg ∙ K.
Since the room isn’t perfectly sealed, the air inside it expands as it’s heated and
the larger specific heat applies. If it’s a typical living room, then its volume is about
40 m3 (1400 ft3) and it contains about 50 kg (110 lbm) of air. The heat needed to warm
that air is proportional to how much you want to raise its temperature and is equal to
air’s specific heat times its mass, or about 50,000 J/K. For every kelvin or degree
Celsius you want to warm the room air, the woodstove has to provide about 50,000
joules of heat!
When the temperature outside is 0 °C (32 °F), it takes about 1,000,000 joules to warm
the room’s air to 20 °C (68 °F). That’s the heat energy in about 0.07 kg (2 ounces) of wood.
Every time you open the front door and let the room fill with outdoor air, the woodstove has
to burn that amount of wood to return the room air to 20 °C. You can save energy and help
the environment simply by keeping the doors and windows closed whenever you’re trying
to keep the room air hotter (or colder) than it is outside.
Check Your Understanding #8: Hot Stuff
When you pull a metal tray of moist cookies out of the oven, the tray initially feels much hotter than
the cookies. A little while later, however, the cookies feel much hotter than the tray. Explain.
Answer: At first, both the tray and the cookies are hot. The tray feels hottest because its metal conducts heat well and can deliver more heat to your skin. But the tray has a relatively small heat
capacity, and its temperature plummets in the cool room air. The moist cookies have large heat
capacities, so they cool relatively slowly.
Why: Metals often feel hotter or colder to the touch than insulators because they’re so good at transferring heat in either direction. However, materials containing water have much larger specific heats
than metals and therefore maintain their temperatures better.

183

184

CHAPT ER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions

Water, Steam, and Ice

S E C TIO N 7 . 2
Water droplets

Ice

Steam
Boiling
water

Droplets of
condensation
Freezing
water

Water

Water is probably the most important chemical in our daily
lives. It is so crucial to biology, climate, commerce, industry,
and entertainment that it merits a whole section of its own.
Moreover, it exhibits the three classic phases of matter—solid,
liquid, and gas—and illustrates the role that heat plays in
transforming one phase into another. Although most of what we
can learn from water is applicable to any material, there are a
few aspects of water that are almost unique in nature. Water
really is a remarkable substance.

Questions to Think About: Why does adding ice make a
drink cold? Why do icebergs float on water? How does perspiration cool you off? Why do humid days feel so muggy?
What is the difference between evaporating and boiling?
How does snow disappear from the ground even when it’s
very cold outside?
Experiments to Do: Experimenting with water is easy. Pick up
an ice cube with wet fingers. What happens if the ice cube has
just come out of the freezer? What if it has been melting on
the table for a few minutes? Why is there a difference? Put
both ice cubes in water. Why do they float?
Now heat tap water in a pot. Shortly before the water
starts to boil, you will see mist begin to form above it. What is
this mist, and why does it form? Carefully feel the mist, but
don’t burn yourself! The mist feels damp because it contains
water. How can water be leaving the pot before the water boils?
Notice the small gas bubbles on the walls of the pot. They’re
not steam; where did this gas come from?
Once the water boils, invisible steam (gaseous water) will
push the mist layer upward. Don’t touch this steam because it
can burn you quickly. Why does steam release so much thermal
energy when it touches your skin?

Solid, Liquid, and Gas: The Phases of Matter

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Like most substances, water exists in three distinct forms or phases: solid ice, liquid water,
and gaseous steam (Fig. 7.2.1). These phases differ in how easily their shapes and volumes
can change. Ice is solid, rigid and incompressible; you can’t alter an ice cube’s shape or its
volume. Water is liquid, fluid but incompressible; you can reshape the water in a pitcher
but you can’t change its volume. Steam is gaseous, fluid and compressible; you can vary
both the shape and the volume of the steam in a tea kettle.
These different characteristics reflect the different microscopic structures of steam,
water, and ice. Steam, or water vapor, is a gas, a collection of independent molecules kept

Fig. 7.2.1

The three phases of water: solid (ice), liquid (water), and gas (steam).

Water, Steam, and Ice

in motion by thermal energy. These water molecules bounce around their container, periodically colliding with one another or with the walls. The water molecules fill the container
uniformly and can accommodate any changes in its shape or size. Enlarging the container
simply decreases the steam’s density and lowers its pressure.
When they are independent of one another as gaseous steam, water molecules have a
substantial amount of chemical potential energy. They can release some of this energy by
joining together to form ordinary water. Water is a liquid, a disorderly collection of molecules that cling to one another with chemical bonds. Because these bonds aren’t very
strong, the molecules in water can use thermal energy to break them temporarily and then
change bonding partners. This rebonding process allows water to change shape so that it is
a fluid. Despite their flexibility, however, these bonds manage to bunch the water molecules
together so snugly that even squeezing can’t pack them much tighter. That’s why water is
incompressible.
The molecules in water can release still more chemical potential energy by linking
together stiffly as ice. Ice is a solid, a rigid collection of chemically bound molecules. Like
most solids, ice is crystalline—its water molecules are arranged in an orderly latticework
that extends over long distances and gives rise to the beautiful crystal facets seen on snowflakes and frost. Ice’s crystalline structure is so constraining that its water molecules can’t
use thermal energy to change bonding partners, and consequently ice can’t change shape.
Just as an orderly stack of oranges at the grocery store takes up less volume than a
disorderly heap, a crystalline solid almost always occupies less volume than its corresponding disorderly liquid. The solid phase of a typical substance is thus denser than the liquid
phase of that same substance, so the solid phase sinks in the liquid phase.
There is only one common substance that violates that rule—water. Ice’s crystalline
structure is unusually open, and its density is surprisingly low. Almost unique in nature,
solid ice is slightly less dense than liquid water, and ice therefore floats on water. That’s
why icebergs float on the open ocean and why ice cubes float in your drink. In fact, water
reaches its greatest density when it is liquid at about 4 °C (39 °F).
Check Your Understanding #1: Skating Anyone?
As a pond freezes, where does the ice begin to form?
Answer: It begins to form at the surface of the pond.
Why: Because ice is less dense than water, it floats at the surface of the pond. The pond therefore
freezes from its top down. The insulating layer of ice at the top of the pond impedes the freezing of
the remainder of the water, so the pond is unlikely to freeze solid. This behavior allows animals to
live in the pond during winter. If ice sank, the pond would freeze solid and the animals would die.
Thus, ice’s tendency to float has profound implications for life on our planet.

Melting Ice and Freezing Water
Ice in a freezer is extremely cold, typically −18 °C (0 °F). When you place this ice on a
warm countertop, heat flows into it and its temperature rises. The ice remains solid until its
temperature reaches 0 °C (32 °F). At that point, the ice stops getting warmer and begins to
melt. Melting is a phase transition, a transformation from the ordered solid phase to the
disordered liquid phase. This transition occurs when heat breaks some of the chemical
bonds between water molecules and permits the molecules to move past one another. The
melting ice transforms into water, losing its rigid shape and crystalline structure.
Zero degrees Celsius is ice’s melting temperature, the temperature at which heat
goes into breaking bonds and converting ice into water, rather than into making the ice
hotter. The ice-water mixture remains at 0 °C until all the ice has melted. When only water
remains, heat once again causes its temperature to rise.

185

186

CHAPT ER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions

The heat used to transform a certain mass of solid into liquid, without changing its
temperature, is called the latent heat of melting or, more formally, latent heat of fusion.
The bonds between the water molecules in ice are strong enough to give ice an enormous
latent heat of melting; it takes about 333,000 J of heat to convert 1 kg of ice at 0 °C into 1 kg
of water at 0 °C. Since water’s specific heat is 4190 J/kg ∙ K, that same amount of heat
would raise the temperature of 1 kg of liquid water by about 80 °C. Thus it takes almost as
much heat to melt an ice cube as it does to warm the resulting water all the way to boiling.
The latent heat of melting reappears when you cool the water back to its melting temperature and it starts to freeze. Freezing is another phase transition, a transformation from
the disordered liquid phase to the ordered solid phase. As you remove heat from water at
0 °C, the water freezes into ice rather than becoming colder. Because the water molecules
release energy as they bind together to form ice crystals, the water releases heat as it freezes.
The heat released when transforming a certain mass of liquid into solid, without changing
its temperature, is again the latent heat of melting. You must add a certain amount of heat
to ice to melt it and you must remove that same amount of heat from water to solidify it.
Check Your Understanding #2: Keeping Crops Warm
Fruit growers often spray their crops with water to protect them from freezing in unusually cold
weather. How does liquid water keep the fruit from freezing?
Answer: Liquid water releases a large amount of heat as it solidifies, and this heat helps to protect
the fruit from freezing.
Why: Fruit freezes at a temperature somewhat below 0 °C. As cold air removes heat from the watercoated fruit, the water begins to freeze. The liquid water gives up a great deal of heat as it solidifies
and prevents the fruit’s temperature from dropping below 0 °C until the water has completely turned
to ice. At that point, ice’s poor thermal conductivity insulates the fruit and slows its loss of heat to
the colder air.

Phase Equilibrium: Leaving and Landing
We’ve seen that ice has a melting temperature, so now let’s see why it has a melting
temperature. To do that, we must look at the interface between solid ice and liquid water.
Whenever both phases are in contact, they exchange water molecules across the interface
between them. Water molecules regularly break free from the ice to enter the water, and
they often drop out of the water to stick to the ice. In other words, water molecules are
leaving the ice and landing on it all the time, like airplanes at a busy airport.
Although you can’t see the individual leavings and landings, you can observe their net
effect. If leavings outpace landings, the ice will gradually transform into water. If the landings outpace leavings, the water will gradually transform into ice. If the two processes
balance one another, the ice and water will coexist indefinitely—a situation known as
phase equilibrium.
Temperature plays a crucial role in this balance because it affects the rate at which
water molecules leave the ice. The warmer the ice, the more often water molecules at its
surface can gather enough thermal energy to break free and leave. Below ice’s melting
temperature, water molecules leave the ice too infrequently to balance the landing process
and the water transforms completely into ice. Above ice’s melting temperature, water molecules leave the ice so often that they outstrip the landing process and the ice transforms
completely into water. Only at the melting temperature do the leaving and landing rates
balance so that ice and water can coexist in phase equilibrium.
Ice’s huge latent heat of melting has a stabilizing effect on the phase equilibrium
between ice and water. Whenever ice and water are mixed together, the mixture’s temperature will shift rapidly toward 0 °C. That’s because if the mixture’s temperature is above
0 °C, the ice will melt—a phase transformation that absorbs the heat of melting and thereby

Water, Steam, and Ice

lowers the mixture’s temperature toward 0 °C. If the mixture’s temperature is below 0 °C,
the-water will freeze—a phase transformation that releases the heat of melting and thereby
raises the mixture’s temperature toward 0 °C.
As long as the mixture doesn’t run out of ice or water, its temperature will soon reach
0 °C and remain there even as you add or remove heat from it. Any heat you add to the
mixture goes into melting more ice, not into raising its temperature. Any heat you remove
from the mixture comes from freezing more water, not from lowering its temperature.
That’s why your glass of ice water remains at 0 °C, even in the hottest or coldest weather
(Fig. 7.2.2).

187

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Check Your Understanding #3: Ice Water
At a restaurant, your glass of water contains 25% ice while your friend’s glass of water contains 75%
ice. Whose water is colder, or are their temperatures equal?
Answer: Their temperatures are equal.
Why: Both glasses contain mixtures of ice and water at 0 °C (32 °F). If either mixture were colder
than that, its water would be freezing rapidly into ice, and if either mixture were warmer than that,
its ice would be melting rapidly into water.

Evaporating Water and Condensing Steam
Water’s open surface is another active interface between phases, but this time the liquid
water is exchanging molecules with gaseous steam. Water molecules are feverishly leaving
the water for the steam and landing on the water from the steam, once again like planes at
a busy airport.
While this frantic exchange of molecules is intriguing, what matters most is its net
effect. If more molecules leave the water than return to it, then water gradually evaporates
into steam. Evaporation is the phase transition from liquid to gas. On the other hand, if
more molecules are landing on the water than leaving it, the steam gradually condenses
into water. Condensation is the phase transition from gas to liquid. If landing and leaving
are balanced, water and steam coexist in phase equilibrium.
These two phase transitions have enormous thermal consequences. Since the molecules in water cling to one another with chemical bonds, it takes energy to separate them.
Although the bonds between water molecules are weaker than the bonds within water
molecules, it still takes a great deal of energy to transform water into steam.
The heat needed to transform a certain mass of liquid into gas, without changing its
temperature, is called the latent heat of evaporation or, more formally, latent heat of
vaporization. Water’s latent heat of evaporation is truly enormous because water molecules are surprisingly hard to separate. About 2,300,000 J of heat is needed to convert 1 kg
of water at 100 °C into 1 kg of steam at 100 °C. That same amount of heat would raise the
temperature of 1 kg of water by more than 500 °C!
You are most aware of this latent heat of evaporation on hot summer days when the
perspiration that evaporates from your skin draws heat from you and lowers your temperature. As each water molecule leaves your skin to become steam, it gathers up more than its
fair share of thermal energy from its environment and carries it away as chemical potential
energy. The departing water molecules thus leave you bereft of thermal energy, and you
grow colder.
The latent heat of evaporation reappears when steam condenses and the gathering
water molecules release their chemical potential energy as heat. The heat released when a
certain mass of gas is transformed into liquid, without changing its temperature, is again
the latent heat of evaporation. You must add a certain amount of heat to water to evaporate
it, and you must remove that same amount of heat from steam to condense it.

Fig. 7.2.2 Ice and water
can coexist only at 0 °C,
ice’s melting temperature.

188

CHAPT ER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions

The huge amount of heat released by condensing steam is often used to cook food or
warm radiators in older buildings. When you steam vegetables, you are allowing steam to
condense on the vegetables and transfer heat to them. A double-boiler uses condensing
steam to transfer heat from a burner to a cooking container in a controlled manner.
Check Your Understanding #4: Tea Time
A kettle of water heats up rapidly on the stove but takes quite a while to boil away. Why does the
water take so long to turn into steam?
Answer: The stove must operate for a long time to provide water’s huge latent heat of evaporation.
Why: Converting a kettle of hot water into steam requires an enormous amount of heat. This heat
separates the molecules without raising their temperature. Since the stove provides only a certain
amount of heat each second, it may take many minutes to boil away the water.

Relative Humidity

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Fig. 7.2.3 You can
determine the air’s
relative humidity using
two thermometers, one
of which has a wet cloth
wrapped around its bulb
(right). Evaporation cools
the wet-bulb thermometer
by an amount related
to the air’s relative
humidity. The dryer the
air, the colder the wet-bulb
thermometer becomes.

Although we’ve examined the consequences of evaporating and condensing, we haven’t
yet seen what conditions determine when they’ll occur. It all comes down to water molecules leaving and landing, so let’s take a look at why one process wins out over the other.
The basic indicator of whether water will evaporate or steam will condense is relative
humidity. Relative humidity measures the water molecules’ landing rate as a percentage
of the leaving rate. When the relative humidity is 100%, the two rates are equal and water
and steam can coexist—they are in phase equilibrium. When the relative humidity is less
than 100%, the landing rate is less than the leaving rate and the water evaporates—only
steam will remain at equilibrium. Finally, when the relative humidity is more than 100%,
the landing rate is more than the leaving rate and the steam condenses—no equilibrium is
possible until the relative humidity has dropped to 100%.
Relative humidity depends on the temperature and on the density of the steam. Temperature affects the leaving rate. The warmer the water, the more thermal energy it contains
and the more frequently water molecules leave its surface to become gas. By itself, an
increase in temperature will boost the leaving rate and thereby decrease the relative humidity. Rising temperatures thus favor evaporation.
The density of water molecules in the steam affects the landing rate. The denser the
steam, the more often water molecules land on the water to become liquid. By itself, an
increase in steam density will boost the landing rate and thereby increase the relative
humidity. Rising steam densities thus favor condensation. Even when that steam is mixed
with air, as it often is, the air molecules act as passive bystanders. The density of water
molecules alone determines the air’s relative humidity.
Relative humidity plays an important role in countless experiences of everyday life.
When the relative humidity is low, water evaporates quickly and the air feels dry. Perspiration
cools you effectively. When the relative humidity is high (near 100%), water barely evaporates at all and the air feels damp. Perspiration clings to your skin and doesn’t cool you much.
When the relative humidity exceeds 100%, perhaps because of a sudden temperature
drop, steam begins to condense everywhere. Water droplets grow on surfaces as dew or
form directly in the air as fog, mist, or clouds. If the humidity remains high, these droplets
grow larger and eventually fall as rain.
You can measure relative humidity by observing the cooling that accompanies evaporation. The most common scheme involves two thermometers (Fig. 7.2.3), one of which
has a wet cloth wrapped around its bulb (right). Water evaporating from the wet cloth cools
the thermometer until that water reaches phase equilibrium with steam in the air and
evaporation ceases. The dryer the air, the colder the thermometer gets. The temperatures of
the two thermometers can then be used to determine the relative humidity, usually with the
help of tabulated values.

Water, Steam, and Ice

Check Your Understanding #5: Seeing Your Breath
When you breathe out on a cold day, you often see mist appearing from your mouth. Explain.
Answer: As the warm, moist air from your mouth cools, its relative humidity increases above 100%.
The water vapor condenses to form a mist of water droplets.
Why: Changes in temperature affect relative humidity. Although the warm air leaving your lungs can
contain a large portion of water vapor, its relative humidity increases dramatically as it cools. At lower
temperatures, condensation takes over and the invisible water vapor condenses into a mist of visible
water droplets.

Subliming Ice and Depositing Steam
We’ve examined phase transitions between ice and water and between water and steam.
That brings us to the phase transitions between ice and steam. Oddly enough, water molecules can leave ice to become steam and can land from steam to become ice. In fact, ice and
steam regularly exchange water molecules even when there is no liquid water present at all.
As usual, this exchange of water molecules occurs at the surface of the ice, the interface between ice and steam. Since we’re most interested in the net movement of molecules,
it comes down to leaving and landing rates on the ice. If molecules leave the ice more often
than they land, the ice sublimes. Sublimation is the phase transition from solid to gas. If
molecules land on the ice more often than they leave, the steam deposits. Deposition is the
phase transition from gas to solid. Once again, relative humidity measures the landing rate
as a percentage of the leaving rate. At 100% relative humidity, ice and steam are in phase
equilibrium.
When the relative humidity is below 100%, ice sublimes. This effect gives rise to a
number of familiar phenomena. When the weather is cold and dry, snow gradually disappears from the ground without ever melting. In the low relative humidity of a frostless
freezer, the ice cubes slowly shrink to miniature size. When you leave food unprotected in
that same frostless freezer, it eventually dries out. While this “freezer burn” is a nuisance at
home, sublimation from frozen food is used commercially to prepare freeze-dried foods.
When the relative humidity exceeds 100%, steam deposits. This process yields several
other familiar effects. Frost forms on cold windows and lawns that are exposed to humid
air. In the high relative humidity of a nonfrostless freezer, frost and ice accumulate on the
walls and require periodic defrosting. Snowflakes grow in clouds and then descend gracefully to the ground.
Check Your Understanding #6: Disappearing Stink
Mothballs are smelly, crystalline pellets used to protect woolen clothes from attack by insects. If you
sprinkle them into a closet and wait a few years, the mothballs will disappear. How do they vanish?
Answer: The mothballs sublime.
Why: Although mothballs do not melt at room temperature, they sublime readily. The air around them
quickly becomes saturated with gaseous mothball molecules, and that’s why it smells so strongly.

Boiling Water
With three phases and six phase transitions, we seem to be out of possibilities. Where does
boiling fit into this picture? Boiling is simply an accelerated form of evaporation in which
bubbles of pure steam grow by evaporation inside the water itself. To understand boiling,
let’s take a look at the interplay between water and steam.
Suppose we seal some water inside an airless container and keep it at a constant temperature. The water will evaporate as steam until the relative humidity inside the container

189

190

CHAPT ER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Fig. 7.2.4 Water boils at
100 °C, when atmospheric
pressure can no longer
smash the bubbles of water
vapor.

reaches 100%. At that point, the water and steam will have reached phase equilibrium; the
steam will have just the right density so that its water molecules will land on the water as
often as they leave. Steam at its equilibrium density is said to be saturated.
Of course, the density of that saturated steam depends on the temperature of the container. If you warm up the container, water molecules will leave the water more frequently
and the density of the steam will have to increase to match the landing rate to the leaving
rate. The density of saturated steam is thus an increasing function of the temperature.
The saturated steam’s density, together with its temperature, determines its pressure—
the pressure inside our container. Near room temperature, the pressure of saturated steam
is only a few percent of atmospheric pressure. It increases with temperature, however, so
that, as the temperature approaches 100 °C (212 °F), the pressure of saturated steam
approaches atmospheric pressure.
With that background, suppose that we place a bubble of pure saturated steam in room
temperature water that’s at atmospheric pressure. Because the pressure inside that bubble
is much lower than atmospheric pressure, the surrounding water will rush inward and compress it. As the steam bubble’s volume shrinks, the steam will exceed its saturated density
and begin to condense. In the blink of an eye, the bubble will be smashed out of existence.
Now suppose we begin warming the water on the stove. As the water temperature
increases, steam’s saturated density and pressure both increase. At first, saturated steam
bubbles remain unstable; they’re crushed quickly by atmospheric pressure. However, when
the water temperature is near 100 °C, something remarkable happens: saturated steam bubbles suddenly become stable and the water can begin boiling (Fig. 7.2.4). At that temperature, water’s boiling temperature, the pressure of saturated steam reaches atmospheric
pressure and bubbles of saturated steam can survive indefinitely within the water. Even
more remarkably, these bubbles can grow by evaporation; each bubble’s surface is an interface between water and steam, so when heat is added to the water, water can transform into
steam and enlarge the bubble. Although the bubbles quickly float to the water’s surface and
pop, new bubbles can promptly take their place.
Boiling converts water to steam so rapidly that it consumes almost any amount of heat
you add to the water. That’s why it’s so difficult to warm water above its boiling temperature. An open pot of water on the stove warms to water’s boiling temperature and then
remains at that temperature until all the water has transformed into steam. Only then can
the pot’s temperature again begin to increase.
The constant, well-defined temperature of boiling water allows you to cook vegetables
or an egg at a particular rate. When you place an egg in boiling water, it cooks in 3 minutes
because it’s in contact with water at its boiling temperature.
Check Your Understanding #7: Vanishing Bubbles
You are heating water in a pot on the stove. Shortly before the water boils properly, bubbles of steam
begin rising from the bottom of the pot but vanish before they reach the water’s surface. What happens to those bubbles?
Answer: The rising steam bubbles condense as they pass through water that is below its boiling
temperature.
Why: Water at the bottom of the pot reaches its boiling temperature first, so bubbles of steam begin
to rise from it. But water nearer the surface of the pot isn’t quite hot enough to sustain those bubbles. Instead, the steam inside them condenses and they collapse completely.

Changing Water’s Boiling Temperature
Water’s boiling temperature depends on the ambient pressure. For an open pot or pan, that
pressure is atmospheric pressure. However, atmospheric pressure decreases with altitude
and depends somewhat on the weather. Water boils at 100 °C (212 °F) near sea level but at

Water, Steam, and Ice

only 90 °C (194 °F) at an altitude of 3000 m (9800 ft). This reduction in water’s boiling
temperature with altitude explains why many recipes must be adapted for use at higher
elevations. At 3000 m, an egg cooks slowly in boiling water because it’s surrounded by
90 °C water, not 100 °C water. The same problem slows the cooking of rice, beans, and
many other foods at high altitudes.
At sufficiently low pressures, water boils even at room temperature or below. At the
other extreme, high pressures can prevent water from boiling until it’s extremely hot. The
boilers in steam engines and power plants often operate at such high pressures that water’s
boiling temperature inside them may exceed 300 °C (572 °F).
One way to decrease cooking times is to use a pressure cooker, a sturdy pot that seals
in steam so that the pressure inside it can exceed atmospheric pressure. This increased
pressure prevents boiling until the water temperature is well above 100 °C. If you subject
water to twice sea-level atmospheric pressure, it won’t boil until 121 °C (250 °F). An egg
cooks very quickly at that temperature, as do vegetables and other foods.
However, just because water can boil, doesn’t mean that it will boil. Boiling depends on
tiny seed bubbles that subsequently grow by evaporation. Without seed bubbles, the water
won’t boil. Because nucleation, or seed-bubble formation, almost never occurs spontaneously in water below 300 °C, something else must create those seeds. Most nucleation occurs
at defects or hotspots on the container or at contaminants in the liquid. Those nucleation sites
usually trap air or other permanent gases and then serve as nurseries for seed bubbles of
steam. Reliance on these specific nucleation sites explains why the-bubbles of boiling water,
like those in soda or champagne, often stream upward from-specific spots on their containers.
When you heat water uniformly in a clean, glass container, it may not boil properly at
its boiling temperature. Glass has a liquid-like smoothness even at the atomic scale and
rarely aids seed-bubble formation. Without any long-lived nucleation sites, the water may
stop forming seed bubbles and cease boiling. Once boiling stops, the water’s temperature
can rise above the boiling temperature so that it becomes superheated.
Superheated water, which forms easily and often in a microwave oven, can be extremely
dangerous. Touching it with a fork, adding sugar or salt, or even just tapping its container
can initiate violent or even explosive boiling (Fig. 7.2.5). The more the water’s temperature
exceeds its boiling temperature, the more energy it can release suddenly if it abruptly boils.
Be careful when you heat water in a microwave oven, particularly in a glass or glazed container. If it doesn’t appear to be boiling properly despite being very hot, recognize that it
may be superheated. Your safest bet is to stay away from it until it has cooled down.
There is one other interesting way to change water’s boiling temperature: dissolve
chemicals in it. A dissolved chemical keeps the water molecules busy so that they are less
likely to leave the water to become steam, or ice for that matter. Since dissolved chemicals
discourage water molecules from leaving water’s liquid phase, they suppress any phase
transitions that reduce the amount of liquid phase water. That’s why dissolving sugar or salt
in water slows its evaporation and raises its boiling temperature. It’s also why salt water
freezes at a lower temperature than freshwater and why salt tends to melt ice. In contrast,
sand doesn’t melt ice because it doesn’t dissolve in water.

Check Your Understanding #8: Lucky Accident
You pull a ceramic mug of hot water out of the microwave oven and add a spoonful of instant coffee.
It bubbles amusingly and splatters a little onto the table. What happened?
Answer: The water in your mug was mildly superheated, and adding the powdered coffee nucleated
boiling.
Why: Like glass, a glazed ceramic mug has no permanent nucleation sites to assist seed-bubble
formation and boiling. You’re lucky. The water was only slightly superheated, and when you triggered
boiling by adding the powder, it boiled relatively gently and quickly cooled to its normal boiling temperature. Had the water been more severely superheated, you might have been badly scalded.

191

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Fig. 7.2.5 The water
in this glass measuring
cup was superheated in a
microwave oven and then
disturbed with a fork.
Explosive boiling blew all
the water out of the cup in
a fraction of second.

192

CHAPT ER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions

S E C TIO N 7 . 3
Knit acrylic fibers

Clothing, Insulation, and Climate
Woven nylon
shell

Fiber insulation
and trapped air
Closed-pore
foam
insulation

When you sit in front of a fire on a cold winter day, heat flows
from the glowing coals to your skin and you feel warm. When
you walk through the snow on your way to the store, however,
heat flow is the last thing you want. As the hottest object
around, you will become colder, not warmer. So you bundle up
in your new down coat. Its thermal insulation keeps you warm
in your frigid environment. In this section, we’ll examine thermal insulation and see how it prevents heat from moving easily
between objects.
Questions to Think About: When you wear a thick coat on a
cold day, what provides the heat that keeps you warm? How
does your coat keep that heat from leaving you? Your head is
exposed, so what keeps your head warm? Why is good cookware

often made of several different materials? Why does wrapping
food in aluminum foil help keep it hot or cold? Why do most
modern windows have more than one pane of glass in them?
Why does increasing the fraction of greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere raise the average temperature at Earth’s surface?
Experiments to Do: Examine the effects of thermal insulation by touching objects while your hand has or does not
have insulation on it. As you pick up a piece of hot toast with
your bare hand, why does your skin feel so hot? Now try again
with a towel or napkin between your skin and the toast. What
has changed? Perform the same experiment with an ice
cube. The towel or napkin keeps your skin comfortable when
you touch either hot or cold objects. How is that possible?
What happens when you use aluminum foil instead of the
towel or napkin?
You can do similar experiments with a heavy coat. The
coat will obviously keep you warm in a cold environment, but it
will also keep you cool (at least briefly) in a hot environment.
Sit in front of a fireplace with a heavy coat on. The parts of your
body that are covered by the coat will barely notice the fire’s
presence. Now touch the exposed surface of the coat carefully
with your fingers. Why is it so hot? As you can see, you need to
be careful when wearing insulated clothes near a fire because
it’s possible to scorch or even ignite those clothes without feeling the heat. Firefighters use heavy fireproof coats to keep cool
as they combat building fires.

The Importance of Insulation
Thermal insulation slows the flow of heat from hot objects to cold and helps keep your
body warm, your refrigerator cold, and your home at a comfortable temperature year
round. Yet in a world where ordered energy is increasingly precious, good insulation is
more than just a convenience; it’s a necessity. That’s because whenever thermal energy
leaves something that must remain hot or enters something that must remain cold, replacing or removing that thermal energy consumes ordered energy. You can save ordered
energy and do your part for the environment simply by using good insulation to keep thermal energy where it belongs.
One of the most important examples of thermal insulation is your clothing. Together
with your skin, clothing lowers the rate at which heat flows into or out of your body and
makes it possible for you to keep your body temperature constant.
Why keep your body temperature constant? After all, cold-blooded animals such as
reptiles, amphibians, and fish make no attempts to control their body temperatures. Instead,
they exchange heat freely with their surroundings and are generally in thermal equilibrium
with their environments. Maintaining a constant body temperature is a goal that’s unique to
mammals and birds. Why bother?
The chemical processes that are responsible for life are very sensitive to temperature.
That sensitivity is due in part to thermal energy’s role in initiating chemical reactions; it
provides the activation energies that many chemical reactions need in order to proceed. As
a cold-blooded animal’s temperature decreases, there is less thermal energy per molecule

Clothing, Insulation, and Climate

and these chemical reactions occur less frequently. The animal’s whole metabolism slows
down, and it becomes sluggish, dimwitted, and vulnerable to predators.
In contrast, warm-blooded animals have temperature regulation systems that allow
them to maintain constant, optimal body temperatures. Regardless of its environment, a
mammal or bird keeps the core of its body at a specific temperature so that it functions the
same way in winter as in summer. The advantages of constant temperature are enormous.
On a cold day, a warm-blooded predator can easily catch and devour its slower-moving
cold-blooded prey.
There is, however, a cost to being warm-blooded. The thermal energy associated with
an animal’s body temperature must come from somewhere, and the animal must struggle
against its environment to maintain its temperature. Without realizing it, many of our
behaviors are governed by our need to maintain body temperature. Our bodies are careful
about how much thermal energy they produce, and we strive to control the rate at which we
exchange heat with our surroundings.
A resting person converts chemical potential energy into thermal energy at the rate of
about 80 calories per hour. Eighty calories per hour is a measure of power, equal to about
100 W, so a resting person generates about 100 W of thermal power. An active person
generates even more. This steady production of thermal energy is why a room filled with
people can get pretty warm. One hundred watts may not seem like much, but when a hundred
people are packed into a tight space, they act like a 10,000-W space heater and the whole
room becomes unpleasantly hot.
If you had no way to get rid of this thermal energy of metabolism, you would become
hotter and hotter. To maintain a constant temperature, you must transfer heat to your surroundings. Since heat flows naturally from a hotter object to a colder object, your body
temperature must generally be higher than the temperature around you. That requirement
is one reason why human body temperature is approximately 37 °C (98.6 °F). This temperature is higher than all but the hottest locations on Earth, so heat flows naturally from your
body to your surroundings. You produce thermal energy as a by-product of your activities
and transfer this thermal energy as heat to your colder surroundings.
The rate at which your resting body generates thermal energy is fairly constant, so the
principal way in which you stabilize your body temperature is by controlling heat loss.
Like all warm-blooded animals, you have a number of physiological and behavioral techniques for doing just that. In hot weather or when you’re exercising hard, you encourage
heat loss to avoid overheating. In cold weather, you limit heat loss to stay warm. Since this
section is about clothing, we’re going to focus primarily on heat loss in cold weather. All
three heat-transfer mechanisms are involved in that heat loss, so you must control them all
to keep warm.
Check Your Understanding #1: Oven as Space Heater
A toaster oven turns electric energy into thermal energy at a rate of 500 J/s, or 500 W. If the appliance’s temperature remains constant, at what rate is it transferring heat to its environment?
Answer: It’s transferring heat at the rate of 500 W.
Why: For the oven to maintain a constant temperature, its total thermal energy mustn’t change.
Since it produces 500 W of thermal power electrically, it must transfer that same amount of thermal
power to its environment. It acts as a 500-W space heater.

Staying Warm by Limiting Thermal Conduction
One way in which your body retains heat in cold weather is by impeding conductive heat
loss. Heat flows through a material via conduction whenever that material is exposed to a
difference in temperature—whenever one side of the material is hotter than the other side.
The rate at which heat flows, however, depends on several factors: the overall temperature

193

194

CHAPT ER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions

difference, the distance separating the hot side from the cold side, the area through which
heat can flow, and the material itself.
Remarkably, heat flows in direct proportion to the temperature difference and to the
area through which that heat can flow. Thus, if you touch your finger to two different cold
surfaces, one 20 °C colder than your internal temperature and the other 40 °C colder, you’ll
lose heat about twice as fast to the colder surface. If you touch two fingers at once, doubling
the area through which heat can flow, you’ll lose heat about twice as fast.
On the other hand, further separating the hot and cold sides slows heat flow. The rate
of heat flow is inversely proportional to that distance. For example, doubling the thickness
of your gloves when you’re building a snowman will double the separation between hot
and cold and roughly halve the heat flow.
Finally, some materials are better conductors of heat than others; they have different
thermal conductivities. Skin has a particularly low thermal conductivity, meaning that it
conducts relatively little heat compared to materials such as glass or copper. Thermal conductivity is a characteristic of the material itself, and its SI unit is the watt per meter-kelvin
(W/m ∙ K). Table 7.3.1 shows the thermal conductivities of a number of common materials.
The overall relationship between heat flow and these four quantities can be written as
a word equation:
heat flow =

thermal conductivity · temperature difference · area
,
separation

in symbols:
H=

k · ΔT · A
,
d

and in everyday language:
When you pick up a hot saucepan, wear a thick oven mitt and grab a small
portion of the cooler handle.
TABLE 7.3.1
Material
Argon

Approximate Thermal Conductivities of Various Materials
Thermal Conductivity†
0.016 W/m ∙ K

Air

0.025 W/m ∙ K

Oak

0.17 W/m ∙ K

Fat

0.2 W/m ∙ K

Skin

0.21 W/m ∙ K

Hair

0.37 W/m ∙ K

Brick

0.6 W/m ∙ K

Water

0.6 W/m ∙ K

Glass

0.8 W/m ∙ K

Marble

2.5 W/m ∙ K

Stainless steel

16 W/m ∙ K

Steel

50 W/m ∙ K

Aluminum

210 W/m ∙ K

Copper

380 W/m ∙ K

Silver

429 W/m ∙ K

Diamond

1000 W/m ∙ K

The watt per meter-kelvin (abbreviated W/m ∙ K) is the SI unit of thermal conductivity.

†

(7.3.1)

Clothing, Insulation, and Climate

Equation 7.3.1 tells us that the amount of heat flowing through your skin depends on its
thermal conductivity, surface area, thickness, and the temperature difference across it.
Amazingly, your body has optimized these factors to help you minimize heat loss. Even
without clothes, you are surprisingly well insulated against conductive heat loss.
Your skin and the layers immediately beneath it contain fats and other thermal insulators. Fat’s thermal conductivity is quite low, about a third that of water, so by placing fat in
and just beneath your skin, your body improves its heat retention. Furthermore, the presence of a fatty layer beneath your skin effectively thickens your skin and increases the
distance separating hot from cold. “Thick-skinned” people retain body heat better than
those who are “thin-skinned.”
Minimizing surface area means that your body is relatively compact, shaped more like
a ball than a sheet. Although other adaptive influences have given you arms, legs, and fingers, which increase your total surface area, you have little superfluous surface through
which to lose heat.
Finally, your body tries to lessen conductive heat loss by reducing the temperature difference between your skin and the surrounding air. It does this by letting your hands and feet
become much cooler than your core body temperature. That arrangement would be simple
were it not for your circulating blood. Your blood must cool down from core body temperature
as it approaches your cold fingers and warm back up to core body temperature as it returns to
your heart. This change in blood temperature occurs via a mechanism called countercurrent
exchange. As the warm blood flows through arteries toward your cold fingers, it transfers heat
to the blood returning to your heart through nearby veins (Fig. 7.3.1). The blood heading
toward your fingers becomes colder, while the blood returning to your heart becomes warmer.
Check Your Understanding #2: Hot Potatoes
You have been cooking potatoes in a pot of boiling water, and it’s time to fish them out. With which
are you least likely to burn your hands: copper tongs or stainless steel tongs?
Answer: Stainless steel tongs are less likely to burn you.
Why: The rate at which heat flows from the hotter water to your colder hand is proportional to the
tongs’ thermal conductivity, and stainless steel has a much lower thermal conductivity than copper.

Check Your Figures #1: Cold Hard Brick
You are visiting a tiny fifteenth-century house that was built entirely of bricks. Its walls have a surface
area of 20 m2 (215 ft2), and the bricks are 9.2 cm (358 in) thick. When the winter air outside is −20 °C
and the heated air inside is 20 °C, at what rate is heat flowing through the walls of the house?
Answer: 5200 W.
Why: According to Table 7.3.1, the thermal conductivity of brick is 0.6 W/m ∙ K. The temperature
difference between the inside and outside of each brick is 40 °C, or, equivalently, 40 K. From Eq.
7.3.1, we obtain:
heat flow =

0.6 W/m · K · 40 K · 20 m2
= 5217 W.
0.092 m

Because of the limited accuracy of our starting values, we round the result to 5200 W. That is an
enormous rate of heat loss, and we haven’t even considered losses through the roof. This house needs
insulation!

Staying Warm by Impeding Convection
Despite its great insulating qualities, skin alone isn’t enough to keep you warm in all situations. Some of your body heat inevitably flows to the surface of your skin and from there
to your environment. Limiting that second step of heat flow is a job for clothing.

195

37 °C
Arterial
blood

Heat
flow

Venous
blood

27 °C

Fig. 7.3.1 Blood flowing
toward your hand through
arteries exchanges heat
with blood returning to
your heart through veins.
In this fashion, your blood
is able to carry oxygen
and food to your fingers
without warming them
all the way up to core
body temperature. This
adaptation reduces the rate
at which you lose heat in
cold weather.

196

CHAPT ER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions

On a cold day, heat leaving your skin warms the nearby air. Since air is a very poor
conductor of heat, however, your skin warms only a thin layer of it. If that warmed air never
moved, you would have to heat it only once and that would be that. Protected by this insulating layer of air, your skin would no longer have to transport much heat and the temperature difference across your skin would shrink. You would feel warm.
But air moves all too easily. In reality, each time your skin manages to warm the
nearby air, natural convection gently lifts that warmed air upward and replaces it with fresh
cold air. The temperature difference across your skin thus remains large, and heat flows
quickly out through your skin. You feel cold.
Wind worsens this heat loss because it blows away warmed air near your skin even
faster than does natural convection. Just as a forced convection oven cooks food faster, so
a forced convection freezer (such as a cold, windy day) chills people faster. The enhanced
heat loss caused by moving air is called wind chill—you feel even colder on a windy day.
To combat convective heat loss and wind chill, most warm-blooded animals are covered
with hair or feathers. These finely structured materials are poor conductors of heat, but their
main purpose is actually to trap an even better insulator: air. In the dense tangle of a sheep’s
wool, air experiences such severe drag forces that it can barely move at all. Since convection
requires airflow, the sheep can lose heat only via conduction through the trapped air and
wool. That combination of materials is a terrible conductor of heat, so the sheep stays warm.
We humans have relatively little hair and are thus poorly adapted to living in cold,
windy climates. Our lack of natural insulation is one of the reasons we wear clothing. Like
hair and feathers, our clothing traps the air and reduces convection. Finely divided strands
or filaments are particularly effective at stopping the flow of air. Not surprisingly, the best
insulating clothing is made of hair (natural or synthetic) and feathers (also natural or synthetic). Since motionless air has a lower thermal conductivity than any of the materials that
trap it, the ideal coat uses only enough material to keep a thick layer of air from moving.
This discussion also applies to swimming in cold water. If the water near your skin
would stay put, you could warm up a layer of it and then feel relatively warm. That’s why
some swimmers wear wet suits. The spongy material in a wet suit keeps the layer of water
near the swimmer’s skin from moving. As long it remains in place, water is a respectable
thermal insulator.
Check Your Understanding #3: When a Cold Wind Blows
Why does wearing a thin nylon windbreaker make such a difference in your ability to keep warm on
a cool, windy day?
Answer: It traps a layer of insulating air near your skin.
Why: Even though the windbreaker is too thin to provide much insulation itself, it traps air near your
skin. With much less circulation of cold air across your skin, you lose heat more slowly and feel
relatively warm.

More about Thermal Radiation
When you sit in front of a glowing fire, you feel its thermal radiation warming your skin.
But your skin also emits thermal radiation, so what you’re really noticing is that your skin
is absorbing more thermal radiation from the fire than it’s emitting toward your surroundings. You’re gaining heat. In contrast, if you sit inside an ice sculpture castle, your skin will
absorb less thermal radiation from the ice than it’s emitting, so you’ll be losing heat and
feeling cold.
Short of walking back and forth between fire and ice, how can you control how much
heat you gain or lose via thermal radiation? More broadly, what determines how much
thermal power you radiate toward your environment and how much you absorb from it? To
answer these questions, we need to take a closer look at thermal radiation itself.

10

3

10–3

1

Gamma rays

X-rays

Infrared light
Visible light
Ultraviolet light

Far infrared light

Millimeter waves

VHF television
FM radio
VHF television
UHF television
Microwaves

Shortwave radio

AM radio

Clothing, Insulation, and Climate

10 –6
Wavelength (meters)

10 –9

10–12

10–15

197

Fig. 7.3.2 The spectrum
of electromagnetic
radiation, arranged by
wavelength. The scale here
is logarithmic, meaning
that the wavelength
decreases by a factor of
10 with each tick mark to
the right.

700

600
500
Wavelength (nanometers)

400

Ultraviolet

Violet

Indigo

Blue

Green

Yellow

Orange

Red

Infrared

You’ve probably noticed that you can often judge the temperature of a hot object by
the color of the light it emits. An object that’s glowing red is too hot to touch, but one that’s
glowing yellow-white is a serious fire hazard. That connection between temperature and
color isn’t a coincidence. The light that you see emanating from a hot object is part of that
object’s thermal radiation. You are quite literally seeing its heat.
However, you’re not seeing all of its heat. Although thermal radiation consists of electromagnetic waves and you can see some electromagnetic waves, most are invisible to your
eyes. Those that you can see, visible light, are part of a continuous spectrum of electromagnetic radiation that extends from radio waves at one extreme to gamma rays at the other
(Fig. 7.3.2).
Electromagnetic waves are distinguished by their wavelengths, that is, the distances
between their wave crests. You can easily recognize the wavelength for the waves on a lake
or sea, where the crests are visible and you can directly measure the distance from one to
the next. Although the wave crests of electromagnetic waves aren’t so easy to observe, they
exist and it’s possible to measure the distance between them. Moreover, within the visible
portion of the electromagnetic spectrum (Fig. 7.3.3), you perceive different wavelengths
of light as different colors. Light with a wavelength of 630 nanometers (billionths of a
meter, abbreviated nm) appears red, while light at 420 nm appears blue.
However, an object’s thermal radiation isn’t a single electromagnetic wave with one
specific wavelength. Instead, it’s many individual waves that cover a broad range of wavelengths. The distribution of those wavelengths depends on the object’s temperature and
surface properties, particularly its emissivity, the efficiency with which it emits and absorbs
thermal radiation. Emissivity is measured on a scale from 0 to 1, with 1 being ideal efficiency. A perfectly black object has an emissivity of 1; it absorbs all light that strikes it and
emits thermal light as efficiently as possible.
The distribution of wavelengths emitted by a black object is determined by its temperature alone and is called a blackbody spectrum. As shown in Fig. 7.3.4, that spectrum
brightens and shifts toward shorter wavelengths as the object’s temperature increases. When
a black object is colder than about 400 °C, its thermal radiation lies entirely in the invisible
long-wavelength portion of the spectrum and you can’t see the radiation at all. Even at
400 °C, only your night vision is able to sense the thermal radiation, which appears dim and
colorless. At about 500 °C, your color vision begins to detect the glow and your eyes make
an average assessment of the distribution of wavelengths. You see dull red. With increasing
temperature, you then observe reddish, orangish, yellowish, whitish, and eventually bluish

Fig. 7.3.3 A portion
of the electromagnetic
radiation spectrum
around visible light.
Wavelengths are measured
in nanometers (nm, or
billionths of a meter).

CHAPT ER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions

Visible
light

(a) 1.00

5800 K

Ultraviolet
light

Infrared
light

0.50
The sun
0.00
(b) 0.02
Intensity

198

2700 K

0.01
Incandescent lightbulb

0.00

2000

1600

1200

800

400

(c)
4×10–7

307 K
Infrared
light

2×10–7
0

Skin
14,000

12,000

10,000

8000

6000

4000

Wavelength (nanometers)
Fig. 7.3.4 The distributions of light emitted by black objects at (a) 5800 K, (b) 2700 K, and
(c) 307 K. In addition to containing a larger fraction of visible light, the object at 5800 K is much
brighter than the object at 2700 K (note the different intensity scales). The object at 307 K emits
only dim, long-wavelength infrared light.

light (Table 7.3.2). The temperature of thermal radiation associated with a particular distribution of wavelengths is the color temperature of that light.
Whether visible or not, the entire spectrum of thermal radiation is important to retaining body heat. Your body radiates thermal power and if your radiated power is greater than
the thermal power you absorb from your environment, you are losing heat via radiation.
The thermal power you radiate depends primarily on your temperature. It’s clear from
Fig. 7.3.4 that a black object radiates more power as its temperature increases. What may
be surprising, however, is how dramatically that radiated power increases with temperature: it is proportional to the fourth power of the absolute temperature! Thus, although a
black pot full of boiling water (373 K) and an identical black pot full of ice water (273 K)
have an absolute temperature ratio of only 1.37, the hotter one radiates 1.374, or 3.5, times
as much thermal power as the cooler one.

TABLE 7.3.2

Temperatures and Colors of Light Emitted by Hot Objects

Object

Temperature

Color

Skin
Heat lamp
Candle flame
Incandescent bulb
Sun’s surface
Blue star

34 ºC
(93 ºF)
500 ºC
(930 ºF)
1700 ºC (3100 ºF)
2500 ºC (4500 ºF)
5525 ºC (9980 ºF)
6000 ºC (10,800 ºF)

Invisible
Dull red
Dim orange
Bright yellow-white
Brilliant white
Dazzling blue-white

Clothing, Insulation, and Climate

Your radiated power also depends on your surface area and on your emissivity, and it
is proportional to each of those quantities. The precise relationship between temperature
and radiated power can be written as a word equation:
radiated power = emissivity · Stefan–Boltzmann constant
· temperature4 · surface area,

(7.3.2)

in symbols:
P = e ∙ σ ∙ T 4 ∙ A,
and in everyday language:
Hot food radiates away lots of heat, so wrap it compactly in aluminum foil
to keep it warm.
This relationship is called the Stefan–Boltzmann law, and the Stefan–Boltzmann constant (σ) that appears in it has a measured value of 5.67 × 10−8 J/(s ∙ m2 ∙ K4). Remember
that the temperature must be measured in kelvins.
Your skin temperature and your surface area aren’t hard to measure, but what is your
emissivity for radiating heat? Prepare for a surprise. Looking at a surface tells you only
about its high-temperature emissivity—how well it absorbs visible thermal radiation from
a very hot object (such as the 5800 K sun) and would emit visible thermal radiation if it
were heated red, yellow, or white hot. Your skin’s temperature is only 307 K, however, so
its thermal radiation depends on its low-temperature emissivity—how well it absorbs and
emits invisible long-wavelength infrared light.
Now for the surprise: regardless of your appearance in visible light, your skin is almost
perfectly black at the infrared wavelengths of skin-temperature thermal radiation! Your
skin’s low-temperature emissivity is approximately 0.97. In fact, most nonmetallic objects
have low-temperature emissivities greater than 0.95. If you could see infrared light rather
than visible light, all the people and most of the objects around you would look black—you
would see that they absorb almost all the infrared light that strikes them and that they glow
brightly with their own infrared thermal radiation.
Check Your Understanding #4: Seeing Your Outer Glow
Passive infrared sensors are commonly used to turn on lights when a person walks by. They sense
changes in long-wavelength infrared light. How do they recognize a person in total darkness?
Answer: Both the person and his environment radiate infrared light, but because the person’s
temperature is different from his surroundings, his infrared brightness is also different.
Why: The sensor responds to the thermal radiation emitted by the objects in front of it. As the person
walks by, the brightness and pattern of that thermal radiation change and the sensor switches on the light.

Check Your Figures #2: De-Lighted at the Blacksmith’s Shop
When a blacksmith pulls a piece of yellow-hot steel out of the furnace, its temperature plummets and
it dims rapidly. However, it remains too hot to touch for several minutes. How much faster does the
steel cool by radiation at 800 °C than it does at 400 °C? (Assume the steel’s emissivity doesn’t
depend on temperature.)
Answer: The steel cools about 6.46 times as fast at 800 °C.
Why: We first convert the two temperatures to Kelvin: 1073 K and 673 K, respectively. We then find
the ratio of the radiated powers at these two temperatures by dividing Eq. 7.3.2 for 1073 K by that
same equation for 673 K:
radiated power at 1073 K
(1073 K) 4
=
= 6.46.
radiated power at 673 K
(673 K) 4

199

200

CHAPT ER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions

Staying Warm by Controlling Thermal Radiation
The average temperature of human skin is about 307 K (34 °C or 93 °F), and a typical person has a body surface area of about 1.8 m2 (19 ft2). Assuming an emissivity of 0.97, the
Stefan–Boltzmann law predicts that a person will radiate about 850 W of thermal power. If
you actually lost heat that fast, you’d cool off quickly and be very uncomfortable. Thus,
limiting radiative heat loss is important to maintaining your body temperature.
Fortunately, everything around you is also emitting thermal radiation, and you typically absorb about as much thermal power as you emit. You even absorb some of your own
thermal radiation. If you hold your hand in front of your face on a cold day, you’ll feel its
thermal radiation warming your face.
However, whenever there’s a temperature difference between you and your environment, heat will flow from hotter to colder every way it can, including radiation. While
conduction and convection transfer heat in proportion to the difference in temperature,
radiation transfers heat in proportion to the difference between the fourth powers of the
absolute temperatures. That exotic relationship between temperatures and heat flow
explains why radiative heat transfer to or from your skin is most noticeable when you’re
exposed to unusually hot or cold objects.
For example, the sun warms your skin quickly because it radiates more heat at you
than the rest of your surroundings combined. Measured on an absolute temperature scale,
the sun’s surface temperature (5800 K) is about 20 times that of your skin (307 K). Though
it’s very distant and appears small to your eye, the sun radiates about 204, or 160,000, times
as much heat at you as you radiate at it.
In contrast, the dark night sky cools you quickly because it’s actually colder than your
surroundings. The nearly empty space beyond Earth’s atmosphere is only a few degrees
above absolute zero, and even with the atmosphere’s considerable help, the sky’s effective
radiant temperature is still about 20 °C colder than the air around you. When you lie on the
snow in an open field and look up at the clear night sky, your 307-K skin radiates about
twice as much heat at the approximately 250-K sky as it radiates back at you. You lose heat
quickly and feel cold.
You can improve your situation by moving under a sheltering pine tree. Although the
tree is no warmer than the snow, it’s about 20 °C hotter than the sky and therefore emits
more thermal radiation at you. Although the tree isn’t quite a crackling campfire, it will still
help to keep you warm.
That said, we still have you running back and forth between hot and cold objects to
keep warm. It’s time to look at how you can control thermal radiation while staying in
one place.
You can start by wearing a heavy coat. The coat’s internal insulation allows its outer
surface to cool down to the temperature of your environment, so that it radiates only a little
more thermal power than it absorbs and doesn’t lose much heat. This strategy is common
in birds and mammals. Penguins and polar bears let the outsides of their insulated feathers
and fur cool to the temperatures of their frozen worlds and therefore lose almost no heat by
radiation.
You can also change your emissivity to control radiative heat transfer. We’ve seen that
black surfaces are ideal whenever you want to exchange thermal radiation with other
objects, but what about when you don’t want to exchange thermal energy? That’s where
shiny, white, and transparent surfaces come into play.
A perfectly shiny or white surface has an emissivity of zero; it reflects all of the light
that strikes it, absorbing none, and is itself unable to emit any thermal radiation. If you put
a shiny or white surface between yourself and a snowman, you’ll each see your own thermal radiation coming back at you and you won’t exchange any heat. This insulating effect
works even if one of you wears the shiny or white surface as clothing; whoever is wearing
it won’t emit thermal radiation at all, and the other will see his or her own thermal radiation
returned by that clothing.

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Clothing, Insulation, and Climate

201

Fig. 7.3.5 This silver coffee urn may not seem to be insulated,
but it is. Its polished silver surface is so shiny that it is an
almost perfect mirror for infrared and visible light. As a result,
it neither emits nor absorbs room-temperature thermal radiation
well. Moreover, the air near the urn’s vertical sides forms tall
convection cells that aren’t very efficient at carrying heat away
from the urn. Overall, the urn loses heat much more slowly than
it would if it were black and had fewer vertical surfaces.

Unfortunately, while truly white clothing would make you immune to radiant heat
transfer, such clothing doesn’t exist. Clothing exemplifies the difference between hightemperature and low-temperature emissivities. Regardless of their colors in visible light,
virtually all clothing materials are black to infrared light and have low-temperature emissivities close to 1. In other words, most clothes absorb and emit low-temperature thermal
radiation almost perfectly. Thus, although wearing a white robe on a scorching summer day
will reduce the amount of thermal radiation you absorb directly from the sun because the
robe’s high-temperature emissivity is nearly 0, it won’t protect you from the sun-warmed
objects around you because its low-temperature emissivity is nearly 1.
In contrast, shiny clothing can protect you from those sun-warmed objects, but only if it
contains metals. Metals have small low-temperature emissivities because they conduct electricity, a property that allows them to reflect electromagnetic waves extremely well. When
you wrap food in aluminum foil, its emissivity drops to about 0.05 and it can barely exchange
heat by radiation (Fig. 7.3.5). Wearing metallic clothes has the same effect for people. Lamé
fabrics—fabrics with metal threads woven into them—help to keep their typically underdressed wearers warm. A less flamboyant use of metallic cloth is in the-metal-coated plastic
blankets that are part of emergency rescue kits; wrapping yourself in one of these blankets
shiny-side out keeps you from exchanging thermal radiation with your surroundings (see 2 ).
Transparent materials also have emissivities near 0 and neither absorb nor emit thermal
radiation well. Unlike shiny or white surfaces, however, transparent materials avoid absorbing thermal radiation by letting it pass through them. For example, when sunlight streams
through a window to warm your skin, it’s obvious that glass doesn’t absorb much of the
sun’s thermal radiation. As for emission, any artist who sculpts molten glass knows from
painful experience that glass provides almost no visible warning that it’s extremely hot.
However, emissivity once again varies with temperature. Nearly all the materials that are
transparent to the visible light of high-temperature thermal radiation, including glass, are black
to the infrared light of low-temperature thermal radiation. That’s probably just as well for clothing because clothing that’s transparent to thermal radiation wouldn’t provide much insulation.
Check Your Understanding #5: Foil Wrapping
Wrapping a hot dish of food in shiny aluminum foil seems to keep the dish warm longer than wrapping it in clear plastic film. Aluminum is a much better conductor of heat than plastic, so why does
it impede the flow of heat so well?
Answer: The aluminum foil prevents the dish from losing heat to its environment via thermal radiation.
Why: Both wraps insulate by trapping air, not by preventing heat from conducting through the wrap
itself. They’re both too thin to permit much of a temperature difference between their inner and outer
surfaces, despite their huge difference in thermal conductivities. In the case of the aluminum foil,
however, aluminum’s low emissivity also prevents it from exchanging thermal radiation with the food
or with the surroundings.

2 Smoke jumpers who
battle forest fires
occasionally get trapped
by the fires they’re
fighting and must try to
survive as the fires burn
over them. Their chances
improve significantly if
they use small personal
survival shelters that have
shiny metallic surfaces.
Huddled against the cool
ground underneath one of
these tent-like shelters, a
firefighter is relatively
insulated from the fire
overhead. Assuming the
firefighter is in a low spot
with nothing to burn
nearby and makes no
contact with the shelter
itself, conduction and
convection can’t convey
much heat to the firefighter. And with the
shelter’s shiny,
low-emissivity surface
reflecting most of the
fire’s thermal radiation,
radiative heat transfer is
also greatly diminished.
On August 29, 1985,
73 firefighters were trapped
for several hours by a fire
in the Salmon National
Forrest near Salmon,
Idaho, and survived only
with the aid of their
personal fire shelters.

CHAPT ER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Fig. 7.3.6 Although stone
is not a good conductor
of heat, it’s not nearly as
good an insulator as air
trapped in a fibrous mat.
Medieval stone castles were
notoriously cold in winter
because heat flowed too
easily out of them through
their stone walls. This
tapestry slows the flow of
heat to the outside air and
helps to keep the room
warm.

Fig. 7.3.7 The space
between the sloped ceiling
of this building and its
actual roof is insulated
with a thick mat of
fiberglass insulation (left).
The importance of that
insulation is clearly visible
on a snowy day, when the
snow melts first where the
fiberglass insulation is
compressed by the beams
and is therefore thinnest
(right).

Insulating Houses
The goal of housing insulation is to limit heat flow into or out of a house so that the temperature inside the house is nearly independent of the temperature outside. It’s based on the
same insulating concepts that help keep people and animals warm, but because houses and
their contents rarely move, they can employ insulating methods and materials that are
heavy, bulky, rigid, or fragile.
While there are many solid materials that are poor conductors of heat, including glass,
plastic, wood, sand, and brick, they aren’t nearly as insulating as air. Of course, since air
tends to undergo convection, it needs to be held in place by porous or fibrous materials such
as glass wool, sawdust, plastic foam, or narrow channels. Trapped air is the primary insulation in most buildings.
Glass wool or fiberglass is made by spinning molten glass into long, thin fibers that are
then matted together like cotton candy. Solid glass is already a poor conductor of heat, but
reducing it to fibers makes it even more insulating. The path that heat must take as it’s
conducted through the tangled fibers is so long and circuitous that little heat gets through.
Most of the volume in glass wool is taken up by trapped air. The glass fibers keep the air
from undergoing convection so the air can carry heat only by conduction.
Together, glass wool and the air trapped in it make excellent insulation. Since they’re
also nonflammable, they are commonly used in ovens, hot-water heaters, and other hightemperature appliances. Most modern houses have about 10–20 cm (4–8 in) of glass wool
insulation built into their outside walls, along with a vapor barrier to keep the wind from
blowing air directly through the insulation. (For a discussion of older insulating techniques,
see Fig. 7.3.6.)
Because hot air rises and cold air sinks, the temperature difference between the hot air
below the ceiling of the top floor and the cold air above that ceiling can become quite large
during the winter. That ceiling is thus a very important site of unwanted heat transfer and
requires heavy insulation. Glass wool inserted above the ceiling of the top floor in a modern
house may be more than 30 cm (12 in) thick (Fig. 7.3.7).
While glass wool is an excellent insulator, other materials are used in certain situations. Urethane foam and polystyrene foam are waterproof, windproof, and even better
insulators than glass wool. Unfortunately, they’re also flammable and fragile. Nonetheless,
they are frequently used in buildings and in refrigerators and freezers, where condensation
makes waterproof insulation a necessity. Polystyrene foam also makes insulating cups that
keep hot coffee hot and cold drinks cold. Unfortunately, polystyrene foam is hard to recycle, so many coffee shops now use alternatives that are less insulating but more environmentally friendly.

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

202

Clothing, Insulation, and Climate

Check Your Understanding #6: Is More Always Better?
Glass wool insulation is easily compressed so that you can put two or three layers into the space that
one layer will normally fill. To improve a building’s insulation, why not pack as much glass wool
insulation into the walls as possible?
Answer: The glass wool’s purpose is to trap air so that the air can act as the insulation. Glass is a
better conductor of heat than air, so adding more glass wool will actually reduce the insulating effect.
Why: Commercial glass wool is designed to thwart convection in air while minimizing conduction
through the glass. The wool is just dense enough to keep the air in place. Overpacking the wool will
reduce its insulation and add weight and expense to the construction.

Modern Insulating Windows
Since windows have to be transparent, they can’t be filled with fiberglass or foam, and a
window made of solid glass is a poor insulator unless it’s extremely thick. Insulating windows requires a different approach.
The most common way to insulate a window is to use two thin panes of glass that are
spaced a centimeter or two apart. That vertical gap is typically filled with argon gas, which is
an even poorer conductor of heat than air (see Table 7.3.1). Although convection occurs inside
the gap, the convection cells that form are tall and thin and therefore relatively ineffective at
carrying heat from one pane to the other. When properly designed, assembled, and installed,
a double-pane window transports relatively little heat by conduction or convection.
What about radiative heat transfer? Alas, this turns out to be a big problem. Although
ordinary glass is clear to visible light, it has a low-temperature emissivity of 0.92 and is
nearly black to long-wavelength infrared light. Thus the glass panes of a conventional
double-pane window are exchanging thermal radiation with almost perfect efficiency. If
there’s a big temperature difference between the inside and outside panes, heat will flow
via thermal radiation from the hotter pane to the colder pane and spoil the window’s insulating behavior.
To decrease this radiant heat flow, an energy-efficient low-emissivity (Low-E) window
has a thin coating applied to the inner surface of one of its panes. That coating makes the
pane’s surface behave like a shiny mirror for infrared light; it emits very little thermal radiation, and it reflects back most of what it receives from the other pane. The coating doesn’t
reflect visible light, though, so the window still looks clear. Known as a “heat mirror”
because it reflects only low-temperature thermal radiation, this coating dramatically reduces
the flow of radiant heat through the window.
One of the most common Low-E coatings is indium-tin-oxide, a transparent electrical
conductor that’s also widely used in electronic displays for watches and computers. Like a
metal, indium-tin-oxide uses its electrical conductivity to reflect electromagnetic waves. It
has a low-temperature emissivity of about 0.10, so it’s almost as reflective as aluminum
foil. However, because indium-tin-oxide’s conductivity is limited, it can respond only to
long-wavelength electromagnetic waves. It reflects low-temperature thermal radiation but
transmits visible light.
By suppressing all three heat transfer mechanisms, a Low-E window is able to provide
surprisingly good insulation. The temperature of its outer pane matches the outdoor temperature and the temperature of its inner pane matches the indoor temperature, yet little
heat flows through the gap between those panes.
One potential problem for Low-E windows is leakage. If the argon gas escapes from
between the two panes and is replaced by moist air, the heat mirror coating may degrade
and the window can become foggy. Keeping the window assembly perfectly sealed for
decades is a challenge, particularly when that assembly is subject to large changes in temperature. The metals, plastics, and glass used in the window assembly don’t all expand
equally as they warm up, and the assembly can literally tear itself apart.

203

CHAPT ER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions

Increasing temperature

204

Average separation
Fig. 7.3.8 The thermal
kinetic energy of a
solid increases with
temperature, causing
its atoms to bounce
against one another more
vigorously. As they vibrate,
the atoms repel more
strongly than they attract,
so their average separation
increases slightly.

A material’s thermal expansion is caused by atomic vibrations. Because of thermal
energy, adjacent atoms vibrate back and forth about their equilibrium separations (Fig.
7.3.8). This vibrational motion isn’t symmetrical; the repulsive forces the atoms experience
when they’re too close together are stiffer than the attractive forces they experience when
they’re too far apart. As a result of this asymmetry, they push apart more quickly than they
draw together and thus spend most of their time at more than their equilibrium separation.
On average, their actual separation is larger than their equilibrium separation, and the
material containing them is bigger than it would be without thermal energy.
As an object’s temperature rises, it grows larger in all directions. The extent to which
it expands with increasing temperature is normally described by its coefficient of volume
expansion, the fractional change in the object’s volume per unit of temperature increase.
Fractional change in volume is the net change in volume divided by the total volume. Since
most materials expand only a small amount when becoming 1 °C (or 1 K) hotter, coefficients of volume expansion are small, typically about 2.5 × 10−5 K−1 for glass , 5 × 10−5
K−1 for metals, and 2 × 10−4 K−1 for plastics.
As the window assembly heats up, its plastics expand more than its metals, which
expand more than its glass. Those differences in expansion put stresses on the components
and can separate them or break them. Making an assembly that tolerates thousands of
warming and cooling cycles without leaking is no small feat.

Check Your Understanding #7: Cool Light
To provide bright white light and almost no unnecessary heat, a special lamp uses a heat mirror. What
does that heat mirror do?
Answer: The heat mirror reflects infrared light back toward the actual light source while allowing the
visible light to continue on to its destination.
Why: The heat mirror transmits only visible light, so it reflects away infrared light that would simply
add unnecessary heat to the lamp’s output.

Earth’s Temperature and the Greenhouse Effect
Despite variations with time, place, and season, Earth’s overall surface temperature has a
fairly constant average value of about 15 °C (59 °F). To maintain that constant average
temperature, Earth must avoid gaining or losing heat. A net flow of heat to Earth would
increase its average temperature, while a net flow from Earth would decrease its temperature. In short, Earth must balance any heat it receives with an equal amount of heat it emits.
Earth’s main source of heat is the sun, and this heat reaches Earth almost entirely as
electromagnetic radiation. Because the sun’s surface temperature is about 5800 K, solar
radiation is primarily visible light, although it also includes a substantial amount of infrared
and ultraviolet light (Fig. 7.3.4). The total solar power reaching Earth is about 1.74 × 1017 W.
For comparison, the world’s total electric-generating capacity is roughly 3 × 1012 W.
While about 30% of the sunlight is simply reflected or scattered back from Earth’s
surface and atmosphere, the remaining 1.21 × 1017 W is absorbed by Earth’s surface and
atmosphere. Earth must get rid of that heat by radiating it into cold, dark space as blackbody radiation. To radiate 1.21 × 1017 W of thermal power, Earth’s radiating surface—the
effective source of its blackbody radiation—must have a temperature of about −18 °C
(0 °F). So while Earth receives heat as mostly visible sunlight, it reemits that heat as invisible infrared light.
If there were no atmosphere, Earth’s radiating surface would be the ground itself and
the average temperature of that ground would be about −18 °C. But Earth does have an
atmosphere, and even though that atmosphere is nearly transparent to visible light, it
absorbs and emits infrared light fairly well. Earth’s principal source of thermal radiation

Clothing, Insulation, and Climate

therefore isn’t the ground but the atmosphere. In fact, Earth’s radiating surface is located
about 5 km (3 miles) above the ground, and it is the air at that altitude that has the −18 °C
average temperature!
This displacement of Earth’s radiating surface from ground level to an elevated layer
in the atmosphere gives rise to the greenhouse effect. Since the ground itself isn’t responsible for radiating away Earth’s excess heat, its temperature doesn’t have to be −18 °C.
Also because the atmosphere naturally develops a temperature gradient of about −6.6 °C
per kilometer of altitude (see 3 ), the ground 5 km below Earth’s radiating surface is about
33 °C hotter, or roughly 15 °C.
Since life would be difficult at −18 °C, we are fortunate to have the greenhouse effect.
However, too large a greenhouse effect would be disastrous. If the atmosphere were to
become even more effective at absorbing and emitting infrared light, the altitude of Earth’s
radiating surface would increase and so would the temperature at Earth’s surface. It is
critical to our climate that this altitude stay about 5 km and not rise to 6 km or more.
Just how effective Earth’s atmosphere is at absorbing and emitting infrared light
depends on its chemical makeup. Nitrogen and oxygen molecules, though extremely common in the atmosphere, are remarkably transparent to both infrared and visible light. It’s
the less common, more complicated gas molecules that allow air to absorb and emit infrared light and are thus greenhouse gases.
Although the principal greenhouse gas is water vapor, gases such as carbon dioxide,
methane, and nitrous oxide are also extremely important. Each gas absorbs its own characteristic portions of the infrared spectrum, and together they darken the atmosphere to infrared light the way a mixture of watercolors darkens a canvas to visible light. The more
greenhouse gases the atmosphere contains, the higher the altitude of Earth’s radiating surface and the warmer Earth’s surface.
There is now overwhelming scientific evidence that human production of greenhouse
gases, particularly carbon dioxide, is causing a rapid warming of Earth’s surface and a
change in its climate. That climate change will be severe unless we dramatically reduce
greenhouse emissions now. Since burning fossil fuels produces carbon dioxide, our current
approach to using those fuels must change. Atmospheric methane is generated primarily by
digestive bacteria in cows, and reducing it will require changes to the cattle and dairy
industries. There are other gases that we have been releasing casually into the atmosphere
for years, including refrigerants and aerosol propellants, that turn out to be especially
potent greenhouse gases and don’t belong in the atmosphere. Alas, maintaining the environment turns out to be much harder than people thought at the dawn of the industrial
revolution. We reap what we sow.
Check Your Understanding #8: Canned Heat
When you use a can of spray paint, its propellant (typically propane and butane) immediately enters
the atmosphere. As the paint dries, its solvents also enter the atmosphere. How do these gases affect
the atmosphere’s transparency in the infrared?
Answer: All these gas molecules darken the atmosphere in the infrared.
Why: Most of the chemicals in your spray can end up in the atmosphere, where they increase its
efficiency at emitting and absorbing infrared light and therefore contribute to the greenhouse effect.

Epilogue for Chapter 7
This chapter has examined the roles of thermal energy and heat in a variety of common
objects. In Woodstoves, we saw how combustion converts ordered chemical potential energy
into disordered thermal energy and we studied the ways in which this thermal energy flows
into the woodstove’s surroundings: conduction, convection, and radiation. In Water, Steam,
and Ice, we examined the three phases of matter and looked at how the transformations

205

3 A competition between
gravity and thermal
energy structure Earth’s
atmosphere and give it
downward gradients in
pressure, density, and
temperature (see Section
5.1). One explanation for
the atmosphere’s
decreasing temperature
with altitude is that rising
air molecules convert
thermal energy into
gravitational potential
energy, so air becomes
cooler as it rises upward.
Another equivalent
explanation is that rising
air expands as the
surrounding pressure
decreases and that
expansion cools the air.
Although the presence of
moisture in the air
weakens this effect, the air
still gets significantly
colder as you go up a
mountain.

206

CHAPT ER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions

between those phases are influenced by temperature, heat, and other characteristics of their
environment. In Clothing, Insulation, and Climate, we examined the laws governing heat
flow and found out how to limit that flow. We then used that understanding to explain the
greenhouse effect and the ways humans are contributing to climate change.

Explanation: A Ruler Thermometer
Like most things, the clear plastic ruler expands when you heat it. Its length increases by an
amount proportional to its increase in temperature. When you transfer heat to the ruler, by
breathing on it, touching it, or exposing it to a hair dryer, its temperature rises, it expands,
and its free end turns the needle and pointer. Since the pointer’s movement is proportional to
the ruler’s length change, it’s also proportional to the thermometer’s change in temperature.

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Woodstoves Work: A woodstove burns wood in air to obtain hot gas. The burning process
is actually a chemical reaction in which molecules in the wood and air are disassembled into
fragments and then reassembled into new, more tightly bound molecules such as water and
carbon dioxide. This reassembly process releases more energy than was required to disassemble the original wood and oxygen molecules. This extra energy appears as thermal energy
within the reaction products, so they’re hot. Rather than distributing the hot burned gas directly to the room, a woodstove transfers heat from the burned gas to clean air or water. Heat
is conducted through the walls of a woodstove and then flows into the room via convection
and radiation.
How Water, Steam, and Ice Work: Water, steam, and ice are the liquid, gaseous, and solid
phases of the chemical we call water. The water molecules in liquid water are bound together
strongly enough to fix water’s volume, but not strongly enough to give water a rigid shape. In
steam, the water molecules are independent and the gas has neither a fixed shape nor a fixed
volume. The molecules in ice are bound together rigidly in solid crystals, so ice is rigid and
its volume is constant.
Ice can transform into water, or vice versa, at its melting temperature. Heat added to ice
at this temperature causes it to melt without becoming warmer. Heat removed from water at
this temperature causes it to freeze without becoming colder. Similarly, water and ice can
transform into steam, or vice versa, through evaporation, condensation, sublimation, and
deposition. Turning water into steam requires heat, and this heat is released when the steam
turns back into water. Boiling is a special case of evaporation in which evaporation occurs
within the body of the water itself. For boiling to occur, the water’s vapor pressure must equal
the ambient pressure on the water, which is normally atmospheric pressure.
How Clothing, Insulation, and Climate Work: Clothing serves as insulation for people, helping them maintain their body temperatures in inhospitable environments. Most clothes are
constructed out of threads and other fibrous materials that not only are poor conductors of
heat but also trap air so that it can act as the primary insulation. The outer surface of thick
clothing has nearly the same temperature as its surroundings and therefore exchanges little
heat via radiation.
Building insulation reduces heat flow between inside and outside. The insulation in
walls and ceilings consists primarily of air trapped in fibrous or porous materials such as
glass wool and urethane foam, but the insulation in windows is necessarily different. The
narrow, gas-filled gap between doubled panes in a modern window limits the heat that can
flow between the panes by conduction and convection, while a low-emissivity coating on one
of the panes limits radiative heat transfer.

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations

207

Earth’s climate is determined in large part by how it eliminates the heat it receives from
the sun. That heat is emitted into space as infrared thermal radiation, mostly by Earth’s
atmosphere. The average temperature at Earth’s surface increases in proportion to the effective altitude from which that thermal radiation is emitted. Since greenhouse gases darken the
atmosphere to infrared light and increase that altitude, they warm Earth’s surface. Human
production of such gases is changing Earth’s climate.

1. Heat conduction: The thermal power an object conducts from
one surface to the other is equal to its thermal conductivity times
the temperature difference between the surfaces times their surface area divided by the distance separating the surfaces, or

thermal conductivity · temperature difference · area
heat flow =
.
separation
(7.3.1)

2. The Stefan–Boltzmann Law: The power an object radiates
is proportional to its emissivity times the fourth power of its
temperature times its surface area, or

radiated power = emissivity · Stefan–Boltzmann constant
· temperature4 · surface area.

(7.3.2)

8

Thermodynamics
eat normally flows from a hotter object to a colder object, which is why the hot sun warms
your skin as you sit on a beach and why a cold winter breeze cools it as you sled down a
mountain. But not everything in nature permits heat to flow passively. Our technological
world includes many devices that actively transfer heat from colder objects to hotter objects or that
use the flow of heat to do useful work. In this chapter, we examine the rules governing the movement of heat, a field of physics known as thermodynamics.

H
 
ACTIVE LEARNING
EXPERIMENTS

Making Fog in a Bottle
flowing out of the bottle, and that takes time. Now step
quickly off the bottle, and immediately illuminate its contents with a bright light. You should see a mist of tiny
water droplets. Abruptly releasing the compression
causes the air’s temperature to plummet, and fog forms in
the bottle.
If no fog has formed despite a hard squeeze with
your shoe and enough patience to let the heat flow out of
the bottle, you can help the fog start by dropping a smoking match into the bottle before capping it. You want just
enough tiny smoke particles to help the mist droplets
form but not enough smoke to obscure the fog itself. It
doesn’t take much smoke to do the trick. After capping
the bottle, squeeze it hard and wait, and then release the
compression suddenly and look for the fog.

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Fog occurs naturally when humid air experiences a sudden drop in temperature. To make fog in a bottle, you’ll
need to do the same thing: cool humid air quickly. In a
room where everything is at the same temperature, cooling air sounds impossible. It’s not.
To make fog in a bottle, obtain a clean 1- or 2-liter
plastic soda bottle and put several spoonfuls of water in
it. Cap the bottle tightly, and shake it to help the water
evaporate into the air. In a minute or two, the relative
humidity in the bottle will reach 100% and you’ll be
ready to do the experiment.
Lay the bottle on its side on the floor, and step on it
with your shoe. You must press down hard enough to dent
the bottle significantly, but you don’t want to pop it or
crack its sides. Wait like this for 20 or 30 seconds. Heat is

208

Air Conditioners

209

Chapter Itinerary
In this chapter, we examine the movement of heat in two everyday machines: (1) air conditioners and (2) automobiles. In Air
Conditioners, we look at the rules governing the movement of
thermal energy—the laws of thermodynamics—and see how
those rules permit an air conditioner to use ordered electric
energy to transfer heat from the cold room air to the hot outdoor
air. In Automobiles, we investigate the ways in which thermal
energy can be used to do work and see how the engine is able
to convert thermal energy into work as heat flows from the
hot burning fuel to the cold outdoor air. For additional preview

SECTION 8.1
Louver

Fan
motor

Air Conditioners
Evaporator
blower

Condenser
fan

also a classic illustration of the laws of thermodynamics in
action.

Casing

Condenser coils
Thermostat
Vent
Fan control
Compressor
Function selector

information, skip ahead to the Chapter Summary and Important
Laws and Equations at the end of the chapter.
The principles illustrated by these two machines are also
found in many other places. Refrigerators and home heat
pumps use ordered energy to transfer heat from cold objects
to hot objects, and steam engines and hot-air balloons use the
natural flow of heat to make things move. Once you understand the concepts behind these heat pumps and heat
engines, you’ll see that they’re quite common in the world
around you.

Evaporator coils

Control panel
Grille

On a summer day, your problem isn’t staying warm; it’s keeping
cool. Instead of looking for something to burn in your woodstove, you turn on your air conditioner. An air conditioner is a
device that cools room air by removing some of its thermal
energy. The air conditioner, however, can’t make thermal
energy either disappear or become ordered energy. Instead, it
transfers thermal energy from the cooler room air to the warmer
air outside. Since the air conditioner transfers heat against its
natural direction of flow, the air conditioner is a heat pump. It’s

Questions to Think About: Why doesn’t heat naturally flow
from a colder object to a hotter object? An air conditioner
removes thermal energy from room air, so why does the air
conditioner require electric energy to operate? Where does this
electric energy go? Why does an air conditioner always have an
indoor component and an outdoor component? If you put a
window air conditioner in the middle of a room and turn it on,
what will happen to the temperature of the room?
Experiments to Do: Take a look at a window air conditioner. If you
can’t find one, examine a refrigerator instead because it’s basically
a powerful air conditioner cooling a food-storage closet. As the air
conditioner (or refrigerator) operates, feel the air leaving the indoor
air vent (or inside the refrigerator) and compare its temperature to
that of air leaving the outdoor air vent (or near the metal coils on
the back of the refrigerator). Which way does the cooling mechanism move heat? If that mechanism were absent, which way would
heat flow? Turn off the air conditioner or refrigerator, and observe
the resulting heat flow. Did you confirm your prediction?

Moving Heat Around: Thermodynamics
On a sweltering summer day, the air in your home becomes unpleasantly hot. Heat enters
your home from outdoors and doesn’t stop flowing until it’s as hot inside as it is outside.
You can make your home more comfortable by getting rid of some of its thermal energy.
Although we’ve already looked at ways to add thermal energy to room air, we haven’t yet
learned how to remove it. At present, the only cooling method we’ve discussed is contact
with a colder object. Unless you have an icehouse nearby, you need another scheme for
eliminating thermal energy. You need an air conditioner.
An air conditioner transfers heat against its natural direction of flow. Heat moves
from the colder air in your home to the hotter air outside so that your home gets colder
while the outdoor air gets hotter. There’s a cost to transferring heat in this manner.
The air conditioner requires ordered energy to operate and typically consumes large

210

CHAPT ER 8 Thermodynamics

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

amounts of electric energy. It’s a type of heat pump, a device that uses ordered energy
to transfer heat from a colder object to a hotter object, against its natural direction
of flow.
Before studying how an air conditioner pumps heat, we should first show that pumping
is necessary. There are three harebrained cooling alternatives that we need to discredit
before turning to air conditioning:
1. Letting heat flow from your home to your neighbor’s home.
2. Destroying some of your home’s thermal energy.
3. Converting some of your home’s thermal energy into electric energy.

Fig. 8.1.1 Although they
are touching, no heat is
flowing between the red
bottle and the blue bottle.
Similarly, no heat is flowing
between the red bottle and
the green bottle. Based on
those two observations, the
law of thermal equilibrium
states that no heat will flow
between the blue bottle
and the green bottle when
they touch.

We’ll find it useful to examine each of these alternatives because, in doing so,
we’ll learn about the laws governing the movement of thermal energy, the laws of
thermodynamics.
The first alternative raises an interesting issue. Your home is in thermal equilibrium
with the outdoor air, meaning that no heat flows from one to the other and they’re at the
same temperature. Your neighbor’s home is also in thermal equilibrium with the outdoor
air. What will happen if you permit heat to flow between your home and your neighbor’s
home? Nothing. Since both homes are simultaneously in thermal equilibrium with the outdoor air, they’re also in thermal equilibrium with one another. All three are at the same
temperature.
This observation is an example of the law of thermal equilibrium (often called the
zeroth law of thermodynamics), which says that two objects that are each in thermal
equilibrium with a third object are also in thermal equilibrium with one another (Fig. 8.1.1).
This seemingly obvious law is the basis for a meaningful system of temperatures. If you
had a roomful of objects at 35 °C (95 °F) and some were in thermal equilibrium with one
another while others were not, then “being at 35 °C” wouldn’t mean much. However, every
object that has a temperature of 35 °C is in thermal equilibrium with every other object at
35 °C. The law of thermal equilibrium is observed to be true in nature, so temperature does
have meaning. Since your neighbor’s home is just as hot as yours, they can relax because
you’re not going to be sending them any extra heat.

THE LAW OF THERMAL EQUILIBRIUM
Two objects that are each in thermal equilibrium with a third object are also in thermal
equilibrium with one another.

The second alternative sounds unlikely from the outset. We’ve known since the first
chapter that energy is special, that it’s a conserved quantity. You can’t cool your home by
destroying thermal energy because energy can’t be destroyed. To eliminate thermal energy,
you must convert it to another form or transfer it elsewhere.
This concept of energy conservation is the basis for the law of conservation of
energy (often called the first law of thermodynamics), which officially recognizes that
there are actually two ways to transfer energy: the mechanical means we know as work
and the thermal means we know as heat. You can increase an object’s internal energy,
which includes its thermal energy, only by doing work on it or by transferring heat to it
(Fig. 8.1.2).
In its traditional form, the law of conservation of energy observes that the change in a
stationary object’s internal energy is equal to the heat transferred into that object minus the
work that object does on its surroundings. In other words, heat added to the object increases

Air Conditioners

211

(b)

(a)

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

(c)

Fig. 8.1.2 According to the law of conservation of energy, you
can increase the internal energy (that is, thermal energy) of an
object either by adding heat to it or by doing work on it. Here the
work done on air while compressing it raises that air’s temperature
so high that a piece of cotton in that air bursts into flames.

its internal energy, while work done by the object decreases its internal energy. The law of
conservation of energy can be written as a word equation:
change in object’s internal energy = heat added to object − work done by object, (8.1.1)
in symbols,
ΔU = Q − W,
and in everyday language:
You can add energy to a ball as heat by cooking it or as work by squeezing it.

THE LAW OF CONSERVATION OF ENERGY
The change in a stationary object’s internal energy is equal to the heat transferred into
that object minus the work that object does on its surroundings.

Check Your Understanding #1: Stirring Up Trouble
If you put cold water into a blender and mix it rapidly for several minutes, the water will become
warm. From where does the additional thermal energy come?
Answer: The blender’s blade does work on the water, and this work becomes thermal energy.
Why: The law of conservation of energy states that the change in the water’s internal energy is equal to
the heat flowing into it minus the work it does on its surroundings. In this case, the water’s surroundings
are doing work on it by stirring it, so its internal energy increases. Since the water can’t store this new
internal energy as ordered potential energy, the energy becomes thermal energy and the water gets hotter.

212

CHAPT ER 8 Thermodynamics

Check Your Figures #1: Powerful You
You have been pedaling the exercise bicycle steadily for 20 min at a power of 200 W. How much
thermal power is the bicycle emitting into the room?
Answer: 200 W.
Why: Since the bicycle’s internal energy can’t increase or decrease forever, it must be emitting as much
thermal power into the room as it is receiving mechanical power from you. As required by Eq. 8.1.1, the
200 W of mechanical power you supply to the bicycle is flowing into the room as 200 W of thermal power.

Disorder and Entropy
The third alternative looks much more promising than the first two. It seems as though you
should be able to convert thermal energy into electricity (or some other ordered form of
energy). You could then sell it back to the electric company and get credit on your bill.
Wouldn’t that be great?
There’s a problem with this idea—ordered energy and thermal energy aren’t equivalent. You can easily convert ordered energy into thermal energy, but the reverse is much
harder. For example, you can burn a log to convert its chemical potential energy into
thermal energy, but you’ll have trouble converting that thermal energy back into chemical
potential energy to recreate the log.
The basic laws of motion are silent on this issue. The log’s original energy and constituent particles still exist, and they could, in principle, act together to reassemble the log.
It is the laws of statistics that prevent the log’s reassembly. That reassembly process would
require a long series of remarkably unlikely events. The particles would all have to move
in just the right ways to turn the burned gases back into wood and oxygen, an incredible
coincidence that simply never happens. Similarly, all the air particles in your home would
have to act together to convert their thermal energy into electricity. Since that coordinated
behavior is ridiculously improbable, you’re not going to be selling thermal-energy power
to the electric company any time soon.
Once ordered energy has been scattered randomly among the individual air particles, you
can’t collect that energy back together again. Creating disorder out of order is easy, but recovering order from disorder is nearly impossible. As a result, systems that begin with some amount
of order gradually become more and more disordered, never the other way around (Fig. 8.1.3).
The best they can do is to stay the same for a while so that their disorder doesn’t change. From
these observations, we can state that the disorder of an isolated system never decreases.
This notion of never-decreasing disorder is one of the central concepts of thermal physics. There is even a formal measure of the total disorder in an object, entropy. All disorder
contributes to an object’s entropy, including its thermal energy and its structural defects.
Both breaking a window and heating it increase its entropy. Although its name sounds similar to energy, don’t confuse energy and entropy. Energy is a conserved quantity, while
entropy is a quantity that can and generally does increase. It’s easy to make more entropy.
Because disorder never decreases, the third cooling alternative is impossible. Turning
your home’s thermal energy into electric energy would reduce its disorder and decrease its
entropy. Our observations about entropy aren’t yet complete, though. There is one way to
decrease your home’s entropy: you can export that entropy somewhere else. In fact, you
export entropy every time you take out the garbage, though that action also changes the
contents of your home. You can also export entropy without modifying your home’s contents by transferring heat somewhere else. Heat carries disorder and entropy with it, so
getting rid of heat also gets rid of entropy.
Our rule about entropy never decreasing is weakened by the possibility of exchanging
heat and entropy between objects. Before asserting that an object or system of objects can’t
decrease its entropy, we must ensure that the object is thermally isolated from its surroundings
so that it can’t export its entropy. With that in mind, the strongest statement that we can make

Air Conditioners

213

(b)

(a)

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

(c)

Fig. 8.1.3 It’s easy to place these three photographs in their
correct time sequence. You simply look for disorder in each
photograph and arrange the sequence from least disorder to most
disorder. You are making use of the law of entropy, which observes
that the entropy (disorder) of a thermally isolated system never
decreases.

concerning entropy is that the entropy of a thermally isolated system of objects never decreases.
This observation is the law of entropy (often called the second law of thermodynamics).
THE LAW OF ENTROPY
The entropy of a thermally isolated system of objects never decreases.

Because of the law of entropy, the only way to cool your home is to export its thermal
energy and entropy elsewhere. Such a transfer would be easy if you had a cold object nearby
to receive the heat. Lacking a cold object, you must use an air conditioner. Like all heat
pumps, an air conditioner transfers heat and entropy in such a way that the law of entropy is
never violated and the entropy of each thermally isolated system of objects never decreases.
As we’ll see, the air conditioner lowers the entropy of your home but raises the entropy of
the outdoor air even more, so that, overall, the entropy of the world actually increases.
Check Your Understanding #2: Something for Nothing
People have tried for centuries to build machines that provide endless outputs of useful, ordered
energy without any inputs of ordered energy. Unfortunately, such perpetual motion machines violate
the laws of thermodynamics. If such a machine is thermally isolated, which law does it violate? What
if it’s not thermally isolated?
Answer: A thermally isolated perpetual motion machine violates the law of conservation of energy,
while one that is not thermally isolated violates the law of entropy.
Why: A thermally isolated perpetual motion machine clearly violates the conservation of energy. This
isolated machine simply can’t export energy forever because it will eventually run out. A perpetual
motion machine that is not thermally isolated may not violate conservation of energy because it can
absorb heat energy from its surroundings. Instead, it violates the law of entropy. This machine can’t
endlessly absorb heat energy and then export it as ordered energy. In doing so, the machine will
eventually begin to reduce the entropy of the universe and violate the law of entropy. Sad though it
may be, perpetual motion machines can’t exist.

214

CHAPT ER 8 Thermodynamics

Pumping Heat Against Its Natural Flow
Although the law of entropy doesn’t allow the entropy of a thermally isolated system to
decrease, it does permit the objects in that system to redistribute their individual entropies.
One object’s entropy can decrease as long as the entropy of the rest of the system increases
by at least as much. Such entropy redistribution allows part of the system to become colder
if the rest of the system becomes hotter.
For example, suppose that there’s a pond of cold water behind your home. You pump
that water through your bathtub and let it draw heat out of the room air. Your home
becomes colder while the pond becomes warmer. This transfer of heat from the hot air in
your home to the cold water in the pond satisfies the law of entropy. The entropy of the
combined system—your home and the pool of water—doesn’t decrease. In fact, it actually increases!
This entropy increase occurs because heat is more disordering to cold objects than it is
to hot objects. Each joule of heat that flows from your home to the pool creates more disorder in the pool than it creates order in your home.
A useful analog for this effect involves two parties taking place simultaneously: the
garden society’s annual tea party and a 4-year-old’s birthday party. The orderly tea party
represents the cold pool while the disorderly birthday party represents your hot home. The
analogy to letting heat flow from your hot home to the cold pool is to trade one lively
4-year-old from the disorderly birthday party for one quiet octogenarian from the orderly
tea party. This exchange will reduce the birthday party’s disorder only slightly, but it will
dramatically increase the disorder of the tea party. The attendance at each party will be
unchanged but their total disorder will increase.
When heat flows from your home to the pool, the overall entropy increases and the
law of entropy is more than satisfied. A similar increase in entropy occurs whenever
heat flows from a hot object to a cold object, which is why heat normally flows in that
direction.
An air conditioner, however, does the seemingly impossible: it transfers heat from a
cold object, your home, to a hot object, the outdoor air. This heat flows in the wrong
direction, and the disorder it creates by entering the hot outdoor air is less than the disorder it removes by leaving the cold indoor air. It’s like returning the tea party’s lone
4-year-old to the birthday party in exchange for the elderly garden fancier—the birthday
party becomes only a tiny bit more disorderly while the garden party becomes much
more orderly, so the net disorder of the two gatherings decreases substantially. Similarly,
if nothing else happened when the air conditioner moved heat from the cold indoor air to
the hot outdoor air, the entropy of the combined system would decrease and the law of
entropy would be violated!
However, we’ve omitted an important feature of the air conditioner’s operation—the
electric energy it consumes. The air conditioner converts this ordered energy into thermal
energy and delivers it as additional heat to the outdoor air (Fig. 8.1.4). In doing so, the air
conditioner creates enough extra entropy to ensure that the overall entropy of the combined
system increases. The law of entropy is satisfied after all.

Fig. 8.1.4 A heat pump transfers heat from a colder
region to a hotter region. In doing so, it converts some
work (ordered energy) into heat (thermal energy in the
hotter region). The larger the temperature difference
between the two regions, the more work is required to
transfer each joule of heat.

Colder
region

Heat
pump
Heat
Work

Hotter
region

Air Conditioners

The amount of ordered energy the air conditioner consumes depends on the temperatures of the indoor air and outdoor air. If the two are close in temperature, the transfer
of heat reduces the entropy only slightly, so the air conditioner doesn’t need to convert
much ordered energy into thermal energy. If they are far apart in temperature, however,
the air conditioner must create lots of extra entropy to make up for the entropy lost in
the transfer.
This requirement that entropy not decrease explains why an air conditioner works
best when it’s cooling your home the least. The greater the temperature difference
between the indoor air and the outdoor air, the more electric energy or other form of work
the air conditioner must consume to transfer each joule of heat. For an ideally efficient
air conditioner or other heat pump, the relationships between the work consumed, the
heat removed from the cold object, and the heat added to the hot object can be written as
two word equations:
heat removed from cold object = work consumed ·

temperaturecold
temperature hot − temperaturecold

heat added to hot object = heat removed from cold object + work consumed, (8.1.2)
in symbols:
−Qc = W

Tc
,
Th − Tc

Qh = −Qc + W,
and in everyday language:
The closer the two temperatures are, the easier it is to move heat
from cold to hot,
where the temperatures are measured on an absolute scale. The hot object receives not only
the heat removed from the cold object but also an amount of heat equal to the work consumed by the transfer. Note also that the work needed to remove heat from your home
approaches infinity as its temperature approaches absolute zero; that’s why absolute zero is
unattainable.
Sadly, a practical air conditioner never reaches ideal efficiency, so it moves less heat
than promised by Eqs. 8.1.2. Moreover, heat leaks back into your home through its walls at
a rate that’s roughly proportional to the temperature difference. No wonder your electric
bill soars when you cool your home to arctic temperatures in tropical weather!

Check Your Understanding #3: Heat Pumps in Cold Weather
Homes located in mild climates are often heated by heat pumps during the winter. Home heat pumps
are essentially air conditioners run backward. They extract heat from the cold outdoor air and release
it to the warm indoor air. Why are heat pumps most effective in mild weather, when the outdoor air
isn’t too cold?
Answer: heat pump requires more ordered energy to pump heat from a cold object to a hot object
when the temperature difference between them is large.
Why: A heat pump becomes less efficient at pumping heat when the temperature of the heat’s source
becomes much colder than the heat’s destination. The colder it is outside, the more ordered energy
it takes to move each joule of heat. On bitter cold days, heat pumps aren’t able to move enough heat
to keep their homes warm, which is why most home heat pumps have built-in electric or gas furnaces
to assist them during unusually cold weather.

215

CHAPT ER 8 Thermodynamics

Check Your Figures #2: A Hot House for Cheap
Your house is heated by an ideally efficient heat pump that uses ordered energy to pump heat from
the colder outdoor air to the warmer indoor air. On a winter day, the outdoor temperature is 270 K
(−3 °C or 26 °F) and the indoor temperature is 300 K (26 °C or 80 °F). To deliver 1000 J of heat to
the indoor air, how much electric energy must the heat pump consume?
Answer: The pump must consume 100 J.
Why: The difference in temperature between indoor air and outdoor air is 30 K, so according to
Eqs. 8.1.2, the heat pump can remove 9 times as much heat from the outdoor air as it consumes in
work and deliver 10 times as much heat to the indoor air. Thus it takes only 100 J of electric energy
to remove 900 J of heat from the outdoor air and deliver all 1000 J as heat to the indoor air. What
a bargain!

How an Air Conditioner Cools the Indoor Air
Having determined the air conditioner’s goals, we can now look at how a real air conditioner meets them. In most cases, the air conditioner uses a fluid to transfer heat from the
colder indoor air to the hotter outdoor air. Known as the working fluid, this substance
absorbs heat from the indoor air and releases that heat to the outdoor air.
The working fluid flows in a looping path through the air conditioner’s three main
components: an evaporator, a condenser, and a compressor (Fig. 8.1.5). The evaporator is
located indoors, where it transfers heat from the indoor air to the working fluid (Fig. 8.1.6).
The condenser is located outdoors, where it transfers heat from the working fluid to the
outdoor air. The compressor is also located outdoors, where it squeezes the working fluid
and does the work needed to move heat against its natural flow. To see how these three
components pump heat out of your home, let’s look at them individually.
We’ll begin with the evaporator, a long metal pipe that’s decorated with thin metal fins.
The evaporator is a heat exchanger that allows heat to flow from the warm indoor air around
it to the cool working fluid inside it. Its fins provide additional surface area through which
heat can flow, and a fan blows indoor air rapidly past those fins to encourage that flow.
True to its name, the evaporator is where the working fluid evaporates from liquid to
gas. To evaporate, the liquid working fluid needs its latent heat of evaporation, the energy
required to separate a liquid’s molecules so that it becomes a gas. The working fluid obtains
part of that energy from its own thermal energy, and its temperature decreases. Heat from
the indoor air then flows into the chilled working fluid and completes the evaporation. By
the time the working fluid leaves the evaporator as a gas, it has absorbed a great deal of the
indoor air’s thermal energy and carries that energy with it as chemical potential energy.
To make the working fluid evaporate, the air conditioner abruptly reduces its pressure. In
Chapter 7, we learned that phase transitions such as evaporation depend on molecular landing
and leaving rates, and that those rates are sensitive to pressure and temperature. Working fluid
Insulated
wall
Compressor

Liquid

Heat

One-way
valves
Condenser

Fig. 8.1.5 A typical air conditioner transfers heat
from colder air to hotter air by condensing a gas
to a liquid in the hotter region and evaporating the
liquid to a gas in the colder region. A compressor
provides the necessary input of ordered energy.

Evaporator

Gas

Heat

216

Constriction
Colder region

Hotter region

Air Conditioners
(b) Indoor unit

(a) Outdoor unit
Gas

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Condenser

Liquid
Liquid
Evaporator
Compressor

Gas

Fig. 8.1.6 The two components of
a central air-conditioning system.
(a) In the outdoor unit, gaseous
working fluid is compressed and
condensed into a liquid, releasing heat
into the outdoor air. (b) In the indoor
unit, liquid working fluid is evaporated
into a gas, extracting heat from the
indoor air. This system is actually a
heat pump, meaning that the roles of
the condenser and evaporator can be
reversed and the system can heat the
indoor air during the winter.

flows toward the evaporator as a warm, high-pressure liquid, but its pressure drops dramatically when it flows into the evaporator through a narrow constriction in the tubing. That pressure drop slows the rate at which working fluid molecules land on the liquid from the gas so
that molecules leaving the liquid for the gas dominate and the liquid starts to evaporate.
As the working fluid evaporates, its temperature plummets and its evaporation slows down;
molecules rarely gather enough thermal energy from the cold liquid to leave it for the gas. However, heat from the warmer room air now rushes into the cold working fluid and encourages
further evaporation. By the time the working fluid emerges from the evaporator, it has evaporated completely and has absorbed considerable thermal energy from the indoor air. It leaves the
evaporator as a cool low-pressure gas and travels through a pipe toward the compressor.
Half the air conditioner’s job is done: it has removed heat from the indoor air. The
remaining half of its job is more challenging; it must add heat to the outdoor air while
ensuring that the total entropy of the combined system doesn’t decrease. After all, there’s
no getting around the law of entropy.

Check Your Understanding #4: Cooling at the Gas Grill
When liquid propane evaporates into a gas in the tank of a propane grill, the tank that contains that
liquid propane becomes colder. Why?
Answer: The tank’s liquid propane needs heat to evaporate into a gas, and it extracts that heat from
its surroundings.
Why: Just as in the evaporator of an air conditioner, the evaporating liquid propane absorbs heat.

How an Air Conditioner Warms the Outdoor Air
Satisfying the law of entropy is the task of the compressor, an electrically powered device
that squeezes gas into a smaller volume. The compressor receives low-pressure gaseous
working fluid from the evaporator, compresses it to much higher density, and delivers it as
a high-pressure gas to the condenser. The compressor may use a piston and one-way valves,
like the water pump in Fig. 5.2.3, or it may use a rotary pumping mechanism. Regardless
of how it functions, the result is the same: the gaseous working fluid undergoes a dramatic
increase in density and pressure as it passes through the compressor.

217

CHAPT ER 8 Thermodynamics

Fig. 8.1.7 The
compressor (bottom) and
condenser coils (top)
are visible on the back
of this refrigerator. The
compressor squeezes the
working fluid into a hot
dense gas and delivers it
to the condenser. There
it gives up heat to the
room air and condenses
into a liquid. The working
fluid evaporates inside the
refrigerator, extracting heat
from the food.

The compressor does work on the gas while compressing it—pushing the gas inward
as the gas moves inward. In accordance with the law of conservation of energy, this work
increases the internal energy of the working fluid. The only way that a gas can store additional energy is as thermal energy, so the working fluid leaves the compressor much hotter
than when it arrived. There is no getting around that temperature rise; compressing a gas
unavoidably raises its temperature.
Hot, high-pressure working fluid then flows into the condenser. Like the evaporator,
the condenser is a long metal pipe with fins attached to it. It acts as a heat exchanger, and
its fins provide extra surface area to speed the flow of heat from the hotter working fluid
inside it to the less hot outdoor air. There may also be a fan to move outdoor air quickly past
the condenser and speed up the heat transfer.
As its name suggests, the condenser is where the working fluid condenses from gas to
liquid. That condensation starts when the gas begins to cool after compression. While it flows
through a pipe toward the compressor, the low-pressure working fluid is stable as a gas. But in
the high-pressure, high-density working fluid that emerges from the compressor and starts to
cool in the condenser, the landing rate outpaces the leaving rate and the gas begins to condense.
As its molecules bind together to form a liquid, the hot gaseous working fluid releases
its latent heat of evaporation. This chemical potential energy becomes thermal energy in
the working fluid, keeping it hot so that heat continues to flow out of it through the walls of
the condenser to the cooler outdoor air.
By the time the working fluid leaves the condenser as a liquid, it has transformed a great
deal of chemical potential energy into thermal energy and released that energy into the outdoor
air. The outdoor air receives as heat not only the thermal energy extracted from the indoor air
but also the electric energy consumed by the compressor. The working fluid exits the condenser as a warm, high-pressure liquid and travels through a pipe toward the evaporator.
The second half of the air conditioner’s job is now complete; it has released heat into
the outdoor air and, in the process, converted ordered energy into thermal energy. From
here, the working fluid returns to the evaporator to begin the cycle all over again. The working fluid passes endlessly around the loop, extracting heat from the indoor air in the evaporator and releasing it to the outdoor air in the condenser. The compressor drives the whole
process and thereby satisfies the law of entropy.
In fact, heat pumps of this type also appear in many common appliances. A refrigerator
uses a heat pump to extract heat from food and release that heat to the room air (Fig. 8.1.7).
A drinking fountain uses a heat pump to transfer heat from water to the room air (Fig. 8.1.8).
Like all heat pumps, these cooling devices release more heat to the warm object (room air)
than they extract from the cold object (food or water). That’s why when you hold the refrigerator door open and it begins to pump heat from one portion of room air to another portion

Fig. 8.1.8 These drinking
fountains have heat pumps
built into them to cool the
water. Heat removed from the
water, along with heat produced
by the heat-pumping process
itself, is released into the room
air through the louvers visible
on the sides of the drinking
fountains.

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

218

Automobiles

219

of room air, the room gets warmer overall—the electric energy the refrigerator consumes
while operating is being turned wastefully into thermal energy in the room. To save energy,
keep the refrigerator closed whenever possible.
Many homes in moderate climates are heated by effectively running their air conditioners backward. Called heat pumps rather than air conditioners, these systems are capable
of pumping heat against its natural direction of flow in winter as well is in summer.
In summer, a heat pump moves heat from indoor air to outdoor air to cool the home. In
winter, however, it moves heat from outdoor air to indoor air to heat the home. Rather than
turning electricity directly into thermal energy to heat the home, it leverages that electrical
energy by using it to gather the abundant thermal energy from outdoors and to carry that indoors.
Before leaving air conditioners, we should take a moment to look at the working fluid
itself. This fluid must become a gas at low pressure and a liquid at high pressure, over most
of the temperature range encountered by the air conditioner. For decades, the standard
working fluids were chlorofluorocarbons such as the various Freons. These compounds
replaced ammonia, a toxic and corrosive gas used in early refrigeration.
Chlorofluorocarbons are ideally suited to air conditioners because they easily transform from gas to liquid and back again over a broad range of temperatures. They’re also
chemically inert and inexpensive. Unfortunately, chlorofluorocarbon molecules contain
chlorine atoms and, when released into the air, can carry those chlorine atoms to the upper
atmosphere. There they promote the destruction of ozone molecules, essential atmospheric
constituents that absorb portions of the sun’s ultraviolet radiation. Recently, chlorine-free
hydrofluorocarbons have replaced chlorofluorocarbons as the working fluids in most air
conditioners. Though not as energy efficient and chemically inert as the materials they
replace, hydrofluorocarbons do not damage the ozone layer. They are, however, potent
greenhouse gases (see Section 7.3) and should not be released to the atmosphere.

Check Your Understanding #5: Air Conditioning or Space Heating?
What would happen to the average air temperature in your room if you placed a window air-conditioning
unit in the middle of the room and turned it on?
Answer: The room air would become warmer, on average.
Why: The air conditioner would begin to pump heat from its front to its back. The air right in front of
the unit would become colder, while the air behind the unit would become hotter. Since the unit
would deliver more heat to the hotter air than it would absorb from the colder air, it would increase
the total amount of thermal energy in the room. On average, the room would become warmer.

SECTION 8.2
Gas tank door

Drip molding

Automobiles
Cowl

Sliding
sunroof

Windshield

Washer
nozzle

Fender Wheel
Mud ﬂap

Wheel
cover

Nothing is more symbolic of freedom and personal independence than an automobile. With its keys in your hand, you can
go almost anywhere at a moment’s notice. The mechanism that
makes this instant transportation possible is the internal combustion engine. Though it has been refined over the years, this
engine’s basic design has changed little since it was invented
more than a century ago. It uses thermal energy released by
burning fuel to do the work needed to propel the car forward.
That thermal energy can do work at all is one of the marvels of
thermal physics and the primary focus of this section.

Antenna

Windshield
wiper

Tire

Transmission

Engine

Grille
Bumper

Headlight

Questions to Think About: What obstacles stand in the way of
using burning fuel’s thermal energy to propel a car? Why are two
objects, one hot and one cold, required to convert any thermal

220

CHAPT ER 8 Thermodynamics

energy into useful work? What hot and cold objects does a car
have? Why does a car have a cooling system to get rid of waste
heat rather than just converting it all into useful work? How does
premium, high-octane gasoline differ from regular, low-octane
gasoline? Why aren’t gasoline and diesel fuel interchangeable?

Experiments to Do: The recent advances in automobile
technology and the increasing demands for pollution-control
equipment have made automobiles exceedingly complicated.
Nonetheless, take a moment to look under the hood of your or

a friend’s car. You should be able to identify the engine and
its electric support system. You should be able to count four
or more spark plug wires heading toward the engine’s cylinders. These cylinders convert thermal energy from burning
fuel into work to propel the car. Why does the engine need so
many cylinders rather than relying on one larger cylinder?
At the front of the engine compartment, you’ll find the
radiator. How does this device extract waste heat from the
engine? Does heat flow naturally into the radiator and then into
the outdoor air, or is there a heat pump involved?

Using Thermal Energy: Heat Engines
The light turns green, and you step on the accelerator pedal. The engine of your car roars
into action, and in a moment, you’re cruising down the road a mile a minute. The engine
noise gradually diminishes to a soft purr and vanishes beneath the sound of the radio and
the passing wind.
The engine is the heart of the automobile, pushing the car forward at the light and
keeping it moving against the forces of gravity, friction, and air resistance. It’s not simply
a miracle of engineering. It’s also a wonder of thermal physics because it performs the
seemingly impossible task of converting thermal energy into ordered energy. However, the
law of entropy forbids the direct conversion of thermal energy into ordered energy, so how
can a car engine use burning fuel to propel the car forward?
The car engine avoids conflict with the law of entropy by being a heat engine, a device
that converts thermal energy into ordered energy as heat flows from a hot object to a cold
object (Fig. 8.2.1). Although thermal energy in a single object can’t be converted into work,
that restriction doesn’t apply to a system of two objects at different temperatures. Because
heat flowing from the hot object to the cold object increases the overall entropy of the system, a small amount of thermal energy can be converted into work without decreasing the
system’s overall entropy and without violating the law of entropy.
Another way to look at a heat engine is through the contributions of the two objects.
The hot object provides the thermal energy that’s converted into work. The cold object
provides the order needed to carry out that conversion. As the heat engine operates, the hot
object loses some of its thermal energy and the cold object loses some of its order. The heat
engine has used them to produce ordered energy. Since the heat engine needs both thermal
energy and order, it can’t operate if either the hot or the cold object is missing.
In a car engine, the hot object is burning fuel and the cold object is outdoor air. Some
of the heat passing from the burning fuel to the outdoor air is diverted and becomes the
ordered energy that propels the car. But what limits the amount of thermal energy the
engine can convert into ordered energy?
To answer that question, let’s examine a simplified car engine. We’ll treat the burning
fuel and outdoor air as a single, thermally isolated system and look at what happens to their
total entropy as the engine operates. In accordance with the law of entropy, this total entropy
can’t decrease while the engine is transforming some thermal energy into ordered energy.

Fig. 8.2.1 A heat engine converts heat (thermal energy
from the hotter region) into work (ordered energy) as heat
flows from a hotter region to a colder region. The larger the
temperature difference between the two regions, the larger
the fraction of heat that can be converted into work.

Colder
region

Heat
engine
Heat
Work

Hotter
region

Automobiles

When the car is idling at a stoplight, its engine is doing no work and heat is simply
flowing from the hot burning fuel to the cold outdoor air. The system’s total entropy
increases because this heat is more disordering to the cold air it enters than to the hot burning fuel it leaves. In fact, the system’s entropy increases dramatically because the burning
fuel is extremely hot compared to the cold outdoor air.
This increase in the system’s entropy is unnecessary and wasteful. The law of entropy
requires only that the engine add as much entropy to the cold outdoor air as it removes from
the hot burning fuel. Since a little heat is quite disordering to cold air, the car engine can
deliver much less heat to the outdoor air than it removes from the burning fuel and still not
cause the system’s total entropy to decrease. As long as the engine delivers enough heat to
the outdoor air to keep the total entropy from decreasing, there’s nothing to prevent it from
converting the remaining heat into ordered energy!
This conversion starts as soon as you remove your foot from the brake and begin to
accelerate forward. Instead of transferring all the thermal energy in the burning fuel to the
outdoor air, your car then extracts some of it as ordered energy and uses it to power the
wheels. The car engine can convert thermal energy into ordered energy, as long as it passes
along enough heat from the hot object to the cold object to satisfy the law of entropy.
Obeying the law of entropy becomes easier as the temperature difference between the
two objects increases. When the temperature difference is huge, as it is in an automobile
engine, a large fraction of the thermal energy leaving the hot object can be converted into
ordered energy—at least in theory. For an ideally efficient automobile engine or other heat
engine, the relationships among the heat removed from the hot object, the heat added to the
cold object, and the work provided can be written as two word equations:
work provided = heat removed from hot object ·

temperature hot − temperature cold
temperature hot

heat added to cold object = heat removed from hot object − work provided,

(8.2.1)

in symbols:
W = −Q h

T h − Tc
Th

Qc = −Q h − W,
and in everyday language:
The greater the temperature difference between hot and cold, the larger the
fraction of heat you can divert and transform into work,
where the temperatures are measured on an absolute scale.
Unfortunately, theoretical limits are often hard to realize in actual machines, and the best
automobile engines extract only about half the ordered energy specified by Eqs. 8.2.1. Still,
obtaining even that amount is a remarkable feat and a tribute to scientists and engineers who,
in recent years, have labored to make automobile engines as energy efficient as possible.
Check Your Understanding #1: Heat Pumps and Heat Engines
An air conditioner uses electric energy to make the air in your home colder than the outdoor air.
Could you use this difference in temperatures to operate a heat engine and generate electric energy?
Answer: Yes, you could.
Why: A heat engine is essentially a heat pump operating backward. The air conditioner (a heat pump)
uses ordered electric energy to pump heat from the cold air in your home to the hot outdoor air. The
heat engine we are considering would use the flow of heat from the hot outdoor air to the cold air in
your home to produce ordered electric energy.

221

222

CHAPT ER 8 Thermodynamics

Check Your Figures #1: Back to the Steam Age
A train locomotive is powered by an ideal steam engine. If the steam boiler operates at 450 K (177 °C
or 350 °F) and the outdoor temperature is 300 K (26 °C or 80 °F), how much work can the steam
engine obtain by removing 1200 J of heat from the boiler?
Answer: It can obtain 400 J of work.
Why: Since the hot object is at 450 K and the temperature difference is 150 K, Eqs. 8.2.1 allow 1/3
of the heat removed from the boiler to be converted into work. The remaining 800 J of heat must flow
into the outdoor air.

The Internal Combustion Engine
Invented by the German engineer Nikolaus August Otto in 1867, the internal combustion
engine burns fuel directly in the engine itself. Gasoline and air are mixed and ignited in an
enclosed chamber. The resulting temperature rise increases the pressure of the gas and
allows it to perform work on a movable surface.
To extract work from the fuel, the internal combustion engine must perform four tasks
in sequence:
1. It must introduce a fuel-air mixture into an enclosed volume.
2. It must ignite that mixture.
3. It must allow the hot burned gas to do work on the car.
4. It must get rid of the exhaust gas.
In the standard, four-stroke fuel-injected engine found in modern gasoline automobiles,
this sequence of events takes place inside a hollow cylinder (Fig. 8.2.2). It’s called a fourstroke engine because it operates in four distinct steps, or strokes: induction, compression,
power, and exhaust. Fuel-injected refers to the technique used to mix the fuel and air as
they’re introduced into the cylinder.
Automobile engines usually have four or more of these cylinders. Each cylinder is a
separate energy source, closed at one end and equipped with a movable piston, several
valves, a fuel injector, and a spark plug. The piston slides up and down in the cylinder,
shrinking or enlarging the cavity inside. The valves, located at the closed end of the cylinder, open to introduce fuel and air into the cavity or to permit burned exhaust gas to escape
from the cavity. The fuel injector adds fuel to the air as it enters the cylinder. The spark
plug, also located at the closed end of the cylinder, ignites the fuel-air mixture to release its
chemical potential energy as thermal energy.
Spark
plug

Fig. 8.2.2 A four-stroke
engine cylinder. During
the induction stroke, fuel
and air enter the cylinder.
The compression stroke
squeezes that mixture into
a small volume. The spark
plug ignites the mixture,
and the power stroke
allows the hot gas to do
work on the automobile.
Finally, the exhaust stroke
ejects the exhaust gas from
the cylinder.

Induction

Fuel and
air inlet

Compression

Exhaust
outlet

Power

Exhaust

Automobiles

The fuel-air mixture is introduced into each cylinder during its induction stroke. In this
stroke, the engine pulls the piston away from the cylinder’s closed end so that its cavity
expands to create a partial vacuum. At the same time, the cylinder’s inlet valves open so
that atmospheric pressure can push fresh air into the cylinder. The cylinder’s fuel injector
adds a mist of fuel droplets to this air so that the cylinder fills with a flammable fuel-air
mixture. Because it takes work to move air out of the way and create a partial vacuum, the
engine does work on the cylinder during the induction stroke.
At the end of the induction stroke, the inlet valves close to prevent the fuel-air mixture from
flowing back out of the cylinder. Now the compression stroke begins. The engine pushes the
piston toward the cylinder’s closed end so that its cavity shrinks and the fuel-air mixture becomes
denser. The engine does work on the mixture while compressing it—the piston pushes the gas
inward as the gas moves inward—so the mixture’s internal energy increases. The only way that
a gas can store this additional energy is as thermal energy, so the mixture’s temperature rises as
it’s compressed. Since increases in a gas’s density and temperature both increase its pressure,
the pressure in the cylinder rises rapidly as the piston approaches the spark plug.
At the end of the compression stroke, the engine applies a high-voltage pulse to the spark
plug and ignites the fuel-air mixture. The mixture burns quickly to produce hot, high-pressure
burned gas, which then does work on the car during the cylinder’s power stroke. In that
stroke, the gas pushes the piston away from the cylinder’s closed end so that its cavity expands
and the burned gas becomes less dense. Since the hot gas exerts a huge pressure force on the
piston as it moves outward, it does work on the piston and ultimately propels the car. As it
does work, the burned gas gives up thermal energy and cools in accordance with the law of
conservation of energy. Its density and pressure also decrease. At the end of the power stroke,
the exhaust gas has cooled significantly and its pressure is only a few times atmospheric
pressure. The cylinder has extracted much of the fuel’s chemical energy as work.
The cylinder gets rid of the exhaust gas during its exhaust stroke. In this stroke, the
engine pushes the piston toward the closed end of the cylinder while the cylinder’s outlet
valves are open. Because the burned gas trapped inside the cylinder at the end of the power
stroke is well above atmospheric pressure, it accelerates out of the cylinder the moment the
outlet valves open. These sudden bursts of gas leaving the cylinders create the “poof-poofpoof” sound of a running engine. Without a muffler on its exhaust pipes, the engine would
be loud and unpleasant.
Just opening the outlet valves releases most of the exhaust gas, but the rest is squeezed
out as the piston moves toward the cylinder’s closed end. The engine again does work on
the cylinder as it squeezes out the exhaust gas. At the end of the exhaust stroke, the cylinder
is empty and the outlet valves close. The cylinder is ready to begin a new induction stroke.
Check Your Understanding #2: Getting Out More Than You Put In
Why does the burned gas do more work on the piston during the power stroke than the piston does
on the unburned fuel-air mixture during the compression stroke?
Answer: The pressure is much higher in the burned gas than in the unburned fuel-air mixture.
Why: The amount of work done on the piston by the gas or done on the gas by the piston depends on
the pressure inside the cylinder. The higher that pressure, the more outward force the piston experiences and the more work is done on it as it moves. The sudden rise in pressure that occurs when the
fuel-air mixture burns explains why the burned gas does so much work on the piston as it moves
outward. That pressure rise is due partly to the rise in temperature and partly to the fragmentation of
the fuel and oxygen molecules into more, smaller molecules.

Engine Efficiency
The goal of an internal combustion engine is to extract as much work as possible from a
given amount of fuel. In principle, the fuel’s chemical potential energy can be converted
entirely into work because both are ordered energies. However, it’s difficult to convert

223

224

CHAPT ER 8 Thermodynamics

chemical potential energy directly into work, so the engine burns the fuel instead. This step
is unfortunate, for in burning the fuel, the engine converts the fuel’s chemical potential
energy directly into thermal energy and produces lots of unnecessary entropy.
But all is not lost. Since the burned fuel is extremely hot, a good fraction of its thermal
energy can be converted into ordered energy by diverting some of the heat that flows from
the burned fuel to the outdoor air. As we noted earlier, the hotter the burned fuel and the
colder the outdoor air, the more ordered energy the engine can extract. To maximize its fuel
efficiency, an internal combustion engine obtains the hottest possible burned gas, lets that
gas do as much work as it can on the piston, and releases the gas at the coldest possible
temperature.
It would be wonderful if, during the power stroke, the burned gas expanded and cooled
until it reached the temperature of the outdoor air. The exhaust gas would then leave the
engine with the same amount of thermal energy it had when it arrived, and the engine
would have extracted all of the fuel’s chemical potential energy as work. Unfortunately,
that would violate the law of entropy by converting thermal energy completely into ordered
energy. As Eqs. 8.2.1 indicate, an operating heat engine always adds some heat to its cold
object. In this case, the engine releases the burned gas before it cools to the temperature of
the outdoor air. It has no choice; the engine’s exhaust must be hot!
An ordinary internal combustion engine, however, is even less fuel efficient than the
law of entropy requires. It releases the burned gas while that gas is still well above atmospheric pressure and is therefore still capable of doing work on the piston. By allowing that
gas to expand further before release, an improved engine could extract more work from it
and thus be more fuel efficient. The Atkinson cycle engine is just such a device, with a
power stroke that is longer than its compression stroke. However, even if the engine expanded the burned gas until it reached atmospheric pressure, the temperature of its exhaust
would still remain somewhat above the temperature of the outdoor air. Invented in 1882,
Atkinson cycle engines have become popular only recently as part of the effort to build
more fuel-efficient vehicles.
Regardless of these improvements, real internal combustion engines always waste
some energy and extract less work than the law of entropy allows. For example, a fraction
of the heat leaks from the burned gas to the cylinder walls and is removed by the car’s
cooling system. This wasted heat isn’t available to produce work. Similarly, sliding friction
in the engine wastes mechanical energy and necessitates an oil-filled lubricating system.
Overall, real internal combustion engines convert only about 20–30% of the fuel’s chemical potential energy into work.
Check Your Understanding #3: Too Much of a Good Thing
What would happen to the pressure of the burned gas in an internal combustion engine if that engine
tried to expand it until it cooled to the temperature of the outdoor air?
Answer: The pressure of the burned gas would drop below atmospheric pressure.
Why: As the engine lets the burned gas expand, that gas does work on the piston and its temperature
and pressure decrease. By the time the gas reaches atmospheric pressure, it has cooled significantly
but it is still hotter than the outdoor air. To cool the burned gas further, the engine would have to
expand it further and its pressure would drop below atmospheric. The engine would then be doing
work on its piston to create a partial vacuum.

Improving Engine Efficiency
To obtain the hottest possible burned gas, the compression stroke should squeeze the fuelair mixture into as small a volume as possible. The more tightly the piston compresses the
mixture, the higher its density, pressure, and temperature will be before ignition and the
hotter the burned gases will be after ignition. Since the efficiency of any heat engine

Automobiles

TABLE 8.2.1 Approximate Ignition Temperatures for the
Three Standard Grades of Gasoline During Compression
Octane Number

Approximate Ignition Temperature

87 (regular)

750 °C (1382 °F)

90 (plus)

800 °C (1472 °F)

93 (premium)

850 °C (1562 °F)

increases as the temperature of its hot object increases and since the hot burned gas is the
automobile engine’s “hot object,” its high temperature after ignition is good for efficiency.
The extent to which the cylinder’s volume decreases during the compression stroke is
measured by its compression ratio, its volume at the start of the compression stroke
divided by its volume at the end of the compression stroke. The larger this compression
ratio, the hotter the burned gas and the more energy efficient the engine. While normal
compression ratios are between 8:1 and 12:1, those in high-compression engines may be
as much as 15:1.
Unfortunately, the compression ratio can’t be made arbitrarily large. If the engine
compresses the fuel-air mixture too much, the flammable mixture will become so hot that
it will ignite all by itself. This spontaneous ignition due to overcompression is called preignition or knocking. When an automobile knocks, the gasoline burns before the engine is
ready to extract work from it and much of the energy is wasted.
There are two ways to reduce knocking. First, you can mix the fuel and air more
uniformly. In a nonuniform mixture, there may be small regions of gas that get hotter or
are more susceptible to ignition than others. The fuel-injection technique used in all
modern cars provides excellent mixing and also allows a car’s computer to adjust the
fuel-air mixture for complete combustion and minimal pollution. So unless a car is seriously out of tune, there isn’t much room for improvement as far as mixture uniformity is
concerned.
Second, you can use the most appropriate fuel. Not all fuels ignite at the same temperature, so you should select a fuel that is able to tolerate your car’s compression process
without igniting spontaneously. That’s exactly what you do when you purchase the proper
grade of gasoline. Regular gasoline ignites at a relatively low temperature and is most susceptible to knocking. Premium gasoline ignites at a relatively high temperature and is most
resistant to knocking.
Fuels that are more difficult to ignite and more resistant to knocking are assigned
higher octane numbers. Regular gasoline has an octane number of about 87, while premium
has an octane number of about 93 (Table 8.2.1). Choosing the proper fuel is simply a matter
of finding the lowest octane gasoline that your car can use without excessive knocking. A
little knocking in the most demanding circumstances is quite acceptable. Most modern
well-tuned automobiles work beautifully on regular gasoline. Since only high-performance
cars with high-compression engines need premium gasoline, putting anything other than
regular gasoline in a normal car is usually a waste of money.
Check Your Understanding #4: The Only Premium Is the Price
As part of its aggressive advertising campaign, one oil company has begun calling its 93-octane
gasoline “the auto elixir.” People are flocking to the pumps to fill up even the most ordinary cars with
it. Should you join them or merely chuckle?
Answer: Chuckle away.
Why: Like any high-octane gasoline, the elixir is an expensive fuel that has been carefully formulated
to be hard to ignite. Although it works wonders for a high-compression engine that would otherwise
overheat the fuel-air mixture and cause it to knock, its resistance to ignition is wasted on most ordinary engines.

225

226

CHAPT ER 8 Thermodynamics

Diesel Engines and Turbochargers
Since knocking sets the limit for compression ratio, it also sets the limit for efficiency in a
gasoline engine. However, diesel engines avoid the knocking problem by separating the
fuel and air during the compression stroke (Fig. 8.2.3). Invented by German engineer
Rudolph Christian Karl Diesel (1858–1913) in 1896, the diesel engine has no spark plug to
ignite the fuel. Instead, it compresses pure air with an extremely high compression ratio of
perhaps 20:1 and then injects diesel fuel directly into the cylinder just as the power stroke
begins. The fuel ignites spontaneously as it enters the hot compressed air. Unlike an internal combustion engine, which uses a fuel that is difficult to ignite, a diesel engine uses fuel
that ignites easily.
Because of its higher compression ratio, a diesel engine burns its fuel at a higher temperature than a standard gasoline engine and can therefore be more energy efficient. It
effectively has a hotter “hot object” and can convert a larger fraction of heat into work.
Some gasoline or diesel engines combine fuel injection with a turbocharger. A turbocharger is essentially a fan that pumps outdoor air into the cylinder during the induction stroke. By
squeezing more fuel-air mixture into the cylinder, a turbocharger increases the engine’s power
output. The engine burns more fuel with each power stroke and behaves like a larger engine.
The fan of a turbocharger is powered by pressure in the engine’s exhaust system. A nearly
identical device called a supercharger is driven directly by the engine’s output power.
For an internal combustion engine, turbochargers have a downside: they encourage
knocking. As a turbocharger squeezes air into the cylinder, it does work on that air and the
air becomes hot. Since the fuel-air mixture enters the engine hot, it may ignite spontaneously during the compression stroke. To avoid knocking in a car equipped with a turbocharger, you may need to use premium gasoline. Some turbocharged cars are equipped
with an intercooler, a device that removes heat from the air passing through the turbocharger. By providing cool, high-density air to the cylinders, the intercooler reduces the peak
temperature of the compression stroke and avoids knocking.
For diesel engines, however, knocking is not an issue. In fact, turbochargers have revolutionized diesel engines, transforming them from sluggish to high performance. Because
of their high compression ratios and extremely hot combustion temperatures, diesel engines
develop enormous pressures inside their cylinders and tremendous forces on their pistons.
As a result, diesel engines can provide large torques and enormous powers, even at low
engine speeds.
With higher fuel efficiency and enhanced performance, these modern diesel engines
have a clear environmental advantage over gasoline engines. However, they still had to
Fuel
Pure air
injector intake

Fig. 8.2.3 A diesel
engine cylinder contains
pure air during the
compression stroke. As
the piston does work
on it, this air becomes
extremely hot. At the start
of the power stroke, diesel
fuel is injected into the
cylinder. The fuel ignites
spontaneously, and the
hot burned gas does work
on the piston and engine
during the power stroke.

Induction

Compression

Exhaust
outlet

Power

Exhaust

Automobiles

solve a long-standing problem with diesel engines—particulate pollution. Because a diesel
engine must burn its oily liquid fuel in about 1/1000th of a second, it was difficult to burn
the fuel completely and some of it became carbon soot. To eliminate that soot, diesel
engines were reengineered to swirl their fuel and air vigorously for more complete burning
and they now incorporate filters that capture and burn up any soot that does manage to get
into the exhaust system. The result is a relatively fuel-efficient vehicle with environmental
specifications that rival hybrid vehicles.
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS: The Hydrogen Economy
Misconception: One day soon, hydrogen will eliminate the need for other sources of energy.
Resolution: Since hydrogen doesn’t occur naturally on Earth, it is not a primary energy source.
Hydrogen is a secondary energy source, meaning that it is produced using a primary source of
energy. Although hydrogen can be made using solar, wind, or hydroelectric energy, most hydrogen
is now produced using natural gas or coal. Hydrogen itself is neither renewable nor nonrenewable;
what matters is which energy source you use to make it.

Check Your Understanding #5: Steam Heat
How can a steam engine be more energy efficient when it operates on 325 °C steam than when it
uses 300 °C steam?
Answer: Like all heat engines, the steam engine can convert more thermal energy into work when
the temperature of its hot object (the steam) increases.
Why: The steam engine converts thermal energy into work as heat flows from the hot steam to the
outdoor air. The greater the temperature difference between those two objects, the more efficient
the steam engine can be at turning thermal energy into work. That is why most steam engines use
extremely hot steam.

Multicylinder Engines
Since the purpose of the engine is to extract work from the fuel-air mixture, it’s important
that each cylinder do more work than it consumes. Three of the strokes require the engine to
do work on various gases, and only one of the strokes extracts work from the burned gas.
During the induction stroke, the engine does work drawing the fuel-air mixture into the
cylinder. During the compression stroke, the engine does work compressing the fuel-air
mixture. During the exhaust stroke, the engine does work squeezing the exhaust gas out of
the cylinder. Fortunately, the work done on the engine by the hot burned gas during the
power stroke more than makes up for the work the engine does during the other three strokes.
Still, the engine has to invest a great deal of energy into the cylinder before each power
stroke. To provide this initial energy, most four-stroke engines have four or more cylinders,
timed so that there is always one cylinder going through the power stroke. The cylinder that
is in the power stroke provides the work needed to carry the other cylinders through the
three nonpower strokes, and there is plenty of work left over to propel the car itself.
While the pistons move back and forth, the engine needs a rotary motion to turn the
car’s wheels. The engine converts each piston’s reciprocating motion into rotary motion by
coupling that piston to a crankshaft with a connecting rod. The crankshaft is a thick steel
bar, suspended in bearings, that has a series of pedal-like extensions, one for each cylinder.
As the piston moves out of the cylinder during the power stroke, it pushes on the connecting rod and the connecting rod pushes on its crankshaft pedal. The connecting rod thus
produces a torque on the crankshaft. The crankshaft rotates in its bearings and transmits
this torque out of the engine so that it can be used to propel the car. So, while each cylinder
initially exerts a force, the crankshaft uses that force to produce a torque.

227

228

CHAPT ER 8 Thermodynamics

The spinning crankshaft conveys its rotary power to the car’s transmission, and from
there the power moves on to the wheels. Overall, a significant portion of the heat flowing
out of the burning fuel-air mixture is being converted into work and used to spin the car’s
wheels. Assisted by friction with the pavement, the wheels push the car forward, and you
cruise down the highway toward your destination.
Check Your Understanding #6: Hard Starting
Modern cars use an electric motor to start the engine turning, but early cars were started with a hand
crank. Why was it so hard to turn the crank?
Answer: The person turning the crank had to do all the work needed to move the engine’s pistons
through the three nonpower strokes.
Why: Before the engine started running on its own, it couldn’t provide any of the energy the cylinders
needed during the induction, compression, and exhaust strokes. The person turning the crank had to
provide this energy. Once the fuel started burning, the power strokes could take over, but up to that
point, turning the crank was hard work.

Epilogue for Chapter 8
This chapter has examined two devices that control the flow of heat to accomplish challenging tasks. In Air Conditioners, we learned how heat pumps use ordered energy to pump
heat against its natural flow and observed that the only way to get rid of thermal energy is
to transfer it to something else. In Automobiles, we saw that heat engines are able to divert
some of the heat flowing from a hot object to a cold object and convert it into useful work.
We also examined the roles of the two objects in a heat engine, hot and cold, finding that
the hot object provides the energy needed to do the work, while the cold object provides the
order that makes the conversion of thermal energy into ordered energy possible.

Explanation: Making Fog in a Bottle
Even when everything in the room is at a single temperature, you can still use thermodynamics to cool the air in the bottle below room temperature. When you step on the bottle,
you compress the air inside it and do work on that air. Since air can accommodate added
energy only as thermal energy, its temperature rises. The air in the bottle becomes hotter,
and heat flows out of the warmer bottle into the cooler room. After half a minute or so, the
temperature of air in the bottle returns to the temperature of the room.
When you step off the bottle, the air inside it expands and does work on you. Since air
can obtain that work only from its thermal energy, its temperature drops. The air in the
bottle becomes colder, and its relative humidity suddenly exceeds 100%. As a result, moisture inside the bottle condenses into droplets and the air becomes foggy.
Smoke particles assist the droplet formation by acting as seeds for the droplets. As we
saw in Chapter 7, water can’t boil without seed bubbles. Similarly, steam can’t condense in
air without seed droplets. When the seed droplets fail to form spontaneously, the smoke
gives them a little help.

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Air Conditioners Work: An air conditioner moves heat against its natural direction of
flow, using a working fluid that passes endlessly through an evaporator, a compressor, and a
condenser. The working fluid flows toward the evaporator as a stable high-pressure liquid. Just
before pouring into the evaporator, this liquid passes through a constriction in the pipe and

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations

229

experiences a large drop in pressure. Since the working fluid is not stable as a low-pressure
liquid, it evaporates rapidly in the evaporator and thereby absorbs a great deal of heat from
the indoor air.
The working fluid then flows to the compressor as a stable low-pressure gas. The compressor squeezes it into a hot, high-density, high-pressure gas and blows it into the condenser.
Since the working fluid is not stable as a high-pressure gas, it condenses rapidly in the condenser and thereby releases a large amount of heat to the outdoor air. The resulting liquid
working fluid then returns toward the evaporator to begin the cycle again.
To propel this process, the compressor consumes ordered energy and delivers it as heat
to the outdoor air. Without this input of ordered energy, the air conditioner could not move
heat against its natural direction of flow.
How Automobiles Work: An automobile engine extracts work from its chemical fuel by burning that fuel inside its cylinders and making the resulting burned gas do work on the engine.
Most engines have at least four cylinders, each of which requires four strokes to extract work
from the fuel. During the induction stroke, a piston moves out of the cylinder and draws a
mixture of fuel and air into the resulting cavity. During the compression stroke, the piston
moves into the cylinder, compressing this fuel-air mixture to high density, pressure, and
temperature. An electric spark then ignites the mixture and it burns to form extremely hot
burned gas. During the power stroke, the piston again moves out of the cylinder while the hot
gas does work on it. This work is what powers the car. Finally, during the exhaust stroke, the
piston moves into the cylinder and squeezes out the burned gas. The cylinder then begins
again with fresh fuel and air.

1. Law of thermal equilibrium: Two objects that are each in
thermal equilibrium with a third object are also in thermal equilibrium with one another.
2. Law of conservation of energy: The change in a stationary
object’s internal energy is equal to the heat transferred into
that object minus the work that object does on its surroundings or

internal energy change = heat added − work done. (8.1.1)
3. Law of entropy: The entropy of a thermally isolated system

of objects never decreases.

4. Efficiency of a heat pump: The ideal efficiency of a heat

pump depends on the temperatures of its hot and cold objects:
temp cold
heat from cold object = work ·
temp hot − tempcold
heat to hot object = heat from cold object + work.

(8.1.2)

5. Efficiency of a heat engine: The ideal efficiency of a heat

engine depends on the temperatures of its hot and cold objects:
temp hot − temp cold
work = heat from hot object ·
temp hot
heat to cold object = heat from hot object − work. (8.2.1)

9

Resonance and Mechanical
Waves
any fascinating motions in the world around us are repetitive ones. Our lives are filled with
cycles, from the sun’s daily passage overhead to a pond’s undulating ripples on a rainy day.
These cyclic motions are governed by the physical laws and steadily mark our journey
through time and space. Some of these cycles structure our lives out of necessity or tradition, while
others are simply there to be observed. Still other cycles have become part of our everyday world
because they’re useful or enjoyable. In this chapter, we cover those three possibilities by examining
cyclic motions in three contexts: in clocks, in musical instruments, and at the seashore.

M
 
ACTIVE LEARNING
EXPERIMENTS

A Singing Wineglass
tap it gently with a spoon and to acquire energy slowly in
the manner described next.
The experiment itself is an activity discovered by
many a bored youth, sitting too long in a fancy restaurant
with only the place settings as entertainment. If you wet
your finger slightly and run it gently around the lip of the

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

One simple experiment with cyclic motion involves a
crystal wineglass, a little water, and a delicate touch. A
crystal wineglass is hard and thin and easily supports
a repetitive mechanical motion called a vibration. The
glass’s hardness allows it to retain energy in this vibrating
motion for a long time so that it rings clearly when you

230

Clocks

wineglass at a slow, steady pace, you should be able to get
the wineglass to sing loudly. The walls of the glass will
vibrate back and forth and emit a clear tone.
If you can’t find a crystal wineglass, you may be out
of luck. An ordinary glass doesn’t work as well because it
converts the energy from your finger into thermal energy

231

rapidly and doesn’t emit much sound. In any case, be sure
that the glass has no sharp edges on its lip so that you
don’t cut your finger.
What will happen to the sound if you add some water
to the glass? Try it and see what happens. Is anything visible
on the surface of the water as you make the glass vibrate?

Chapter Itinerary
The wineglass’s vibration is an example of a natural resonance,
a cyclic motion of the glass itself. Whether you tap the glass
gently with a spoon or rub it with your finger, you’re causing
it to undergo this characteristic motion. In this chapter we
examine several other objects that exhibit natural resonances:
(1) clocks, (2) musical instruments, and (3) the sea.
In Clocks, we study pendulums, balance rings, and quartz
crystals to see how their natural resonances are used to measure

SECTION 9.1

the passage of time. In Musical Instruments, we look at the
vibrations of strings, air columns, and drumheads to find out
how these instruments produce their musical sounds and to
learn how those sounds travel to our ears. Last, in The Sea, we
look at the nature of waves on the surface of water and explore
such issues as tides, tsunamis, and surf. For a more detailed
preview, turn to the Chapter Summary and Important Laws and
Equations at the end of the chapter.

Clocks

Pediment
Body
Minute hand
Hour hand
Dial

Weight

Pendulum
Timing
adjustment

Plinth

People measure their lives according to the sky, dividing existence into days, months, and years according to the celestial
motions of the sun, moon, and stars. On the less romantic
scale of daily life, the sky offers little help. Since it provides no
easy way to measure short periods of time, people invented
clocks.
Early clocks were based on the time it took to complete
simple processes—the flow of sand or water, or the burning of
candles. However, these clocks had limited accuracy and

required constant attention. Better clocks measure time with
repetitive motions such as swinging or rocking. In this section,
we’ll examine the workings of modern clocks based on repetitive motions. As we do, we’ll see that repetitive motions are
interesting in their own right and appear throughout nature in
countless objects in addition to clocks.
Questions to Think About: What exactly is time? Why do some
objects swing or rock back and forth repetitively? How can you
use a repetitive motion to measure time? How can you change
the rate at which an object swings or rocks? Since repetitive
motions don’t normally continue forever, how can you keep
them going without upsetting their timekeeping ability?
Experiments to Do: You can build the timekeeping portion of
a pendulum clock by attaching a small, dense object to the
end of a string and hanging that string from a table or doorway.
Push the object gently so that it swings back and forth. You’ll
find that it completes this repetitive motion with great regularity. What limits its regularity?
If the string is about 25 cm (10 in) long, a complete swing
(back and forth) will take almost exactly 1 s. Change the length
of the string and observe its effect on the swing. Do you think
that the object’s weight affects the swing? Try a different object
and see whether you’re right.
Now vary the extent of the swing to find out whether it
affects the time each swing takes. How can it be that a small
swing takes the same time as a large swing? Notice that you can
get the object swinging by pushing on it rhythmically. Randomly
timed pushes won’t do; you must push the object in synchrony
with its motion. At what times should you push it to make it
swing farther? To make it swing less far? Rhythmic pushes of
this sort keep the timekeeper in a clock moving, hour after hour.

232

CHAPT ER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves

Time
Before examining clocks, we should take a brief look at time itself. Scientists treat time as a
dimension, similar but not identical to the three spatial dimensions that we perceive in the
world around us. In total, our universe has four dimensions: three spatial dimensions and one
temporal dimension. Thus it takes four numbers to completely specify when and where an
event occurs: three numbers identify the event’s location and one identifies its moment in time.
An obvious difference between space and time is that, while we can see space stretched
out around us, we can observe only the passage of time. Although we occupy only one
location in space at a given moment, we are somehow more aware of the expanse of space
around us. It’s much harder to sense the whole framework of time stretching off into the
past and future; you must use your imagination.
Another difference between time and space is that, while you can turn around and walk
back the way you came, you can’t grow any younger. Our travels through space are reversible, but our travels through time are one-way. That irreversibility of time is associated with
entropy and the law of entropy (see Chapter 8), particularly the ever-increasing disorder of
the universe. Disorder increases, we get older, the weeds grow around our homes, and even
clocks run down.
Our perception of space is ultimately based on the need for forces, accelerations, and
velocities to travel from one place to another. A city seems far away because we know that
traveling there with reasonable forces, accelerations, and velocities will take a long time.
Our perception of time is based on the same mechanical principles. If two moments are
separated by a long time, then reasonable forces, accelerations, and velocities will permit
us to travel large distances between the two moments. In short, our perceptions of space
and time are interrelated, and measurements of time and space are connected as well.
We measure space with rulers and time with clocks. How would you make a ruler? You
could construct a rather large ruler by driving a car at constant velocity and marking the
pavement with paint once each second. Your ruler wouldn’t be very practical, but it would
fit the definition of a ruler as having spatial markings at uniform distances. You would be
using your movement through time to measure space.
How would you make a clock? You could make a rather strange clock by driving a car
at constant velocity down your giant ruler and counting each time you see one of your
marks go by. You would then be using your movement through space to measure time.
Most clocks really do use motion to measure time. As we are about to see, however, they
use motions that are a bit more compact than a car ride.
Check Your Understanding #1: The Ultimate Moon Bounce
To measure the distance from Earth to the moon, scientists bounce light from reflectors placed on
the moon by the Apollo astronauts. Light travels at a constant speed. How can a measurement of
light’s travel time to and from the moon be used to determine the distance from Earth to the moon?
Answer: Since light travels at a constant speed, the distance it travels is equal to its speed times its
travel time. If you know the travel time and the speed, you can determine that distance.
Why: Many distance measurements are made by measuring time. Surveyors routinely use light’s
travel time to measure distances. Decorators and architects often use sound’s travel time to measure
the distances between walls. In general, the motion of an object at constant velocity can be used
either to measure the distance traveled if you know the elapsed time or to measure the elapsed time
if you know the distance traveled.

Natural Resonances
An ideal timekeeping motion should offer both accuracy and convenience. That rules out
some of the obvious choices. The sun, moon, and stars keep excellent time but fail the
convenience test. Sure, conservation of energy, momentum, and angular momentum so

Clocks

dominate their motions that these celestial bodies move steadily and predictably through
the heavens, century after century, but what do you do on a cloudy day? And while simple
interval timers like sandglasses and burning candles are easy to make and use, they’re not
very accurate. Besides, who’s going to stay up all night lighting fresh candles just to keep
the “clock” running? (For an interesting astronomical clock, see 1 .)
Instead, practical clocks are based on a particular type of repetitive motion called a
natural resonance. In a natural resonance, the energy in an isolated object or system of
objects causes it to perform a certain motion over and over again. Many objects in our
world exhibit natural resonances, from tipping rocking chairs to sloshing basins of water to
waving flagpoles, and those natural resonances usually involve motion about a stable equilibrium. Like the bouncing spring scale in Section 3.1, an object that has been displaced
from its stable equilibrium accelerates toward that equilibrium but then overshoots; it
coasts right through equilibrium and must turn around to try again. As long as it has excess
energy, this object continues to glide back and forth through its equilibrium and thus exhibits a natural resonance.
Some resonances, such as those of bouncing balls and teetering bottles, don’t maintain
a steady beat and aren’t suitable for clocks. However, we are about to encounter a group of
resonances that are extremely regular and that can be used to measure the passage of time
with remarkable accuracy. Those resonances belong to an important class of mechanical
systems known as harmonic oscillators.

233

1 The daughter of a
planetarium architect,
Jocelyn Bell (British
astronomer, 1943– )
acquired an early interest
in radio astronomy.
Advised to study physics
first, she became the only
woman in a class of 50 at
Glasgow University.
While working on her
Ph.D. at Cambridge, Bell
discovered an extraterrestrial source of radio
bursts, occurring precisely
1.33730113 seconds apart.
She had discovered the
first pulsar, a collapsed
star whose angular
momentum keeps it
turning at an extraordinarily uniform rate. Each
burst coincided with one
rotation of the star
remnant.

Check Your Understanding #2: An Egg-Timer Clock
Although a sandglass can be made repetitive by turning it over every time the sand runs out, this
manual restarting process introduces timing errors. If a 3-min sandglass is always turned over within
10 s after the sand runs out, how accurately will it measure time over the course of a day?
Answer: It may have lost as much as 80 min after 24 h.
Why: If the operator of a sandglass waits 10 s before turning it over each time the sand runs out,
the clock will lose 10 s every 3 min, 200 s every h, and 4800 s every day. If you could be sure that
the operator would always wait 10 s, you could include it in the clock’s design. However, the operator might be faster one time than the next, and this uncertainty makes the clock unreliable and
inaccurate. For a repetitive clock to keep accurate time, it must repeat its motion with almost perfect
regularity.

Pivot

Pendulums and Harmonic Oscillators
One of the first natural resonances to find its way into clocks is the swing of a pendulum, a
weight hanging from a pivot (Fig. 9.1.1). When the pendulum’s center of gravity is directly
below its pivot, it’s in a stable equilibrium. Its center of gravity is then as low as possible,
so displacing it raises its gravitational potential energy and a restoring force begins pushing
it back toward that equilibrium position (Fig. 9.1.2). For geometrical reasons, this restoring
force is almost exactly proportional to how far the pendulum is from equilibrium. As you
displace the pendulum steadily from equilibrium, the restoring force on it also increases
steadily.
When you release the displaced pendulum, its restoring force accelerates it back
toward equilibrium. Instead of stopping, however, the pendulum swings back and forth
about its equilibrium position in a repetitive motion called an oscillation. As it swings, its
energy alternates between potential and kinetic forms. When it swings rapidly through its
equilibrium position in the middle of a swing, its energy is all kinetic. When it stops
momentarily at the end of a swing, its energy is all gravitational potential. This repetitive
transformation of excess energy from one form to another is part of any oscillation and
keeps the oscillator—the system experiencing the oscillation—moving back and forth until
that excess energy is either converted into thermal energy or transferred elsewhere.

Center of
mass/gravity
Timing
adjustment

Fig. 9.1.1 A pendulum
consists of a weight
hanging from a pivot. The
pendulum is in a stable
equilibrium when its center
of gravity is directly below
the pivot.

234

CHAPT ER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves

Fig. 9.1.2 If you tilt a pendulum’s
center of gravity away from its
equilibrium position, it experiences
a restoring force proportional to
its distance from that equilibrium
position.

Restoring
force

Restoring
force
Equilibrium
position

The pendulum isn’t just any oscillator, though. Because its restoring force is proportional to its displacement from equilibrium, the pendulum is a harmonic oscillator—the
simplest and best understood mechanical system in nature. As a harmonic oscillator,
the pendulum undergoes simple harmonic motion, a regular and predictable oscillation
that makes it a superb timekeeper.
The period of any harmonic oscillator, the time it takes to complete one full cycle
of its motion, depends only on how stiffly its restoring force pushes it back and forth,
and on how strongly its inertia resists the accelerations of that motion. Stiffness is the
measure of how sharply the restoring force increases as the oscillator is displaced from
equilibrium; stiff restoring forces are associated with firm or hard objects, while less
stiff restoring forces are associated with soft objects. The stiffer the restoring force, the
more forcefully it pushes the oscillator back and forth and the shorter the oscillator’s
period. On the other hand, the larger the oscillator’s mass, the less it accelerates and the
longer its period.
However, the most remarkable and important characteristic of a harmonic oscillator is
not that its period depends on stiffness and mass, but that its period doesn’t depend on
amplitude, its furthest displacement from equilibrium. Whether that amplitude is large or
small, the harmonic oscillator’s period remains exactly the same. This insensitivity to amplitude is a consequence of its special restoring force, a restoring force that is proportional
to its displacement from equilibrium. At larger amplitudes, the oscillator travels farther
each cycle, but the forces accelerating it through that cycle are stronger as well. Overall, the
harmonic oscillator completes a large cycle of motion just as quickly as it completes a
small cycle of motion.
Any harmonic oscillator can be thought of as having a restoring force component that
drives the back and forth motion and an inertial component that resists that motion. Their
competition determines the oscillator’s period. Harmonic oscillators with stiff restoring
forces and little inertia have short periods, while those with soft restoring forces and great
inertia have long periods. Their amplitudes of oscillation simply don’t affect their periods,
which is why harmonic oscillators are so ideal for timekeeping. Because practical clocks
can’t control the amplitudes of their timekeeping oscillators perfectly, virtually all of them
are based on harmonic oscillators.

Clocks

HARMONIC OSCILLATORS
A harmonic oscillator is an oscillator with a restoring force proportional to its displacement from equilibrium. Its period of oscillation depends only on the stiffness of that
restoring force and on its mass, not on its amplitude of oscillation.

Actually, a pendulum is an unusual harmonic oscillator because increasing its mass
doesn’t increase its period. That’s because increasing the pendulum’s mass also increases
its weight and therefore stiffens its restoring force. These two changes compensate for one
another perfectly so that the pendulum’s period is unchanged.
A pendulum’s period does, however, depend on its length and on gravity. When you
reduce the pendulum’s length, the distance from its pivot to its center of mass, you stiffen
its restoring force and shorten its period. Similarly, when you strengthen gravity (perhaps
by traveling to Jupiter), you increase the pendulum’s weight, stiffen its restoring force, and
reduce its period. Though we won’t try to prove it, the period of a pendulum is
period of pendulum = 2π

length of pendulum
.
B acceleration due to gravity

© Robert Mathena/Fundamental Photographs

Thus a short pendulum swings more often than a long one, and any pendulum swings more
often on Earth than it would on the moon.
On Earth’s surface, a 0.248-m (10-in) pendulum has a period of 1 s (Fig. 9.1.3),
making it suitable for a wall clock that advances its second hand by 1 s each time the
pendulum completes a cycle. Since a pendulum’s period increases as the square root of
its length, a 0.992-m (40-in) pendulum (four times as tall as a 0.248-m pendulum) takes
2 s to complete its cycle and is appropriate for a floor clock that advances its second hand
by 2 s per cycle.

Fig. 9.1.3 The swinging pendulum
controls the movement of the clock’s
hands. The pendulum is 0.248 m long,
from pivot to center of mass/gravity, so
each cycle takes 1 s to complete and
advances the hands by 1 s.

235

236

CHAPT ER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves

Because a pendulum’s period depends on its length and gravity, a change in either one
causes trouble. As we learned in Chapter 7, materials expand with increasing temperature,
so a simple pendulum slows down as it heats up. A more accurate pendulum is thermally
compensated by using several different materials with different coefficients of loudness
expansion to ensure that its center of mass remains at a fixed distance from its pivot.
Although gravity doesn’t change with time, it does vary slightly from place to place.
To correct for differences in gravity between the factory and a clock’s final destination, its
pendulum has a threaded adjustment knob. This knob allows you to change the pendulum’s
length to fine-tune its period.
Check Your Understanding #3: Swing Time
A child swinging on a swing set travels back and forth at a steady pace. What determines the period
of the child’s motion?
Answer: The strength of Earth’s gravity and the length of the swing’s chains.
Why: A child swinging on a swing set is a form of pendulum. As with any pendulum, the child’s period
of motion is determined only by the strength of gravity and the length of the pendulum. In this case,
the length of the pendulum is approximately the length of the swing’s supporting chains. Thus, a tall
swing has a longer period than a short swing.

Pendulum Clocks

Anchor and
bearing
Toothed
wheel

Weight

Swinging motion

Fig. 9.1.4 A pendulum
clock uses a swinging
pendulum to determine
how quickly a toothed
wheel turns and advances
a series of gears that
control the hands of the
clock. The anchor permits
the toothed wheel to
advance by one tooth
each time the pendulum
completes a full cycle.

Although a pendulum maintains a steady beat, it’s not a complete clock. Something must
keep the pendulum swinging and use that swing to determine the time. A pendulum clock
does both. It sustains the pendulum’s motion with gentle pushes, and it uses that motion to
advance its hands at a steady rate.
The top of the pendulum has a two-pointed anchor that controls the rotation of a
toothed wheel (Fig. 9.1.4). This mechanism is called an escapement. A weighted cord
wrapped around the toothed wheel’s shaft exerts a torque on that wheel, so that the wheel
would spin if the anchor weren’t holding it in place. Each time the pendulum reaches the
end of a swing, one point of the anchor releases the toothed wheel while the other point
catches it. The wheel turns slowly as the pendulum rocks back and forth, advancing by one
tooth for each full cycle of the pendulum. This wheel turns a series of gears, which slowly
advance the clock’s hands. Although these hands are actually counting the number of pendulum swings since midnight, their movement is calibrated so that their positions indicate
the current time.
The toothed wheel also keeps the pendulum moving by giving the anchor a tiny
forward push each time the pendulum completes a swing. Since the anchor moves in the
direction of the push, the wheel does work on the anchor and pendulum, and replaces energy
lost to friction and air resistance. This energy comes from the weighted cord, which releases
gravitational potential energy as its weight descends. When you wind the clock, you rewind
this cord around the shaft, lifting the weight and replenishing its potential energy.
While these pushes from the toothed wheel can keep even the clumsiest pendulum
swinging, a clock works best when its pendulum swings with almost perfect freedom.
That’s because any outside force—even the push from the toothed wheel—will influence
the pendulum’s period. The most accurate timekeepers are those that can oscillate without
any assistance or energy replacement for thousands or millions of cycles. These precision
timekeepers need only the slightest pushes to keep them moving and thus have extremely
precise periods. That’s why a good pendulum clock uses an aerodynamic pendulum and
low-friction bearings.
Finally, the clock must keep the oscillation amplitude of its pendulum relatively constant. From a practical perspective, drastic changes in that amplitude will make the toothed
wheel turn erratically. However, there is a more fundamental reason to keep the pendulum’s

Clocks

237

amplitude steady: it’s not really a perfect harmonic oscillator. If you displace the pendulum
too far, it becomes an anharmonic oscillator—its restoring force ceases to be proportional
to its displacement from equilibrium, and its period begins to depend on its amplitude. Since
a change in period will spoil the clock’s accuracy, the pendulum’s amplitude must be kept
small and steady. That way, the amplitude has almost no effect on the pendulum’s period.

Check Your Understanding #4: Swing High, Swing Low
When pushing a child on a playground swing, you normally push her forward as she moves away from
you. What happens if you push her forward each time she moves toward you?
Answer: The amplitude of her motion will gradually decrease so that she comes to a stop.
Why: To keep her swinging, you must make up for the energy she loses to friction and air resistance.
By pushing her forward each time she moves away from you, you do work on her and increase her
energy. However, when you push her as she moves toward you, she does work on you and you extract
some of her energy. You are then slowing her down rather than sustaining her motion.

Balance Clocks
Because it relies on gravity for its restoring force, a swinging pendulum mustn’t be tilted
or moved. That’s why there are so few pendulum-based wristwatches. To make use of the
excellent timekeeping characteristics of a harmonic oscillator, a portable clock needs some
other restoring force that’s proportional to displacement but independent of gravity. It
needs a spring!
As we saw in Section 3.1, the force a spring exerts is proportional to its distortion. The
more you stretch, compress, or bend a spring, the harder it pushes back toward its equilibrium shape. Attach a block of wood to the free end of a spring, stretch it gently, and let go,
and you’ll find you have a harmonic oscillator with a period determined only by the stiffness of the spring and the block’s mass (Fig. 9.1.5). Since the period of a harmonic oscillator doesn’t depend on the amplitude of its motion, the block oscillates steadily about its
equilibrium position and makes an excellent timekeeper.
Unfortunately, gravity complicates this simple system. Although gravity doesn’t
alter the block’s period, it does shift the block’s equilibrium position downward. That

Acceleration
Force

Velocity
Equilibrium

Fig. 9.1.5 A metal
cylinder attached to a
spring is a harmonic
oscillator, shown here in
a time sequence (top to
bottom). The oscillator’s
period is determined only
by the stiffness of the
spring and the cylinder’s
mass.

CHAPT ER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves

Ring
Equilibrium
Coil spring

Angular
acceleration
Torque
Angular
velocity

Fig. 9.1.6 A small wheel
attached to a coil spring is
a harmonic oscillator known
as a balance ring, shown
here in a time sequence
(top to bottom). Its period
is determined only by the
stiffness of the coil spring
and the rotational mass of
the wheel.

shift is a problem for a clock that might be tilted sometimes. However, there’s another
spring-based timekeeper that marks time accurately in any orientation or location. This
ingenious device, used in most mechanical clocks and watches, is called a balance ring
or simply a balance.
A balance ring resembles a tiny metal bicycle wheel, supported at its center of mass/
gravity by an axle and a pair of bearings (Fig. 9.1.6). Any friction in the bearings is exerted
so close to the ring’s axis of rotation that it produces little torque and the ring turns
extremely easily. Moreover, the ring pivots about its own center of gravity so that its weight
produces no torque on it. In keeping with its name, the balance is balanced.
The only thing exerting a torque on the balance ring is a tiny coil spring. One end of
this spring is attached to the ring, while the other is fixed to the body of the clock. When
the spring is undistorted, it exerts no torque on the ring and the ring is in equilibrium. If
you rotate the ring either way, however, torque from the distorted spring will act to restore
it to its equilibrium orientation. Since this restoring torque is proportional to the ring’s
rotation away from a stable equilibrium, the balance ring and coil spring form a harmonic
oscillator!
Because of the rotational character of this harmonic oscillator, its period depends on
the torsional stiffness of the coil spring, that is, on how rapidly the spring’s torque
increases as you twist it, and on the balance ring’s rotational mass. Since the balance
ring’s period doesn’t depend on the amplitude of its motion, it keeps excellent time. Also,
because gravity exerts no torque on the balance ring, this timekeeper works anywhere and
in any orientation.
The rest of a balance clock is similar to a pendulum clock (Fig. 9.1.7). As the balance
ring rocks back and forth, it tips a lever that controls the rotation of a toothed wheel. An
anchor attached to the lever allows the toothed wheel to advance one tooth for each complete cycle of the balance ring’s motion. Gears connect the toothed wheel to the clock’s
hands, which slowly advance as the wheel turns.
Because the balance clock is portable, it can’t draw energy from a weighted cord.
Instead, it has a main spring that exerts a torque on the toothed wheel. This main spring is
a coil of elastic metal that stores energy when you wind the clock. Its energy keeps the
balance ring rocking steadily back and forth and also turns the clock’s hands. Since the

Jewel bearing

Balance ring

Fig. 9.1.7 The balance ring in this
antique French carriage clock twists back
and forth rhythmically under the influence
of the spiral spring near its center. The
tiny ruby bearings that support the ring
minimize friction and permit this clock to
keep very accurate time.

Coil spring

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

238

Clocks

main spring unwinds as the toothed wheel turns, the clock occasionally needs winding.
(For two interesting examples of balance clocks, see 2 and 3 .)
Check Your Understanding #5: A Little Light Entertainment
When you accidentally strike a chandelier with a broom, this hanging lamp begins to twist back and
forth with a regular period. What determines its period of oscillation?
Answer: It’s determined by the torsional stiffness of the chandelier’s supporting cord and the chandelier’s rotational mass.
Why: The hanging chandelier is a harmonic oscillator. Its supporting cord opposes any twists by
exerting a restoring force on the chandelier. Once you twist it away from its equilibrium orientation,
the chandelier oscillates back and forth with a period determined only by the cord’s torsional stiffness
(its stiffness with respect to twists) and the chandelier’s rotational mass. As with any harmonic oscillator, the amplitude of the chandelier’s motion doesn’t affect its period.

Electronic Clocks
The potential accuracy of pendulum and balance clocks is limited by friction, air resistance, and thermal expansion to about 10 s per year. To do better, a clock’s timekeeper must
avoid these mechanical shortcomings. That’s why so many modern clocks use quartz oscillators as their timekeepers.
A quartz oscillator is made from a single crystal of quartz, the same mineral found
in most white sand. Like many hard and brittle objects, a quartz crystal oscillates
strongly after being struck. In fact, it’s a harmonic oscillator because it acts like a spring
with a metal cylinder at each end (Fig. 9.1.8, left). The two cylinders oscillate in and out
symmetrically about their combined center of mass, with a period determined only by
the cylinders’ masses and the spring’s stiffness. In a quartz crystal, the spring is the
crystal itself and the cylinders’ are its two halves (Fig. 9.1.8, right). Since their restoring
forces are proportional to displacement from equilibrium, both systems are harmonic
oscillators.
Because of its exceptional hardness, a quartz crystal’s restoring forces are extremely
stiff. Even a tiny distortion leads to huge restoring forces. Since the period of a harmonic
oscillator decreases as its spring becomes stiffer, a typical quartz oscillator has an extremely
short period. Its motion is usually called a vibration rather than an oscillation because
vibration implies a fast oscillation in a mechanical system. Oscillation itself is a more general term for any repetitive process, and it can even apply to such nonmechanical processes
as electric or thermal oscillations.

Acceleration
Force

Velocity

Equilibrium

Equilibrium

Fig. 9.1.8 A quartz crystal disk (right) acts like a spring with metal cylinders at each end (left).
As shown in a time sequence (top to bottom), both systems can oscillate about equilibrium. They
accelerate outward when compressed and inward when stretched.

239

2 The son of freed
slaves, Benjamin
Banneker (African
American mathematician,
astronomer, and writer,
1731–1806) grew up on a
Maryland tobacco farm
and supplemented his
limited schooling with
borrowed books. Though
best remembered for his
work in astronomy and for
compiling six almanacs,
he also produced one of
the first clocks made
entirely in America. Based
on a borrowed pocket
watch, Banneker built his
wooden balance clock by
hand, using a knife to
shape the parts. The clock
kept accurate time for half
a century and even struck
the hours.
3 Although ships’
navigators could determine latitude (north–south)
by measuring the angles
of the sun and stars,
Earth’s rotation prevented
them from determining
their longitudes (east–
west) without help from
accurate clocks. Uncertainty in longitude caused
so many shipwrecks that,
in 1714, the British
government offered the
Longitude Prize to anyone
who could measure
longitude to within a
prescribed accuracy.
One contender for that
enormous prize was
English clockmaker John
Harrison (1693–1776).
Harrison spent more than
30 years working on a
series of four increasingly
accurate clocks. His final
prototype, a small
balance-ring chronometer
known as H4, lost only 5 s
during its first transatlantic voyage and could
therefore determine
longitude to within about
1 mile. Despite H4’s
repeated successes, the
British government took
over a decade to fully
reward Harrison for his
achievements.

240

CHAPT ER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Because of its rapid vibration, a quartz oscillator’s period is a small fraction of a
second. We normally characterize such a fast oscillator by its frequency, the number of
cycles it completes in a certain amount of time. The SI unit of frequency is the cycle per
second, also called the hertz (abbreviated Hz) after German physicist Heinrich Rudolph
Hertz. Period and frequency are reciprocals of one another,
frequency =

Quartz tuning fork
Fig. 9.1.9 The quartz
crystal in this wristwatch
is located inside the
silver cylinder at the
bottom. Carefully polished
to vibrate at a precise
frequency, the crystal
keeps the watch accurate
to a few seconds a month.

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

1 ,
period

so an oscillator with a period of 0.001 s has a frequency of 1000 Hz.
Because the vibrating crystal isn’t sliding across anything or moving quickly through
the air, it loses energy slowly and vibrates for a long, long time. Also, because quartz’s
coefficient of thermal expansion is extremely small, the crystal’s period is nearly indepen-dent of its temperature. With its exceptionally steady period, a quartz oscillator can
serve as the timekeeper for a highly accurate clock, one that loses or gains less than a tenth
of a second per year.
Of course, a quartz crystal isn’t a complete clock. Like the pendulum and balance, it
needs something to keep it vibrating and to use that vibration to determine the time.
Although these tasks could conceivably be done mechanically, quartz clocks are normally
electronic. There are two reasons for this choice. First, the crystal’s vibrations are too fast
and too small for most mechanical devices to follow. Second, a quartz crystal is intrinsically electronic itself; it responds mechanically to electrical stress and electrically to mechanical stress. Because of this coupling between its mechanical and electrical behaviors,
crystalline quartz is known as a piezoelectric material and is ideal for electronic clocks.
The clock’s circuitry uses electrical stresses to keep the quartz crystal vibrating (Fig.
9.1.9). Just as carefully timed pushes keep a child swinging endlessly on a playground
swing, carefully timed electrical stresses keep the quartz crystal vibrating endlessly in its
holder. Because the crystal loses so little energy with each vibration, only a tiny amount of
work is required each cycle to maintain its vibration.
The clock also detects the crystal’s vibrations electrically. Each time its halves move
in or out, the crystal experiences mechanical stress and emits a pulse of electricity. These
pulses may control an electric motor that advances clock hands or may serve as input to an
electronic chip that measures time by counting the pulses.
The quartz crystals used in clocks and watches are carefully cut and polished to vibrate
at specific frequencies. In effect, these crystals are tuned like musical instruments to match
the requirements of their clocks. Because counting each vibration of the crystal consumes
energy, we can prolong clocks’ battery lives by using crystals that vibrate relatively
slowly—just above the range of human hearing. To make a small crystal vibrate slowly, the
manufacturer cuts away most of the center of that crystal to weaken its restoring forces and
slow its oscillations. The resulting quartz “tuning fork” oscillator (Fig 9.1.10) is carefully
metalized to permit the watch to interact with it electrically and then it’s tuned: a laser
beam slowly evaporates the metal from the tips of the fork, decreasing its mass and increasing its frequency, until the desired frequency is reached.

Check Your Understanding #6: Heavy Metal Music
Fig. 9.1.10 Shaped like a
tiny tuning fork, this watch
crystal vibrates almost
exactly 32,768 times per
second. Burn marks at its
tips were created when its
vibrational frequency was
tuned by a laser beam.

If you drop a metal rod on the floor, end first, you hear a high-pitched tone. What’s happening?
Answer: The rod is vibrating as a harmonic oscillator, with its two halves first approaching one another
and then moving apart.
Why: The metal rod vibrates in the same manner as a quartz crystal. The body of the rod exerts
restoring forces on its two halves. After hitting the floor, these halves move toward and away from one
another rapidly, emitting the tone that you hear. Because it’s a harmonic oscillator, the frequency
(and pitch) of the tone doesn’t change as the amplitude of motion decreases.

Musical Instruments

SECTION 9.2

Chin rest

End
button

Sound
hole

Tailpiece

Bridge

241

Musical Instruments
Purﬂing

Soundboard

String

Fingerboard

Neck

Nut

vibrating inside a pipe organ? Why are some organ pipes longer than others? Why do most drums sound toneless, providing
more rhythm than pitch?

Peg

Scroll

Music is an important part of human expression. Although
what qualifies as music is a matter of taste, it always involves
sound and often involves instruments. In this section, we’ll
examine sound, music, and several instruments: violins, pipe
organs, and drums. As examples of the three most common
types of instruments—strings, winds, and percussion—this trio
will help us to understand many other instruments as well.
Questions to Think About: Why are the low-pitch strings on a
violin thicker than the high-pitch strings? How does pressing a
violin’s string against the fingerboard change its pitch? Why
does a violin sound different when it’s plucked rather than
bowed? What purpose does the violin’s body serve? What is

Experiments to Do: Find a violin or guitar, or stretch a strong
string between two rigid supports. Even a rubber band will do
in a pinch. Pluck the string with your finger and listen to the
tone it makes. The string vibrates back and forth at a particular frequency or pitch even as its amplitude of motion gradually decreases. What kind of oscillator has that behavior?
Change the string’s frequency of vibration by changing its
tension or length. What happens when you shorten the string or
prevent part of it from moving? What happens if you increase its
tension by pulling it tighter? You can also increase the string’s
mass by wrapping it with tape. How does that affect its pitch?
You can imitate a pipe organ by blowing gently across
the mouth of a bottle or soda straw. If done properly, you’ll get
the air inside the bottle vibrating up and down rhythmically
and you’ll hear a tone. What happens to its pitch when you add
water to the bottle or pinch off the straw at various points? Why
does this tone sound different from that of the string, even
when the two have the same pitch?
Finally, a table or plate will act like a drum when you tap
it. Compare the sound it makes with those of the previous two
“instruments.” Does it have a pitch? What distinguishes the
sounds of different tables or plates?

Sound and Music
To understand how instruments work, we need to know a bit more about sound and music.
In air, sound consists of density waves, patterns of compressions and rarefactions that travel
outward rapidly from their source. When a sound passes by, the air pressure in your ear
fluctuates up and down about normal atmospheric pressure. Even when these fluctuations
have amplitudes less than a millionth of atmospheric pressure, you hear them as sound.
When the fluctuations are repetitive, you hear a tone with a pitch equal to the fluctuation’s frequency. Pitch is the frequency of a sound. A bass singer’s pitch range extends
from 80 to 300 Hz, while that of a soprano singer extends from 300 to 1100 Hz. Musical
instruments can produce tones over a much wider range of pitches, but we can hear only
those between about 30 and 20,000 Hz, and that range narrows as we get older.
Most music is constructed around intervals, the frequency ratio between two different
tones. This ratio is found by dividing one tone’s frequency by that of the other. Our hearing
is particularly sensitive to intervals, with pairs of tones at equal intervals sounding quite
similar to one another. For example, a pair of tones at 440 and 660 Hz sounds similar to a
pair at 330 and 495 Hz because they both have the interval 3/2.
The interval 3/2 is pleasing to most ears and is common in Western music, where it’s
called a fifth. A fifth is the interval between the two “twinkles” at the beginning of “Twinkle,
Twinkle, Little Star.” If your ear is good, you can start with any tone for the first twinkle
and will easily find the second tone, located at 3/2 the frequency of the first. Your ear hears
that factor of 3/2 between the two frequencies.
The most important interval in virtually all music is 2/1, or an octave. Tones that differ
by a factor of 2 in frequency sound so similar to our ears that we often think of them as

242

CHAPT ER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves

4 In addition to his
contributions to mathematics, geometry, and
astronomy, the Greek
mathematician Pythagoras
(ca. 580–500 BC) was
perhaps the first person to
use mathematics to relate
intervals, pitches, and
the lengths of vibrating
strings. He and his
followers laid the
groundwork for the scale
used in most Western
music.

being the same. When men and women sing together “in unison,” they often sing an octave
or two apart, and the differences in the tones, always factors of 2 or 4 in frequency, are only
barely noticeable.
The octave is so important that it structures the entire range of audible pitches. Most of
the subtle interplay of tones in music occurs in intervals of less than an octave, less than a
factor of 2 in frequency. Thus most traditions build their music around the intervals that lie
within a single octave, such as 5/4 and 3/2. They pick a particular standard pitch and then
assign notes at specific intervals from this standard pitch. This arrangement repeats at
octaves above and below the standard pitch to create a complete scale of notes. (For a history of scales, see 4 .)
The scale used in Western music is constructed around a note called A4, which has a
standard pitch of 440 Hz. At intervals of 9/8, 5/4, 4/3, 3/2, 5/3, and 15/8 above A4 lie the six
notes B4, C#5, D5, E5, F#5, and G#5. Similar collections of six notes are built above A5 (880
Hz), which has a frequency twice that of A4, and above A3 (220 Hz), which has a frequency
half that of A4. In fact, this pattern repeats above A1 (55 Hz) through A8 (7040 Hz).
Actually, Western music is built around 12 notes and 11 intervals that lie within a
single octave. Five more intervals account for five additional notes, Bb4, C5, D#5, F5, and
G5. It’s also not quite true that every note is based exclusively on its interval from A4. While
A4 remains at 440 Hz, the pitches of the other 11 notes have been modified slightly so that
they’re at interesting and pleasing intervals from one another as well as from A4. This
adjustment of the pitches led to the well-tempered scale that has been the basis for Western
music for the last several centuries.
Check Your Understanding #1: A Night at the Opera

Tension

Tension
Zero net force

A typical singing voice can cover a range of about two octaves—for example, from C4 to C6. How
broad is this range of frequencies?
Answer: There is a factor of 4 in frequency between the lowest and the highest notes that the typical
voice can sing.

Fig. 9.2.1 A taut violin
string can be viewed as
being composed of many
individual pieces. When
the string is straight,
the two forces exerted
on a given piece by its
neighbors cancel perfectly.

Tension
Tension
Net force

Fig. 9.2.2 When a violin
string is curved, the two
forces exerted on a given
piece by its neighbors
don’t point in exactly
opposite directions and
don’t balance one another.
The piece experiences a
net force.

Why: Since notes separated by an octave are separated by a factor of 2 in frequency, notes separated
by two octaves are separated by a factor of 4.

A Violin’s Vibrating String
The tones produced by a violin begin as vibrations in its strings. On their own, these strings
are limp and shapeless so they rely on the violin’s rigid body and neck for structure. The
violin subjects its strings to tension, outward forces that act to stretch it, and this tension
gives each string an equilibrium shape—a straight line.
To see that a straight violin string is in equilibrium, think of it as being composed of
many individual pieces that are connected together in a chain (Fig. 9.2.1). Tension exerts a
pair of outward forces on each piece of the string; its neighboring pieces are pulling that
piece toward them. Since the string’s tension is uniform, these two outward forces sum to
zero; they have equal magnitudes but point in opposite directions. With zero net force on
each of its pieces, the straight string is in equilibrium.
When the string is curved, however, the pairs of outward forces no longer sum to zero
(Fig. 9.2.2). Although those outward forces still have equal magnitudes, they now point in
slightly different directions. As a result, each piece experiences a small net force.
The net forces on its pieces are restoring forces because they act to straighten the
string. If you distort the string and release it, these restoring forces will cause the string to
vibrate about its straight equilibrium shape in a natural resonance. The string’s restoring
forces are special; the more you curve the string, the stronger the restoring forces on its
pieces become. In fact, the restoring forces are springlike forces—they increase in proportion to the string’s distortion—so the string is a form of harmonic oscillator!

Musical Instruments

Actually, the string is much more complicated than a pendulum or a balance ring. It
can bend and vibrate in many distinct modes, or basic patterns of distortion, each with its
own period of vibration. Nonetheless, the string retains the most important feature of a
harmonic oscillator: the period of each vibrational mode is independent of its amplitude.
Thus a violin string’s pitch doesn’t depend on how hard it’s vibrating. Think how tricky it
would be to play a violin if its pitch depended on its loudness!
A violin string has one simplest vibration—its fundamental vibrational mode. In
this mode, the entire string arcs alternately one way and then the other (Fig. 9.2.3). Its
kinetic energy peaks as it rushes through its straight equilibrium shape, and its potential
energy (elastic potential energy in the string) peaks as it stops to turn around. The string’s
midpoint travels the farthest (the vibrational antinode), while its ends remain fixed (the
vibrational nodes). At each moment, its shape is the gradual curve of the trigonometric
sine function.
In this fundamental mode, the violin string behaves as a single harmonic oscillator. As
with any harmonic oscillator, its vibrational period depends only on the stiffness of its
restoring forces and on its inertia. Either stiffening the violin string or reducing its mass
will quicken its fundamental vibration and increase its fundamental pitch.
A violin has four strings, each with its own stiffness and mass, and therefore with its
own fundamental pitch. In a tuned violin, the notes produced by these strings are G3
(196 Hz), D4 (294 Hz), A4 (440 Hz), and E5 (660 Hz). The G3 string, which vibrates rather
slowly, is the most massive. It’s usually made of gut, wrapped in a coil of heavy metal wire.
The E5 string, on the other hand, must vibrate quite rapidly and so needs to have a low
mass. It’s usually a thin steel wire.
You tune a violin by adjusting the tension in its strings using the pegs in its neck and
tension adjusters on the tailpiece. Tightening the string stiffens it by increasing both the
outward forces on its pieces and the net forces they experience during a distortion. Since
temperature and time can alter a string’s tension, you should always tune your violin just
before a concert.
A string’s fundamental pitch also depends on its length. Shortening the string both
stiffens it and reduces its mass, so its pitch increases. That stiffening occurs because a
shorter string curves more sharply when it’s displaced from equilibrium and therefore subjects its pieces to larger net forces. This dependence on length allows you to raise a string’s
pitch by pressing it against the fingerboard in the violin’s neck and effectively shortening
it. Part of a violinist’s skill involves knowing exactly where on the string to press it against
the fingerboard to produce a particular note.
If the arc of a string vibrating in its fundamental mode reminds you of a wave, that’s
because it is one. It’s a mechanical wave, the natural motions of an extended object about
its stable equilibrium shape or situation. An extended object is one like a string, stick, or
lake surface that has many parts that move with limited independence. Since its parts influence one another, an extended object with a stable equilibrium exhibits fascinating natural
motions that involve many parts moving at once; it exhibits mechanical waves.
With its innumerable linked pieces and its stable equilibrium shape, the violin string
exhibits such waves. The string’s fundamental mode is a particularly simple wave, a standing wave, which is a wave with fixed nodes and antinodes. A standing wave’s basic shape
doesn’t change with time; it merely scales up and down rhythmically at a particular frequency and amplitude (its peak extent of motion). Most important, the standing wave
doesn’t travel along the string.

Fundamental
Antinode
Force
Node

Force
Equilibrium

Node

243

Fig. 9.2.3 Pulled outward
at its fixed ends, this
string’s tension gives it
a straight equilibrium
shape about which it can
vibrate. Here, the string
vibrates in its fundamental
vibrational mode—the
whole string moves up and
down together as a single
harmonic oscillator.

244

CHAPT ER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves

Fig. 9.2.4 In a transverse
wave, the underlying
oscillation is perpendicular
to the wave itself. In this
case, a spring is oscillating
vertically but forming a
horizontal wave. With its
fixed nodes and antinodes,
this transverse wave is also
a standing wave.

Start

1/4 cycle

1/2 cycle

3/4 cycle

Oscillation

Wave

1 cycle

Although this wave extends along the string, its associated oscillation is perpendicular
to the string and therefore perpendicular to the wave itself. A wave in which the underlying
oscillation is perpendicular to the wave itself is called a transverse wave (Fig. 9.2.4).
Waves on strings, drums, and the surface of water are all transverse waves.
Check Your Understanding #2: Feeling Tense?
A common way to determine the tension in a cord is to pluck it and listen for how fast it vibrates. Why
does this technique measure tension?
Answer: The frequency of a string’s fundamental vibrational mode increases with its tension.
Why: Any cord that is drawn taut from its ends will exhibit natural resonances like those in a violin
string. The tauter the string, the higher will be the frequencies of those resonances.

The Violin String’s Harmonics
The fundamental vibrational mode isn’t the only way in which a violin string can vibrate.
The string also has higher-order vibrational modes in which the string vibrates as a chain
of shorter strings arcing in alternate directions (Fig. 9.2.5). Each of these higher-order
vibrational modes is another standing wave, with a fixed shape that scales up and down
rhythmically at its own frequency and amplitude.
Second harmonic
Antinode

Node

Node
Node
Third harmonic
Fig. 9.2.5 A taut string
vibrating between two
fixed points in its second,
third, and fourth harmonic
modes. The string vibrates
as two, three, or four
segments, completing
cycles at two, three, or four
times the fundamental
vibrational frequency,
respectively.

Fourth harmonic

Antinode

Musical Instruments

For example, the string can vibrate as two half-strings arcing in opposite directions and
separated by a motionless vibrational node. In this mode, the violin string not only vibrates as
half-strings but has the pitch of half-strings as well. Remarkably, that half-string pitch is
exactly twice the whole-string (fundamental) pitch! In general, a string’s vibrational frequency
is inversely proportional to its length, so halving its length doubles its frequency. Frequencies
that are integer multiples of the fundamental pitch are called harmonics, so this half-string
vibration occurs at the second harmonic pitch and is called the second harmonic mode.
A violin string can also vibrate as three third-strings, with a frequency that’s three
times the fundamental. The interval between this third harmonic pitch and the fundamental
pitch is an octave and a fifth (2/1 times 3/2). Overall, the fundamental and its second and
third harmonics sound very pleasant together.
While the violin string can vibrate in even higher harmonics, what’s more important is
that the string often vibrates in more than one mode at the same time. For example, a violin
string vibrating in its fundamental mode can also vibrate in its second harmonic and emit
two tones at once.
Harmonics are important because bowing a violin excites many of its vibrational
modes. The violin’s sound is thus a rich mixture of the fundamental tone and the harmonics. Known as timbre, this mixture of tones is characteristic of a violin, which is why an
instrument producing a different mixture doesn’t sound like a violin.
When a violin string is vibrating in several modes at once, its shape and motion are
complicated. The individual standing waves add on top of one another, a process known as
superposition. Each vibrational mode has its own amplitude and therefore its own loudness contribution to the string’s timbre.
While these individual waves coexist beautifully on the string, with virtually no effect
on one another, the string’s overall distorted shape is now the superposition of the individual wave shapes. Not only is that overall shape quite complicated, it also actually
changes substantially with time. That’s because the different harmonic waves vibrate at
different frequencies, and their superposition changes as they change. The string’s overall
wave is not a standing wave, and its features can even move along the string!
Check Your Understanding #3: Swinging High and Low Together
When two people swing a long jump rope, they can make it swing as a single arc or as two half-ropes
arcing in opposite directions. To make the rope swing as two half-ropes, it must be turned faster or
with less tension. Why?
Answer: A jump rope is essentially a vibrating string. The two-half-rope pattern is the second harmonic mode, with a vibrational frequency twice that of the normal fundamental arc.
Why: Although it swings around in a circle, the jump rope is actually vibrating up and down at the
same time it’s vibrating forward and back. Together, these two vibrations create the circular motion.
To make the rope vibrate in its second harmonic mode (as two half-ropes) without changing its tension, it must be swung twice as fast as normal.

Bowing and Plucking the Violin String
You play a violin by drawing a bow across its strings. The bow consists of horsehair, pulled
taut by a wooden stick and coated with rosin, a sticky substance based on pine sap. This
coated horsehair exerts frictional forces on the strings as it moves across them. Most important, however, is that it exerts much larger static frictional forces than sliding ones.
As the sticky bow hairs rub across a string, they grab the string and push it forward
with static friction. Eventually the string’s restoring force overpowers static friction, and
the string suddenly starts sliding backward across the hairs. Because the hairs exert little
sliding friction, the string completes half a vibrational cycle with ease. As it stops to reverse
direction, however, the hairs grab the string again and begin pushing it forward. This process repeats over and over.

245

CHAPT ER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves

Fig. 9.2.6 Resonant
energy transfer makes
it possible for sound to
shatter a crystal wineglass.
When the sound pushes
on the glass rhythmically,
the sound slowly transfers
energy to the glass,
until it finally shatters.
Because the sound must
be extremely loud and
at exactly the resonant
frequency of the glass,
only the most extraordinary
opera singers can break a
crystal wineglass.

Each time the bow pushes the string forward, it does work on the string and adds
energy to the string’s vibrational modes. This process is an example of resonant energy
transfer, in which a modest force doing work in synchrony with a natural resonance can
transfer a large amount of energy to that resonance. Just as gentle, carefully timed pushes
can get a child swinging high on a playground swing, so too can gentle, carefully timed
pushes from a bow get a string vibrating vigorously on a violin. Similar rhythmic pushes
can cause other objects to vibrate strongly, notably a crystal wineglass (Fig. 9.2.6) and the
Tacoma Narrows Bridge near Seattle, Washington (Fig. 9.2.7). The wineglass’s response to
a certain tone is also an example of sympathetic vibration, the transfer of vibrational
energy between two systems that share a common vibrational frequency.
The amount of energy the bow adds to each vibrational mode depends on where it
crosses the violin string. When you bow the string at the usual position, you produce a
strong fundamental vibration and a moderate amount of each harmonic. Bowing the string
nearer its middle reduces the string’s curvature, weakening its harmonic vibrations and
giving it a more mellow sound. Bowing the string nearer its end increases the string’s
curvature, strengthening its harmonic vibrations and giving it a brighter sound.
The sound of a plucked violin string also depends on harmonic content and thus on
where that string is plucked. However, this sound is quite different from that of a bowed
string. The difference lies in the sound’s envelope, the way the sound evolves with time.
This envelope can be viewed as having three time periods: an initial attack, an intermediate
sustain, and a final decay. The envelope of a plucked string is an abrupt attack followed
immediately by a gradual decay. In contrast, the envelope of a bowed string is a gradual
attack, a steady sustain, and then a gradual decay. We learn to recognize individual instruments not only by their harmonic content but also by their sound envelopes.
Check Your Understanding #4: What’s the Buzz?
Sometimes a tone from an instrument or sound system will cause some object in the room to begin
vibrating loudly. Why does this happen?
Answer: The object has a natural resonance at the tone’s frequency, and sympathetic vibration is
transferring energy to the object.
Why: Energy moves easily between two objects that vibrate at the same frequency. A note played on
one instrument will cause the same note on another instrument to begin playing. Even everyday
objects will exhibit sympathetic vibration when the right tone is present in the air.

© AP/Wide World Photos

© Steve Bronstein/Stone/Getty Images, Inc.

246

Fig. 9.2.7 The Tacoma Narrows Bridge collapsed in November 1940, as the result of resonant energy
transfer between the wind and the bridge surface. Shortly after its construction, the automobile bridge
began to exhibit an unusual natural resonance in which its surface twisted slowly back and forth so
that one lane rose as the other fell. During a storm, the wind slowly added energy to this resonance
until the bridge ripped itself apart.

Musical Instruments

An Organ Pipe’s Vibrating Air
Like a violin, a pipe organ uses vibrations to create sound. However, its vibrations take
place in the air itself. An organ pipe is essentially a hollow cylinder, open at each end
and filled with air. Because that air is protected by the rigid walls of the pipe, its pressure can fluctuate up and down relative to atmospheric pressure and it can exhibit
natural resonances.
In its fundamental vibrational mode, air moves alternately toward and away from the
pipe’s center (Fig. 9.2.8), like two blocks on a spring. As air moves toward the pipe’s center, the density there rises and a pressure imbalance develops. Since the pressure at the
pipe’s center is higher than at its ends, air accelerates away from the center. The air eventually stops moving inward and begins to move outward. As air moves away from the
pipe’s center, the density there drops and a reversed pressure imbalance occurs. Since the
pressure at the pipe’s center is lower than at its ends, air now accelerates toward the center.
It eventually stops moving outward and begins to move inward, and the cycle repeats. The
air’s kinetic energy peaks each time it rushes through that equilibrium and its potential
energy (pressure potential energy in the air) peaks each time it stops to turn around.
This air is vibrating about a stable equilibrium of uniform atmospheric density and
pressure, and it is clearly experiencing restoring forces. It should come as no surprise that
those restoring forces are springlike and that the air column is yet another harmonic oscillator. As such, its vibrational frequency depends only on the stiffness of its restoring forces
and on its inertia. Either stiffening the air column or reducing its mass will quicken its
vibration and increase its pitch.
These characteristics depend on the length of the organ pipe. A shorter pipe not only
holds less air mass than a longer pipe, it also offers stiffer opposition to any movements of
air in and out of that pipe. With less room in the shorter pipe, the pressure inside it rises and
falls more abruptly, leading to stiffer restoring forces on the moving air. Together, these
effects make the air in a shorter pipe vibrate faster than the air in a longer pipe. In general,
an organ pipe’s vibrational frequency is inversely proportional to its length.
Unfortunately, the mass of vibrating air in a pipe also increases with the air’s average
density, so even a modest change in temperature or weather will alter the pipe’s pitch. Fortunately, all the pipes shift together so that an organ continues to sound in tune. Nonetheless, this shift may be noticeable when the organ is part of an orchestra.

Velocity

High
pressure
and
density

Pressure node

Pressure node

Low
pressure
and
density

Pressure antinode

Fig. 9.2.8 A time sequence (left
to right) showing a column of air
vibrating in a pipe that’s open at both
ends. Here, the column vibrates in
its fundamental vibration mode—
the whole column moves in and
out together as a single harmonic
oscillator.

247

248

CHAPT ER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves

Fig. 9.2.9 In a
longitudinal wave, the
underlying oscillation is
parallel to the wave itself.
In this case, a spring is
oscillating horizontally,
in the same direction as
the wave. With its fixed
nodes and antinodes, this
longitudinal wave is also a
standing wave.

Start

1/4 cycle

1/2 cycle

3/4 cycle

Oscillation

Wave

1 cycle

As you may suspect, the fundamental vibrational mode of air in the organ pipe is
another standing wave. Air in the pipe is an extended object with a stable equilibrium, and
the disturbance associated with its fundamental vibrational mode has a basic shape that
doesn’t change with time; it merely scales up and down rhythmically.
However, the shape of the wave in the pipe’s air now has to do with back-and-forth
compressions and rarefaction, not with side-to-side displacements, as it did in the violin
string. In fact, all the wave’s associated oscillation is along the pipe and therefore along the
wave itself. A wave in which the underlying oscillation is parallel to the wave itself is called
a longitudinal wave (Fig. 9.2.9). Waves in the air, including those inside organ pipes and
other wind instruments and those in the open air, are all longitudinal waves.
Check Your Understanding #5: A Pop Organ
If you blow across a soda bottle, it emits a tone. Why does adding water to the bottle raise the pitch
of that tone?
Answer: The water shortens the column of moving air inside the bottle and increases the frequency
of its fundamental vibrational mode.

(a)

Why: A water bottle is essentially a pipe that is open at only one end. It has a fundamental vibrational
mode with a frequency that is half that of an open pipe of equal length. As you add water to the
bottle, you shorten the effective length of the pipe and raise its pitch.

(b)

Playing an Organ Pipe
Airﬂow

Airﬂow

Fig. 9.2.10 (a) Air blown
across the bottom of an
open pipe will follow any
other air that’s moving
into the pipe. If the air
in the pipe is vibrating,
this effect will add energy
to that vibration. (b) The
lower opening in an organ
pipe is cut in its side for
practical reasons.

The organ uses resonant energy transfer to make the air in a pipe vibrate. It starts this
transfer by blowing air across the pipe’s lower opening (Fig. 9.2.10a), although for
practical reasons that lower opening is usually found on the pipe’s side (Fig. 9.2.10b).
As the air flows across the opening, it’s easily deflected to one side or the other and
tends to follow any air that’s already moving into or out of the pipe. If the air inside the
pipe is vibrating, the new air will follow it in perfect synchrony and strengthen the
vibration.
This following process is so effective at enhancing vibrations that it can even initiate
a vibration from the random noise that’s always present in a pipe. That’s how the sound
starts when the organ’s pump first blows air across the pipe. Once the vibration has
started, it grows quickly in amplitude. That amplitude increases until energy leaves the
pipe as sound and heat as quickly as it arrives via compressed air. The more air the organ
blows across the pipe each second, the more power it delivers to the pipe and the louder
the vibration.

Musical Instruments

249

Like a violin string, an organ pipe can support more than one mode of vibration. In its
fundamental vibrational mode, the pipe’s entire column of air vibrates together. In the
higher-order vibrational modes, this air column vibrates as a chain of shorter air columns
moving in alternate directions. If the pipe has a constant width, these vibrations occur at
harmonics of the fundamental. When the air column vibrates as two half-columns, its pitch
is exactly twice that of the fundamental mode. When it vibrates as three third-columns, its
pitch is exactly three times that of the fundamental. And so on.
Also, the air column inside a pipe can vibrate in more than one mode simultaneously.
As with a violin string, the standing waves superpose and the fundamental and harmonic
tones are produced together. The shape of the organ pipe and the place where air is blown
across it determine the pipe’s harmonic content and thus its timbre. Different pipes can
imitate different instruments. To sound like a flute, the pipe emits mostly the fundamental
tone and keep the harmonics fairly quiet. To sound like a clarinet, its harmonics must be
much louder. An organ pipe’s loudness always builds slowly during the attack, so it can’t
pretend to be a plucked string. However, a clever designer can make the organ imitate a
surprising range of instruments.
Check Your Understanding #6: An Across Blow
To make the air in a soda bottle vibrate, you must blow across the bottle’s mouth. Why doesn’t blowing into its mouth work?
Answer: By blowing across the mouth, you let air that is already vibrating in the bottle redirect your
breath so that it enhances the vibration. Blowing into the bottle’s mouth merely compresses the air
inside the bottle.
Why: Like the bow of a violin moving across its strings, your breath moving across the bottle’s mouth
enhances the air’s vibration via resonant energy transfer. The spontaneous redirection of your breath
when you blow across the bottle’s mouth leads to rhythmic pushes that are perfectly synchronized
with the air’s vibration.

A Drum’s Vibrating Surface
After examining violin strings and organ pipes, you might think that drums have no new
physics concepts to show us. But while a drumhead is yet another extended object with a
stable equilibrium and springlike restoring forces, its overtone vibrations have an important
difference: they aren’t harmonics.
Violin strings and organ pipes are effectively one-dimensional or linelike objects,
dividing easily into half-objects or third-objects that then vibrate at second or third harmonic pitches. Together with the many other one-dimensional instruments in an orchestra
or band, they blend seamlessly when they’re playing the same fundamental pitch because
they share the same harmonics.
However, because a drumhead is effectively two-dimensional or surfacelike, it doesn’t
divide easily into pieces that resemble the entire drumhead. As a result, the pitches of its
overtone vibrations have no simple relationship to its fundamental pitch. A timpani stands
out relative to other instruments in part because of the unique overtone pitches.
Figure 9.2.11 illustrates the fundamental (Fig. 9.2.11a) and five lowest-pitched overtone (Fig. 9.2.11b–f) vibrational modes for a drumhead. Each vibrational mode is a
standing wave but with vibrational nodes that are curves or lines rather than points. The
fundamental mode (Fig. 9.2.11a) has only one node on its outer edge, while the overtone
modes have additional nodes within the surface. In each vibrational mode, these nodes
remain motionless as the rest of the surface vibrates up and down, its peaks and valleys
interchanging alternately. The pitches of the overtone vibrations are indicated relative to
the pitch of the fundamental vibration. (For a historical note on the understanding of
surface modes, see 5 ).

5 In 1809, the French
Academy of Sciences
announced a competition
to explain the intricate
patterns observed on
vibrating surface plates.
The only respondent was
French mathematician
Sophie Germain (1776–
1831). As a woman,
Germain had been barred
from formal education in
mathematics and had
struggled to learn the
subject from books and
via correspondence with
leading mathematicians,
which she conducted
under the pseudonym
Antoine-August Le Blanc.
It took her three tries, but
in 1816 she was awarded
the prize. Because she was
a woman, however, she
did not attend the
ceremony. Her analysis of
surface vibrations, though
imperfect, was a visionary
effort, made all the more
extraordinary by her
circumstances. Although
her mentor, Carl Friedrich
Gauss, managed to
convince the University of
Göttingen to award her an
honorary degree, she died
of breast cancer before
she could receive it.

250

CHAPT ER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves

Fig. 9.2.11 The six
lowest-pitch vibrational
modes of a drumhead,
including (a) the
fundamental vibrational
mode and (b–f ) overtone
modes. Pitches are shown
relative to the fundamental
pitch.

Antinode

(a)

(b)

Node

Pitch = 1.000

Node

Pitch = 1.593

(c)

Pitch = 2.136
(d)

(e)

Node

Pitch = 2.295

Pitch = 2.653
(f)

Pitch = 2.917

Because striking a drumhead causes it to vibrate in several modes at once, the drum
emits several pitches simultaneously. The amplitude of each mode, and consequently its
loudness, depends not only on how hard you hit the drumhead but also on where you hit it.
If you hit it at its center, it vibrates primarily in circular modes (Fig. 9.2.11a,d). If you hit
it nearer its edge, it also vibrates in noncircular modes (Fig. 9.2.11b,c,e,f).
A timpani sounds most musical when it’s struck off-center in such a way that the amplitude of its fundamental vibrational mode is nearly zero and its overtones, particularly Fig.
9.2.11b, dominate its sound. That’s because the fundamental vibrational mode emits sound
so efficiently that its vibrational energy dissipates before it can produce a discernible tone.
Unless all you want is a loud thump, you must hit the timpani off-center so that its longlived overtone vibrations receive most of the energy and emit most of the sound. The dominant pitch of a properly played timpani is that of its first overtone vibration, and it is tuned
with that pitch in mind.
In truth, the pitches shown in Fig. 9.2.11 neglect the effects of air’s inertia on the drumhead’s vibrations. Since air adds inertia to the drumhead, it lowers the pitches of all the
vibrational modes, some more than others. Because of air’s influence on pitch, a drum must
be tuned to accommodate changes in temperature and weather.
Check Your Understanding #7: Space Kid One
A trampoline is hazardous with several children on it because a child landing on one side of its surface can launch skyward a second child standing on the other side of the surface. How does a downward impact on one side of the trampoline produce a sudden rise of the other side?
Answer: The off-center impact causes the surface to vibrate in its noncircular overtone modes. The
simplest such mode, Fig. 9.2.11b, has its two sides moving in alternate directions.
Why: The trampoline is essentially a drumhead, and the children are riding its vibrational modes.
Off-center impacts can cause the surface to vibrate in its overtone modes, and these can toss the
children in unexpected directions.

Sound in Air
All these vibrations would serve little purpose if we couldn’t hear them, so it’s time to look
at how instruments produce sound. We’ll start by looking at sound itself.

Musical Instruments

We noted at the beginning of this section that sound in air consists of density
waves—patterns of compressions and rarefactions that travel outward rapidly from their
source. While that observation was mysterious at the time, we can now understand those
waves as vibrations in an extended object with a stable equilibrium. That extended
object is air.
Neglecting gravity, air is in a stable equilibrium when its density is uniform. If we
disturb it from equilibrium, the resulting pressure imbalances will provide springlike
restoring forces. These forces, together with air’s inertia, lead to rhythmic vibrations—the
vibrations of harmonic oscillators. In open air, the most basic vibrations are waves that
move steadily in a particular direction and are therefore called traveling waves. Like the
standing waves inside an organ pipe, the traveling waves in open air are longitudinal—air
vibrates along the same direction as the sound wave travels.
As it moves through the open air, a basic traveling sound wave consists of an
alternating pattern of high-density regions we’ll call crests and low-density regions
we’ll call troughs (Fig. 9.2.12). While those names will seem more appropriate when
we examine water surface waves in the next section, it’s customary to refer to the
alternating highs and lows of any wave as crests and troughs, respectively. Whether a
wave is standing or traveling, the shortest distance between two adjacent crests is
known as the wavelength.
A standing wave’s crests and troughs merely flip back and forth in place, crests becoming troughs and troughs becoming crests. However, a traveling wave’s crests and troughs
move steadily in a particular direction at a particular speed. The speed and direction of
travel together constitute the traveling wave’s wave velocity.
Figure 9.2.13 shows five snapshots of a simple sound wave that’s heading toward the
right. If we watch air’s density at the same point in space (green line), it begins as a crest
(a), decreases (b) to a trough (c), then rises (d) back to a crest (e) during one complete
vibration cycle. However, if we follow the same crest (red line) over time, it travels one
wavelength to the right during one complete vibration cycle (a–e). Since a crest moves
one wavelength per vibration cycle and frequency is the number of vibration cycles per
second, the speed at which the crest moves is equal to the wavelength times the frequency.
That relationship can be written as a word equation:
wave speed = wavelength · frequency,

251

gth

len

ve
Wa

ve
Wa

(cre

elo

v
st)

city

High density (crest)
Low density (trough)

Fig. 9.2.12 A traveling
sound wave in air consists
of a washboard pattern of
high-density (blue) and lowdensity (white) regions. The
distance separating adjacent
crests is the wavelength,
and the speed and direction
of crest motion are the wave
velocity.

(9.2.1)
(a)

Wave velocity

in symbols:

Start

s = 𝜆𝜈,

crest

Remarkably enough, all sound waves travel at the same speed through air, regardless
of wavelength or frequency. That’s because as a sound wave’s wavelength increases, its
crests travel farther during one cycle of vibration but that cycle also takes longer. The two
changes balance one another, so the crests travel at the same speed. Longer wavelengths
lead to slower vibrations because broadening out the pressure variations in the sound wave
weakens its restoring forces. With softer restoring forces and the same inertia (that is, its
density), the air vibrates more slowly as the wavelength increases.
Equation 9.2.1 thus yields the same wave speed for any sound wave. Known as the
speed of sound in air, it’s about 331 m/s (1086 ft/s) under standard conditions at sea level
(0 °C, 101, 325 Pa pressure). Although that’s fast, there is still a noticeable delay between
when a percussionist strikes the cymbals and when you hear them from across the concert

Same

Broad waves that vibrate quickly travel fast.

1/4 cycle
(c)

Same point

and in everyday language:

(b)

1/2 cycle

(d)
3/4 cycle
(e)
1 cycle
Wavelength

Fig. 9.2.13 A sound wave
at five evenly spaced times
(a–e) showing one complete
cycle of oscillation. During
that cycle, the pressure at a
specific point in space goes
from high to low to high
(green line), and a specific
crest moves 1 wavelength
to the right (red line).

252

CHAPT ER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves

hall. Fortunately, because the speed of sound doesn’t depend on frequency, when the entire
orchestra plays in unison you hear all its different pitches simultaneously.
This discussion of sound assumes that the instruments and listener maintain a constant
separation, as they usually do at an orchestra concert. However, when a marching band
steps quickly toward or away from the listener, something odd happens: the listener hears
its music shifted up or down in pitch. Known as the Doppler effect, this frequency shift
occurs because the listener encounters sound wave crests at a rate that’s different from the
rate at which those crests were created. If an instrument and the listener are approaching
one another, the listener encounters the crests at an increased rate and the pitch increases.
If the two are moving away from one another, the listener encounters the crests at a
decreased rate and the pitch decreases. Fortunately, the Doppler effect is subtle at speeds
that are small compared to the speed of sound, so you can listen to parades without their
sounding flat or sharp.

Check Your Understanding #8: Sounds Faster
Helium in a toy balloon has the same stiffness as ordinary air, but its density and inertia are smaller.
How does this difference affect the speed of sound in helium?
Answer: Sound travels faster in helium than it does in ordinary air.
Why: With its reduced density and inertia, helium vibrates faster than air when the two gases carry
sound waves of equal wavelengths. Since the speed at which sound of a specific wavelength travels
is proportional to the frequency of that sound, the wave speed in helium is greater than that in air.

Check Your Figures #1: Underwater Sound
Although water is about 800 times as dense as ordinary air, water is also about 15,000 times as stiff
and its sound vibrations therefore have increased frequencies relative to those in air. When two sound
waves have equal wavelengths, the wave in water has a frequency about 4.3 times greater than the
wave in air. What is the speed of sound in water?
Answer: The speed of sound in water is about 1420 m/s (4700 ft/s).
Why: From Eq. 9.2.1, the wave speed in water must be 4.3 times the wave speed in air. Since the
sound waves have a wave speed of about 331 m/s in air, they must have a speed of about 331 m/s
times 4.3 or 1420 m/s in water.

Turning Vibrations into Sound
Anything that disturbs air’s otherwise uniform density can produce traveling sound waves.
Instruments emit sound by compressing and rarefying the nearby air in synch with their
own vibrations. How they accomplish this task differs from instrument to instrument, so
we’ll have to look at them individually. As we’ll see, some instruments find it easier to
produce sound than others.
A drum produces sound when its vibrating drumhead alternately compresses and rarefies the nearby air. As portions of that drumhead rise and fall, they upset the air’s uniform
density and thereby produce sound waves. Whenever it can, though, air simply flows
silently out of the drumhead’s way, leading to smaller density fluctuations and less intense
sound. For example, when the drumhead is experiencing one of the five overtone vibrations
shown in Fig. 9.2.11, air flows away from each rising peak in the undulating surface and
toward each falling valley. The overtone vibrations still manage to produce sound, but it’s
less intense and the vibrational energy in the drumhead transforms relatively inefficiently
into sound energy.
Air’s partial success in dodging the drumhead’s overtone vibrations allows those
overtones to complete many vibrational cycles before running out of vibrational

Musical Instruments

energy. Their vibrations are therefore long-lived and have distinct pitches. In contrast,
air has difficulty dodging the drumhead’s fundamental vibrational mode, which alternately compresses and rarefies the air so effectively that it transfers all its vibrational
energy to the air in just a few cycles. That’s why the fundamental vibrational mode of
a drumhead produces the intense and nearly pitchless “thump” sound that we associate
with a drum.
If air can dodge a vibrating surface, it can certainly dodge a vibrating string. Little
of a violin’s sound comes directly from its vibrating strings; the air simply skirts
around them. Instead, the violin creates sound with its top plate, or belly (Fig. 9.2.14).
The strings transfer their vibrational motions to the belly and the belly pushes on the
air to create sound.
Most of this vibrational energy flows into the belly through the violin’s bridge,
which holds the strings away from the violin’s body (Fig. 9.2.15). Beneath the G3-string
side of the bridge is the bass bar, a long wooden strip that stiffens the belly. Beneath the
E5-string side of the bridge is the sound post, a shaft that extends from the violin’s belly
to its back.
As a bowed string vibrates across the violin’s belly, it exerts a torque on the bridge
about the sound post. The bridge rotates back and forth, causing the bass bar and belly to
move in and out. The belly’s motion produces most of the violin’s sound. Some of this
sound comes directly from the belly’s outer surface, and the rest comes from its inner surface and must emerge through its S-shaped holes.
An organ pipe doesn’t have to produce sound because that sound already exists. In
effect, the pipe’s vibrating column of air is a standing sound wave that gradually leaks out
of the pipe as a traveling one. Trapped sound is escaping from its container.
This conversion of a standing wave into a traveling wave isn’t so remarkable because
the two types of waves are closely related. The pipe’s standing wave can be thought of as a
reflected traveling wave, a traveling wave that’s bouncing back and forth between the two
ends of the pipe. Because of the reflections, the traveling wave is superposed with itself
heading in the opposite direction, and the sum of two equal but oppositely directed traveling waves is a standing wave!
The fact that sound reflects from the open end of an organ pipe is rather surprising. If
that end were closed, you’d probably expect a reflection. After all, sound echoes from cliffs
and other rigid surfaces. But sound partially reflects from a surprising range of other transitions, including the transition from inside a pipe to outside it. If you don’t believe that,
clap your hands inside a long pipe and listen for the decaying echoes.
The reflections at the organ pipe’s open ends aren’t perfect, so the trapped sound
wave gradually leaks out and becomes the sound you hear. This process of letting a
standing sound wave emerge slowly as a traveling wave is typical of woodwind and
brass instruments. The reflection at an open pipe end depends on the shape of that end.
Flaring it into the horn shape common in brass instruments reduces the reflection and
eases the transition from standing wave to traveling wave. That’s why horns project
sound so well.

Check Your Understanding #9: Air Guitar
Why does an acoustic guitar have a sound box?
Answer: The sound box transfers the vibrational energy of the strings to the air.
Why: Guitar strings are too narrow to push effectively on the air and emit sound. They do better by
transferring their energy to the body of the acoustic guitar so that its flat surfaces can push on the
air. An electric guitar avoids the need for a sound box by converting the string’s vibrations directly
into electric currents and from there into movements of an audio speaker.

253

Fig. 9.2.14 A violin’s
bridge transfers energy
from its vibrating strings to
its belly. The belly moves
in and out, emitting sound.
Some of this sound leaves
the violin through the
S-holes in its body.

Bridge
Sound
post

Bass bar

Fig. 9.2.15 The bridge
is supported by the bass
bar on one side and the
sound post on the other.
As the strings vibrate
back and forth, the bridge
experiences a torque that
causes the belly of the
violin to move in and out
and emit sound.

254

CHAPT ER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves

SECTION 9.3

The Sea

Breaking crest

Trough

The sea is never still. If you’ve visited the seashore, you’ve probably noticed two of the sea’s most important motions: tides and
surface waves. In this section, we’ll examine the cycle of tides
and look at how surface waves travel across water. These water
waves can help us understand other wave phenomena, including the electromagnetic waves that are responsible for light and
the density waves that are the basis for sound.
Questions to Think About: Why do the tides vary in height
from place to place? Why are there no significant tides in a
lake or swimming pool? Why does high tide occur about every
12 hours? What moves in a water wave? Do all waves travel at

the same speed? How deep is a wave? Why do waves break
near shore? Why do waves always seem to head almost directly
toward shore? Why is there often a rhythm to the surf?
Experiments to Do: Although you can make water waves in a
basin or tub, they move too quickly for you to see them clearly.
You would do better to watch waves at the beach. On a calm
day, the sea is in its flat equilibrium shape—but when the
wind picks up, look out. How does wind affect the sea’s surface? If water waves contain energy, where does that energy
come from and what forms does it take in the water?
Watch a floating object move as a wave passes it. Does the
object travel with the wave? Does the water itself travel with the
wave? Can you think of other cases in which a disturbance
moves steadily forward but the material carrying the disturbance remains behind?
Now watch as waves break near the shore. If you look
around at different beaches, you’ll find waves breaking in two
different ways. In some cases a wave will simply collapse into
churning froth, while in others its top will dive forward over the
water ahead of it. Can you see anything about the beaches or
water that might account for this difference?

The Tides

Moon’s
gravity

Moon
Earth

Fig. 9.3.1 The moon’s
gravity varies over the
surface of Earth. The closer
a point is to the moon,
the stronger the gravity it
experiences. This variation
in the moon’s gravity
produces the tides.

If you watch the sea for a few days, you’ll notice the tides. In a cycle as old as the oceans
themselves, the water level rises for about 6¼ hours to reach high tide, drops for about 6¼
hours to arrive at low tide, and then begins rising again. Once a wonderful mystery, we now
know that the tides are caused by Earth’s rotation, the moon’s gravity, and, to a lesser
extent, the sun’s gravity.
On Earth, the moon’s gravity is so weak that we normally don’t notice it. The moon is
far away, and as we learned in Section 4.2, gravity diminishes with distance. But this
dependence on distance also means that the moon’s gravity is stronger on one side of Earth
than the other; you experience a stronger pull when you’re on the side of Earth nearest the
moon than you do when you’re on the side opposite it (Fig. 9.3.1). Although you can’t feel
these variations in moon gravity yourself, Earth’s oceans respond to them. The oceans are
deformed by the moon’s gravity (Fig. 9.3.2), and this deformation produces the tides.
The differences between the moon’s gravity at particular locations on Earth and its
average strength for the entire Earth give rise to tidal forces, residual gravitational forces
that act to displace those locations relative to Earth as a whole. The near side of Earth is
pulled toward the moon more strongly than average, so it experiences a tidal force toward
the moon. The far side of Earth is pulled less strongly than average, so it experiences a tidal
force away from the moon.
If Earth were less rigid, these tidal forces would stretch it into an egg shape. The near
side of Earth would bulge outward toward the moon, while the far side of Earth would
bulge outward away from the moon. But while Earth itself is too stiff to deform much, the
oceans are not and they bulge outward in response to the tidal forces. Two tidal bulges
appear: one closest to the moon and one farthest from the moon (Fig. 9.3.2). The near-side
bulge develops because the water there tries to fall toward the moon faster than Earth does
as a whole. The far-side bulge forms because water there tries to fall toward the moon

The Sea
Low tide

High
tide

Water
High
tide

255

Fig. 9.3.2 Variations in the moon’s gravity produce tidal
forces on Earth’s surface and cause Earth’s oceans to bulge
outward in two places. These bulges, which are located
nearest and farthest from the moon, move over Earth’s
surface as it rotates.

Moon
Low tide

slower than Earth does as a whole. A beach located in one of these tidal bulges experiences
high tide, while one in the ring of ocean between the bulges experiences low tide.
As Earth rotates, the locations of the two tidal bulges move westward around the
equator. Since a particular beach experiences high tide whenever it’s closest to or farthest
from the moon, the full cycle from high to low to high tide occurs about once every 12 h and
24.4 min. The extra 24.4 min reflects the fact that the moon isn’t stationary; it orbits Earth
and completes a lunar month (the time it takes for the moon to orbit Earth) every 29.53 days.
The moon thus passes overhead once every 24 h and 48.8 min, rather than every 24 h.
The moon isn’t the only source of tidal forces on Earth’s oceans. Although the sun is
much farther away from Earth than the moon is, it’s so massive that the tidal forces it exerts
are almost half as large as those exerted by the moon. The sun’s principal effect is to
increase or decrease the strength of the tides caused by the moon (Fig. 9.3.3). When the
moon and the sun are aligned with one another, their tidal forces add together and produce
extra large tidal bulges. When the moon and the sun are at right angles to one another, their
tidal forces partially cancel and produce tidal bulges that are unusually small. Twice each
lunar month, the tides are particularly strong. These spring tides occur whenever the moon
and sun are aligned with one another (full moon and new moon). Twice each lunar month
the tides are particularly weak. These neap tides occur whenever the moon and sun are at
right angles to one another (half moon).
Because of this interplay between lunar and solar tidal effects, the cycle of tides varies
slightly from day to day. While the average cycle is 12 h and 24.4 min, it fluctuates over a lunar
month. Moreover, the exact moment of high or low tide at a particular location is influenced by
water’s inertia, Earth’s rotation, and the environment through which water must flow to form
the tidal bulge. This variation is why shore areas often publish tables of the local tides.
Check Your Understanding #1: Seaside Vacations of the Tidal Rich
The Atlantic and Pacific oceans come very close to one another in Central America. If the Atlantic
side of this isthmus is experiencing high tide, what tide is the Pacific side experiencing?
Answer: It is experiencing high tide, too.
Why: When the Atlantic side of the Central American isthmus is experiencing high tide, there is a
tidal bulge over all of Central America. Both sides of the isthmus experience the same (high) tide.

Neap tide (Day 0)

Moon
Earth

Sun
Spring tide (Day 7)
Moon
Sun

Earth

Neap tide (Day 14)

Tidal Resonances
The sizes of the tides depend on where you are, but high tide is typically a meter or two
above low tide. Because the tidal bulges are located near the equator, tides far to the north or
south are smaller than that; tides in isolated lakes or seas are smaller still because water can’t
flow in to create the bulges. However, there are a few special places that have enormous
tides. For example, tides in the Bay of Fundy, an estuary between New Brunswick and Nova
Scotia, can change the water level by as much as 15 m. How can tides ever get this large?
Giant tides result from natural resonances in channels and estuaries. Just as air in an
organ pipe can be made to vibrate strongly by a series of carefully timed pushes from a
pump, water in a channel or estuary can be made to oscillate strongly by a series of carefully

Sun

Earth
Moon

Spring tide (Day 21)

Sun

Earth Moon

Fig. 9.3.3 The tides vary
over a lunar month. They’re
strongest when the sun
and the moon are aligned
(spring tides) and weakest
when they are at 90° from
one another (neap tides).

CHAPT ER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves

Node

Crest
Equilibrium level

Trough

Water flow

Water flow

Water flow

Crest

Trough

Fig. 9.3.4 Water
sloshing in a basin in its
fundamental mode. Its
surface oscillates up and
down, its crest becoming a
trough and vice versa, over
and over again.

timed pushes from the tides. The water in that channel is another extended object with a
stable equilibrium, so it will oscillate about its equilibrium after being disturbed. Giant
tides occur through resonant energy transfer when the cycle of the tides gradually builds up
the amplitude of a suitable standing wave in a channel.
However, while standing waves in an organ pipe involve the column of air as a whole,
standing waves in a channel involve primarily the water’s open surface. That water is at
equilibrium when its surface is smooth and horizontal, and it experiences springlike restoring forces whenever its surface is disturbed. For the broad waves we’re considering in this
section, those restoring forces are due to gravity and they are known as gravity waves. For
the miniature waves in a small drinking glass, however, water’s springy, elastic surface
contributes significantly to the restoring forces. Waves that involve this surface tension are
known as capillary waves.
You can observe standing gravity waves on the surface of a large cup of coffee. As you
walk with the cup in hand and jostle it back and forth rhythmically, you’ll produce gravity
waves on the coffee’s surface. If you time your walking motion so that it’s synchronized
with the natural rhythm of a particular standing wave, you’ll build up the amplitude of that
wave by resonant energy transfer and may find yourself needing a change of clothes. Similar gravity-wave resonances occur in washbasins and bathtubs, phenomena that children
find particularly amusing—to the dismay of their parents and the delight of people who
repair water-damaged floors and ceilings.
Like standing waves on violin strings and drumheads, standing surface waves on
water are transverse—the water’s vertical surface vibrations are perpendicular to the horizontal waves themselves. In a basin, the fundamental vibrational mode (Fig. 9.3.4) has a
node along the middle of the basin and antinodes at either end. At one antinode, water arcs
up to a crest—a maximum upward displacement from equilibrium. At the other antinodes,
water arcs down to a trough—a maximum downward displacement from equilibrium. Over
time, the crest drops to become a trough, while the trough rises to become a crest. That
process reverses and then repeats, over and over again until the sloshing water turns all its
vibrational energy into thermal energy or transfers it elsewhere.
The giant tides at the end of an estuary are simply the antinode of a standing wave
fluctuating up and down between a crest and a trough. While the standing waves in an
ordinary washbasin have periods measured in seconds or less, large bodies of water can
sustain standing waves known as seiches that have periods of minutes or even hours. These
standing waves appear throughout the oceans and significantly affect the heights and timings of the tides almost everywhere on Earth.
Water in the Bay of Fundy has a fundamental seiche mode with a period of roughly
13.3 hours. Because this period nearly matches the 12.5-hour cycle of the tides, there’s a
resonant transfer of energy from the moon to the water oscillating in the estuary. The tides
drive water back and forth in this estuary until, after many cycles, that water is moving so
strongly that its height varies dramatically with time (Fig. 9.3.5).

© Everett Johnson/eStock Photo

256

Fig. 9.3.5 The giant tides in the Bay of Fundy can cause its water level to change by as much as 15 m
between high and low tide.

The Sea

Check Your Understanding #2: Potential Profits
People occasionally propose using giant tides to generate electric power, but there’s a problem with
this idea. If you extracted all the gravitational potential energy from the water at high tide in the Bay
of Fundy, how long would it take for a giant high tide to appear again?
Answer: It would take many days.
Why: The sloshing water in the Bay of Fundy acquires its energy via resonant energy transfer. The
tides do work on the water, slowly increasing its energy over many cycles of its periodic motion. Since
each cycle takes half a day, many days are required to build up the energy needed for a giant tide. If
you were to extract all this stored energy at once, the bay would have to start sloshing all over again.
A small power plant that extracts only a tiny portion of the stored energy each cycle is possible, however, and one such plant is actually in operation.

Traveling Waves on the Surface of Water
As you sit at the seashore on a cloudless day, enjoying a warm, steady breeze, you can’t
help but notice that the sea in front of you is covered with ridges. These ridges move steadily toward land and finally crash on the beach. Though it’s customary to think of each
breaking swell as a separate wave, we’ll find it useful to view the entire moving pattern of
evenly spaced ridges as a single wave—a traveling surface wave on water.
Traveling surface waves are the basic modes of oscillation on the open ocean, the
simplest waves on that effectively limitless surface. Despite their steady progress across
the water, these traveling waves actually involve oscillation. You can see this oscillation by
watching a fixed point on the water’s surface. That point fluctuates up and down as the
crests and troughs of a traveling wave pass through it. The period of this oscillation is
the time required for one full cycle of rise and fall, and the frequency is the number of
crests passing through that fixed point each second.
The ocean’s surface can host an incredible variety of traveling waves, each moving in
its own direction with its own period and frequency. Moreover, these basic waves can coexist, adding together on the ocean’s surface to create ever more complicated patterns. Like
the pure tones of many flutes, which when blended together in proper proportions imitate
the richer timbres of oboes and violins and which when blended still further can produce
any possible pattern of sound, traveling waves can be superposed in proper proportions to
produce any possible surface pattern or wave. When the ocean is rough and its surface
features are ripples layered on swells layered on broad undulations, you’re seeing this
superposition of “pure tone” traveling waves in all its glory.
In contrast, the basic modes of oscillation on a channel or lake are standing surface
waves—the simplest waves on that limited surface. In a standing wave, the water’s surface
oscillates up and down vertically, with its crests and troughs interchanging periodically:
crests become troughs and troughs become crests. The standing wave’s pattern of crests and
troughs doesn’t move anywhere; it simply flips up and down in place at a certain frequency.
On their limited surface, these standing waves can be superposed to produce any possible surface pattern or wave, so they, too, are like primary colors. Overall, traveling waves
constitute the primary palette of waves for a limitless ocean, and standing waves constitute
the primary palette of waves for a limited channel or lake.
STANDING AND TRAVELING WAVES
The most basic waves on an extended object of limited dimensions are standing waves.
With their different periods and/or patterns, these standing waves can be superposed
to form any possible wave on that limited object.
The most basic waves on an extended object of limitless dimensions are traveling
waves. With their different periods and/or directions of travel, these traveling waves
can be superposed to form any possible wave on that limitless object.

257

258

CHAPT ER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves

Actually, we’ve seen these ideas before in the context of musical instruments and
sound. Since instruments are limited objects, their basic vibrations are standing waves—
the fundamental and overtone vibrations. And because air is effectively limitless, its basic
vibrations are traveling waves—the sound waves it carries. The timbre of an instrument
reveals the superposition of its many standing waves, while the full sound of an orchestra
or band displays the superposition of its many traveling waves.
Both standing and traveling water surface waves carry energy—energy that they typically obtain from the wind, the tide, and occasionally seismic activity. Each wave’s energy
consists of kinetic energy in moving water and gravitational potential energy in water that
has been displaced from its level equilibrium.
In a standing wave, the energy of the entire wave fluctuates back and forth between
kinetic and gravitational potential; the wave’s kinetic energy peaks as the surface rushes
through its level equilibrium, and its potential energy peaks as the surface stops to turn
around at its maximum displacement from equilibrium.
A traveling wave’s crests and troughs move steadily forward, so the water is never
level or motionless. The energy in a traveling wave is therefore always an even mixture of
kinetic and potential energies. Also, because of its directed motion, a traveling wave carries
momentum pointing in the same direction as the wave velocity.
Check Your Understanding #3: The Frequency of Seasickness
You’re sitting in a small boat on the open ocean, rising and falling with each passing wave crest. How
could you measure the frequency of the wave passing under your boat?
Answer: Count the number of up and down cycles you complete in a certain amount of time.
Why: Your boat’s up and down motion is caused by the oscillation of the ocean’s surface. You are
rising and falling at the frequency of the passing wave.

The Structure of a Water Wave
We’ve seen that a traveling surface wave moves across the open ocean with a certain velocity, wavelength, and frequency. But what is the water itself doing as the wave passes?
You can begin to answer that question by watching a bottle floating on the water’s
surface (Fig. 9.3.6). As a wave passes it, that bottle rises and falls with the crests and
troughs, but it makes no overall progress in any direction. Instead, the bottle travels in a
circle. Like the bottle, the water itself doesn’t actually move along with the passing wave.
Although this water bunches up to create each crest and spreads out to create each trough,
it returns to its starting point once the wave has left.
Like the bottle in Fig. 9.3.6, a patch of water on the ocean’s surface moves in a circular
pattern (Fig. 9.3.7) as a traveling wave passes. Water that starts out on top of a crest moves
down and forward as the crest departs. It moves down and backward as the trough arrives,
then up and backward as the trough departs, and finally up and forward as the next crest
arrives. When it reaches the top of the arriving crest, this water is back where it started on
Wave (crest) velocity
(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Fig. 9.3.6 You can see that water doesn’t move with a wave by watching a bottle floating on the
water. The bottle moves in a circle as each crest passes by. Starting at (a) a crest, the bottle moves
(b) down and right, (c) down and left, (d) up and left, and then (e) up and right. It returns to its original
position just as the next crest arrives.

The Sea

y
velocit
Wave

Loop diameter
decreases
downward
Wa
ve

ba

se

th

leng

e
Wav
Negligible motion
at depth equal to
wavelength/2

the ocean’s surface. Which way the water circles depends on the wave velocity’s direction—the wave’s direction of travel. The water at the top of a crest always moves in the
same direction as the wave itself.
It isn’t only the surface water that moves; water beneath the surface also circles. However, the circles diminish in radius gradually with depth and become negligible at a depth
roughly equal to half the wave’s wavelength. Thus although it’s called a surface wave, it
has a depth to it and therefore a sensitivity to shallow water, as we’ll soon see.
‘These surface waves have another interesting characteristic—their wave speed
increases with wavelength. As you may have noticed, long-wavelength swells travel faster
than short-wavelength ripples. That’s quite different from sound waves, which all have the
same wave speed regardless of wavelength.
Such dependence of wave speed on wavelength is known as dispersion. It occurs in
this case because water’s surface is surprisingly stiff when carrying long-wavelength
waves. Unlike a taut violin string, which opposes short-wavelength distortions much more
stiffly than long-wavelength ones, water’s surface uses its weight to oppose long-wavelength
disturbances almost as vigorously as it opposes short-wavelength ones. That heightened
stiffness for long-wavelength waves boosts their frequencies and therefore increases their
wave speeds (see Eq. 9.2.1).
Little ripples have short wavelengths and travel slowly, while large ocean swells have
long wavelengths and travel much more rapidly. Giant waves produced by earthquakes and
volcanic eruptions, known as tsunamis, have extremely long wavelengths and can travel at
hundreds of kilometers per hour. Because these giant waves travel so fast and move water
so deep in the ocean, they carry enormous amounts of energy and momentum and are
potentially disastrous to shore areas (Fig. 9.3.8).
Check Your Understanding #4: Beneath the Waves
If you’re swimming and want to dive beneath a wave, how deep must you go to avoid any significant
motion in the water?
Answer: You must dive about half a wavelength beneath the water’s surface.
Why: A wave causes motion in the water up to a depth of roughly half its wavelength. A typical wave
has a wavelength of about 5 m, so you must dive 2.5 m under water before the water will remain
essentially still.

259

Fig. 9.3.7 Surface water
moves in a circular motion
as a wave passes. The
water currently located at
each dark dot will follow
the circular path outlined
around it as time passes.
The circles are largest at
the surface and become
relatively insignificant once
you look more than half
a wavelength below the
surface. The sense of the
circular motion (clockwise
or counterclockwise)
determines the direction
in which the wave travels.
This wave travels toward
the right.

CHAPT ER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves

Fig. 9.3.8 The Indian Ocean
tsunami of December 26,
2004, was initiated by a sudden
rise in the ocean floor off the
northern coast of Sumatra.
This long-wavelength traveling
wave moved so quickly through
the surrounding Indian Ocean
that most shore inhabitants
received no warning and were
caught unprepared. Moreover,
the wave’s phenomenal troughs
exposed vast stretches of seabed,
attracting inquisitive people
offshore, where they were then
unprotected from the destructive
crests that followed. Roughly a
quarter million people perished.

Waves at the Shore

Deep
water

Beach

Shallow
water

Wa
ve

ve

loc

ity

Fig. 9.3.9 When a
traveling water surface
wave encounters shallow
water, it slows down and its
direction of travel changes.
This refraction process
bends the wave velocity so
that it points more directly
toward the beach.

As a wave approaches the shore, it begins to travel through shallow water. Since the water’s
circular motion extends below the surface, there comes a point at which the wave begins to
encounter the seabed. Once the water is shallower than half the wavelength of the wave, the
seabed distorts the water’s circular motion so that it becomes elliptical.
That change has a number of interesting effects on the wave. First, its wave speed
gradually decreases so that the crests begin to bunch together. Second, its amplitude (the
height of its crests and depth of its troughs) increases as the wave acts to keep its overall
forward momentum constant despite its decrease in speed. These two effects explain why
waves that look broad and gradual on the open ocean look quite steep and dangerous nearer
the beach. Their crests have bunched together and grown taller, so the slopes between crests
and troughs really have become steeper.
A third effect of the shallowing water is a gradual change in the wave’s direction of
travel. Known as refraction, this bending occurs whenever a wave’s speed changes as it
passes from one environment to another. Since a water surface wave slows as it approaches
the shore, that wave refracts—it bends—so as to head more directly toward the shore (Fig.
9.3.9). Because of refraction, waves approach the beach almost perpendicular to it, even if
they were traveling at relatively oblique angles far from shore.
A fourth and final effect is the destruction of the wave—it eventually runs out of water
and crashes onto the beach. The wave builds each of its crests using local water. When the
crest enters very shallow water, there isn’t enough water in front of it to construct its forward side. The crest becomes incomplete and begins to “break.”
The form of its demise depends on the slope of the seabed. If that slope is gradual, the
wave breaks slowly to form a smooth, rolling, “boiling” surf (Fig. 9.3.10). However, if the
slope of the seabed is steep, the wave breaks quickly by having the top of its crest plunge
forward over the trough in front of it (Fig. 9.3.11). The steep slope essentially prevents the
forward half of the crest from forming. The rearward half continues through its normal
circular motion and dives over the missing half-crest in front of it.
The wave can avoid this violent end by colliding with a seawall or cliff instead of a
beach. Rather than breaking, the wave will then bounce off the wall and continue on in a new
direction. Known as reflection, this bouncing effect occurs whenever a wave would have to
change significantly to cross a boundary. In this case, the water actually ends at the rigid
wall, so the wave simply cannot cross that boundary and must reflect instead. The reflecting
wave passes back over itself, and as it does, what had been a traveling wave develops some
standing-wave character—a consequence of the wall’s limiting the surface of the sea.

© Reuters/Corbis Images

260

The Sea

261

© Sean Davey/Aurora Photos, Inc.

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Fig. 9.3.10 When the
slope of the sea bottom
is very gradual, the wave
crests crumble gently into
rolling surf.

Wave becomes
higher and
steeper

Breaking
wave

Swash

Beach

Deep water

Shallow
water

Wave first
"feels bottom"
here
Wave base = wavelength/2

Looplike motion

Turbulent
water

Loops deformed
by confined
space

Fig. 9.3.11 When the water becomes too shallow to form a complete crest for the wave, the wave
“breaks.” If the slope of the shore is steep enough, the crest will be quite incomplete on its shore side
and will plunge forward over the trough in front of it.

262

CHAPT ER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves

Less severe changes in how a wave travels on opposite sides of a boundary can also
make that wave reflect from the boundary, if only partially. Thus when a water surface wave
passes over a sandbar or coral reef and its wave speed changes, it may experience both
partial reflection and refraction. These effects contribute to the complicated dynamics of
waves near the shore.

Check Your Understanding #5: Out Past the Surf
As you swim away from shore at the ocean, you go through a region where the wave crests are
breaking and then reach a more distant region where they don’t break. What distinguishes the two
regions?
Answer: The breaking region is too shallow for complete crests to form. The nonbreaking region is
deep enough to form complete crests.
Why: Wave crests break in shallow regions, where complete crests can’t be formed. As long as the
water is deep enough, the waves travel intact. However, if there is a shallow region such as a sandbar,
even quite far from shore, the crests may break as the wave passes through it.

The Rhythm of the Surf: Wave Interference
If the ocean were carrying only one pure traveling wave toward shore, every breaking swell
would look and sound the same. However, there is often a complicated rhythm to the crashing surf; its loudness fluctuates with an overall pattern known as surf beat. Surf beat is a
sign that the ocean’s surface is a busy place; it’s actually carrying more than one traveling
wave at a time, and these various waves all contribute to the surf.
To understand how multiple traveling waves produce surf beat, let’s consider a
simple case. Suppose that two traveling waves are heading toward shore and that they
have equal amplitudes but different wavelengths (Fig. 9.3.12). Such a situation can easily arise when winds over two portions of the ocean produce two different traveling
waves that later overlap. Since they are sharing the ocean’s surface, they are superposed
on one another.
Because these traveling waves are different, their patterns of crests and troughs
can’t coincide everywhere. Instead, these waves experience interference, their overlying patterns enhance one another at some locations and cancel one another at other
locations. Wherever the two waves are in phase, that is, whenever their crests or troughs
coincide, they experience constructive interference—the waves act together to produce enormous crests or troughs. Wherever the two waves are out of phase, that is,
whenever the crest of one wave coincides with the trough of the other wave, they experience destructive interference—the waves oppose one another to produce muted or
absent crests or troughs.
The result is an interference pattern, an intricate structure that spreads across space
and time when waves are superposed. This interference pattern on the ocean’s surface
moves and evolves as the traveling waves head toward shore, and it leaves its impression
Destructive interference
Constructive interference
Waves A+B (superposed)

Fig. 9.3.12 When two traveling waves A and B are
superposed on the surface of the ocean, they produce
interference pattern A + B. As this moving pattern encounters
the shore, its varying crest heights give rise to surf beat.

Wave A (long-wavelength)
Wave B (short-wavelength)

The Sea

on the crests that eventually break on the beach. Since these crests are no longer equal in
height, they exhibit the complicated rhythm of surf beat. When you listen to that beat,
you’re hearing the consequence of superposition and the interference of waves.
Of course, the real ocean carries many traveling waves, each with its own amplitude, wavelength, and direction of travel. But no matter how complicated the ocean’s
surface or how intricate the surface beat, you are still just observing the interference of
waves.

SUMMARY OF IMPORTANT WAVE PHENOMENA
Reflection: The complete or partial mirror redirection of a wave that occurs when certain
dynamical properties of that wave, particularly its speed, change abruptly as it passes
from one environment to another.
Refraction: The bending of a wave that occurs when that wave’s speed changes as it
passes from one environment to another.
Dispersion: The dependence of a wave’s speed on its wavelength.
Interference: The interaction of two or more waves when they are superposed; their
crests and troughs can enhance one another (constructive interference) or cancel
one another (destructive interference) and can produce an interference pattern.

Check Your Understanding #6: Sound Beats
Many notes on a piano are played by two or even three separate strings. If those strings aren’t tuned
to exactly the same pitch, the resulting sound has a pulsing character—it grows louder and softer
rhythmically. What causes this strange pulsation or beat?
Answer: The slightly different sound waves produced by the separate strings are experiencing
interference.
Why: Like slightly different water waves, slightly different sound waves exhibit interference effects.
The resulting pulsation reflects alternating constructive and destructive interference between the
sound waves with slightly different pitches.

Epilogue for Chapter 9
In this chapter, we have looked at natural resonances in a variety of objects. In Clocks, we
examined resonances in pendulums, balance rings, and quartz crystals, and we found that
these objects are harmonic oscillators—their restoring forces are proportional to displacement. As such, these timekeepers have periods that don’t depend on the amplitudes of
their motions.
In Musical Instruments, we explored the vibrations of strings and air columns and
found that they, too, behave as harmonic oscillators, but with many modes of vibration
and thus more complicated behaviors. We found that we could view their motions as
waves.
In The Sea, we further explored two different types of waves: standing waves and
traveling waves. We saw that both types of waves are found in water, with standing waves
appearing in tidal resonances and traveling waves heading out over the open ocean.

Explanation: A Singing Wineglass
Rubbing the lip of the glass is similar to bowing a violin string; both procedures cause
resonant energy transfer. Your finger alternately pushes on the glass and then slips,

263

264

CHAPT ER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves

helping the glass itself to vibrate back and forth beneath your finger in its fundamental
vibrational mode. As the glass begins to vibrate, your finger does a little work on it each
time the glass is moving in the same direction as your finger. Once the glass is singing
loudly, you can keep it singing by circling your finger steadily around the glass. Although
the glass continues to emit its energy as sound, you keep giving it more energy by doing
work on it with your finger. Adding more water to the glass increases its inertia and slows
its vibrations.

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Clocks Work: Clocks are usually based on harmonic oscillators because of their extremely steady periods. Most important, the period of a harmonic oscillator doesn’t depend on
the amplitude of its motion. Common harmonic oscillator timekeepers include pendulums,
balance rings, and quartz crystals.
In a pendulum clock, a swinging pendulum controls the rotation of a toothed wheel,
which in turn controls the rotation of the clock’s hands. Energy needed to keep the pendulum
swinging and to advance the hands comes from the descent of a weighted cord. In a balance
clock, a rocking balance ring controls the toothed wheel. Energy for this clock comes from a
wound coil spring. A quartz crystal clock detects the vibration of its crystal electronically and
uses that vibration to control a motor that advances its clock hands or an electronic circuit
that measures time by counting the crystal’s vibrations. Small, carefully timed electric pulses
from the clock provide the energy that keeps the crystal vibrating.
How Musical Instruments Work: A violin string exhibits natural resonances by vibrating
back and forth about its equilibrium shape, a straight line. Bowing the string causes it to
vibrate by pushing it away from its equilibrium shape and then allowing it to slip back.
The bow transfers energy to the vibrating string by pushing it each time it moves in the
bow’s direction. The string’s fundamental pitch is determined by its mass, tension, and
length, and the pitch corresponds to a standing wave on the string. After selecting a string
of the correct mass, you tune that string by adjusting its tension. While playing, you
change the string’s length and pitch by pressing it against the fingerboard. The belly of
the violin serves to convert the string’s vibration into sound by moving in and out as the
string vibrates.
The air inside an organ pipe also exhibits natural resonances. As the organ blows air
across the opening at the bottom of a pipe, the air inside that pipe begins to vibrate as a
standing wave. The frequency of this vibration is determined principally by the pipe’s length,
so a short pipe has a higher pitch than a long one. Pipes with different shapes produce different amounts of harmonics and yield different sounds.
The surface of a drum has natural resonances but with a difference: they’re not harmonics of the fundamental pitch. The complicated standing waves on the drumhead contribute to
its unique sound.
How the Sea Works: The sea exhibits two interesting motions: tides and waves. Tides are
caused by bulges in Earth’s oceans, created by gravitational tidal forces from the moon and
sun. The moon dominates the tides so that bulges appear on the regions of Earth closest to
and farthest from the moon. Since Earth is rotating, these bulges move with respect to land
and give the tides their 12½-hour cycle.
Waves occur because the water’s surface has a stable equilibrium. When it’s disturbed
from that flat, level equilibrium, this surface will oscillate. Its most basic oscillations are
standing waves on confined bodies of water and traveling waves on open water.
The familiar ripples on the ocean’s surface are traveling waves that head toward shore
at speeds that increase with wavelength. As they approach the shore, these waves form

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations

265

incomplete crests, which eventually break. The shallowing water also slows the waves, so
that they bend more directly toward shore. Interference effects among multiple traveling
waves give rise to intricate patterns on the water’s surface and to complicated rhythms in
the crashing surf.

1. Harmonic oscillator: An oscillator with a restoring force pro-

2. Relationship among wave speed, wavelength, and frequency:

portional to displacement. Its period of oscillation depends only
on the stiffness of its restoring force and on its mass, not on its
amplitude of oscillation.

Wave speed equals wavelength times frequency, or
wave speed = wavelength · frequency.

(9.2.1)

10

Electricity
hile it’s hard to see the electric charges that are responsible for electricity, it’s easy to see
their effects. They’re all around us, in the sparks and shocks of a cold winter day, the
imaging process of a xerographic copier, and the illumination of a flashlight when you turn
on its switch. Although we often take electricity for granted, it clearly underlies many aspects of
our modern world.
Just imagine what life would be like if there were no electric charges and no electricity. For starters,
we’d probably be sitting around campfires at night, trying to think of things to do without television, cell
phones, or computer games. But before you remark on just how peaceful such a pre-electronic-age
existence would be, let me add one more sobering thought: we wouldn’t exist either. Whether it’s motionless as static charge or moving as electric current, electricity really does make the world go ‘round.

W
 

ACTIVE LEARNING
EXPERIMENTS

Moving Water without Touching It
thin stream of water and an electrically charged comb.
First, open a water faucet slightly so that the flow of
water forms a thin but continuous strand below the

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Unlike gravity, which always pulls objects toward one
another, electric forces can be either attractive or repulsive. You can experiment with electric forces using a

266

Static Electricity

mouth of the faucet. Next, give your rubber or plastic
comb an electric charge by passing it rapidly through
your hair or rubbing it vigorously against a wool sweater.
Finally, hold the comb near the stream of water, just
below the faucet, and watch what happens to the stream.
Is the electric force that you’re observing attractive or

267

repulsive? Why does this force change the path of the
falling water?
Rubbing the comb through your hair makes it electrically charged. What other objects can acquire and hold a
charge when you rub them across hair or fabric? Which
works better: a metal object or one that’s an insulator? Why?

Chapter Itinerary
Although we often experience electric forces and currents as
novelties or nuisances, there are also many devices that depend
on them. In this chapter, we examine the mysteries of (1) static
electricity and study two modern devices based on electricity:
(2) xerographic copiers and (3) flashlights. In Static Electricity,
we look at how clothes and other objects acquire charges and
how they exert forces on one another as a result. In Xerographic
Copiers, we see how these same electric forces work together
with light to control the placement of black powder to reproduce
images on sheets of paper. In Flashlights, we look at how a

S EC TIO N 1 0 . 1

current of electric charges conveys power from batteries to a
lightbulb. For a more complete preview of the chapter, turn
ahead to the Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations at the end of the chapter.
This chapter concentrates on electricity and its charges,
but as we will see in Chapter 11, electricity is closely related to
magnetism and its poles. While we’ll leave the relationships
between electricity and magnetism for that next chapter, you
may already begin seeing similarities between those two seemingly separate phenomena as you read Chapter 10.

Static Electricity
things around, however, as you’ve probably noticed while
reaching for a doorknob or a friend’s hand on a cold, dry day. In
this section, we’ll examine static electricity and the physics
behind its intriguing forces and often painful shocks.
Questions to Think About: How does a dryer produce static
electricity, and why do some clothes cling while others repel
each other? Why does walking across a carpet on a cold, dry
day put you at great risk of a shock as you reach for a doorknob? Why do you get only a single brief shock from that knob
and not a long sustained one? When you touch a friend and get
a shock, did one of you cause that shock or are you both
responsible? If rubbing is required to develop static electricity,
why does the plastic wrap produce so much of it when you
open a package? Why do moist air and antistatic chemicals
reduce static electricity?

Electricity may be difficult to see, but you can easily observe
its effects. How often have you found socks clinging to a shirt
as you remove them from a hot dryer or struggled to throw away
a piece of plastic packaging that just won’t leave your hand or
stay in the trash can? The forces behind these familiar effects
are electric in nature and stem from what we commonly call
static electricity. Static electricity does more than just push

Experiments to Do: You can study static electricity by rubbing
a toy balloon vigorously through your hair or against a wool
sweater. Though its appearance won’t change, the balloon will
begin to attract other things, particularly your hair. What has
happened to the balloon? to your hair? Why does the balloon
also attract things that weren’t rubbed?
Try to get rid of the balloon’s attractiveness by letting a thick
stream of water flow over its surface. Why does this process return
the balloon to normal? What did you “wash” off the balloon? Now
rub two identical balloons through your hair and see whether they
attract or repel one another. Does the result make sense?
Finally, draw two long strips of transparent tape from a
dispenser without rubbing them on anything, and see if they
attract or repel. Is rubbing essential to the development of
static electricity?

268

CHAPT ER 10 Electricity

Electric Charge and Freshly Laundered Clothes

(a)

+
+
(b)

–
–
(c)

+
–
Fig. 10.1.1 (a) Two
positive charges experience
equal but oppositely
directed forces exactly
away from one another.
(b) The same effect occurs
for two negative charges.
(c) Two opposite charges
experience equal but
oppositely directed forces
exactly toward one another.

1 Although best
remembered for his
political activities,
American statesman and
philosopher Benjamin
Franklin (1706–1790) was
also the preeminent
scientist in the American
colonies during the
mid-1700s. His experiments, both at home and
in Europe, contributed
significantly to the
understanding of
electricity and electric
charge. In addition to
demonstrating that
lightning is a form of
electric discharge,
Franklin invented a
number of useful devices,
including the Franklin
stove, lightning rods, and
bifocals.

Unless you have always lived in a damp climate and avoided synthetic materials, you have
experienced the effects of static electricity. Seemingly ordinary objects have pushed or
pulled on one another mysteriously, and you’ve received shocks while reaching for light
switches, car doors, or friends’ hands. Static electricity is more than an interesting nuisance, though; it’s a simple window into the inner workings of our universe and worthy of
a serious look. It will take some time to lay the groundwork, but soon you’ll be able to
explain most of the effects of static electricity and even to control it to some extent.
The existence of static electricity has been known for several thousand years. About
600 bc, the Greek philosopher Thales of Miletus (ca. 624–546 bc) observed that when
amber is rubbed vigorously with fur, it attracts light objects such as straw and feathers.
,
Known in Greek as elektron (η'λεκτρου), amber is a fossil tree resin with properties similar
to those of modern plastics. The term static electricity, like many others in this chapter,
derives from that Greek root.
Static electricity begins with electric charge, an intrinsic property of matter. Electric
charge is present in many of the subatomic particles from which matter is constructed,
and these particles incorporate their charges into nearly everything. No one knows why
charge exists; it’s simply one of the basic features of our universe and something that people discovered through observation and experiment. Because electric charge has so much
influence on the objects that contain it, we sometimes refer to those objects as electric
charges, or simply as charges.
Charges exert forces on one another, and these forces are what you observe with static
electricity. Next time you’re doing laundry, experiment with your clothes as they come out
of the dryer. You’ll find that some electrically charged garments attract one another, while
others repel each other. Evidently, there are two different types of charge. Although this
dichotomy has been known since 1733, when it was discovered by French chemist CharlesFrançois de Cisternay du Fay (1698–1739), it was Benjamin Franklin 1 who finally gave
the two charges their present names. Franklin called what appears on glass when it’s rubbed
with silk “positive charge” and what appears on hard rubber when it’s rubbed with animal
fur “negative charge.”
Two like charges (both positive or both negative) push apart, each experiencing a
repulsive force that pushes it directly away from the other (Figs. 10.1.1a, b). Two opposite
charges (one positive and one negative) pull together, each experiencing an attractive force
that pulls it directly toward the other (Fig. 10.1.1c). These forces between stationary electric charges are called electrostatic forces.
When you find that two freshly laundered socks push apart, it’s because they both have
the same type of charge. Whether that charge is positive or negative depends on the fabrics
involved (more on that later), so let’s just suppose that the dryer has given each sock a
negative charge. Since like charges repel, the socks push apart. What does it mean for the
dryer to give each sock a negative charge?
The answer to that question has several parts. First, the dryer didn’t create the negative
charge that it gave to a sock. Like momentum, angular momentum, and energy, electric
charge is a conserved physical quantity—it cannot be created or destroyed, only transferred. The negative charge that the dryer gave to the sock must have come from something
else, perhaps a shirt.
Second, positive charge and negative charge aren’t actually separate entities—they’re
just positive and negative amounts of the same physical quantity: electric charge. Positive
charges have positive amounts of electric charge, while negative charges have negative
amounts. Like most physical quantities, we measure charge in standard units. The SI unit
of electric charge is the coulomb (abbreviated C). Small objects rarely have a whole coulomb of charge, and your sock’s charge is only about −0.0000001 C.
Third, the sock’s negative charge refers to the sock as a whole, not to its internal
pieces. As with all ordinary matter, the sock contains an enormous number of positively

Static Electricity

269

and negatively charged particles. Each of the sock’s atoms consists of a dense central core
or nucleus, containing positively charged protons and uncharged neutrons, surrounded by
a diffuse cloud of negatively charged electrons. The electrostatic forces between those tiny
charged particles hold together not only the atoms but also the entire sock. However, in
giving the sock a negative charge, the dryer saw to it that the sock’s net electric charge, the
sum of all its positive and negative amounts of charge, is negative. With its negative net
charge, the sock behaves much like a simple, negatively charged object.
Last, the sock became negatively charged when it contained more electrons than protons. Underlying that seemingly simple statement is a great deal of painstaking scientific
study. To begin with, experiments have shown that electric charge is quantized, that is,
charge always appears in integer multiples of the elementary unit of electric charge. This
elementary unit of charge is extremely small, only about 1.6 × 10−19 C, and is the magnitude of the charge found on most subatomic particles. An electron has a −1 elementary unit
of charge, while a proton has a +1 elementary unit of charge. Since the only charged subatomic particles in normal matter are electrons and protons, the sock becomes negatively
charged simply by having more electrons than protons.
Returning to the original question, we now know what the dryer did that gave a sock a
negative charge. Assuming the sock was electrically neutral to start—it had zero net charge—
the dryer must have added electrons to the sock or removed protons from the sock or both.
These transfers of charge upset the sock’s charge balance and gave it a negative net charge.
In keeping with our convention regarding conserved quantities, all unsigned references
to charge in this book imply a positive amount. For example, if the dryer gave charge to a
jacket, we mean it gave a positive amount of charge to that jacket. We follow this same
convention with money: when you say that you gave money to a charity, we assume that
you gave a positive amount.
Finally, Franklin’s charge-naming scheme was brilliant in concept but unlucky in execution. Although it reduced the calculation of net charge to a simple addition problem, it
required Franklin to choose which type of charge to call “positive” and which to call “negative.” Unfortunately, his seemingly arbitrary choice made electrons, the primary constituents of electric current in wires, negatively charged. By the time physicists had recognized
the mistake, it was too late to fix. Scientists and engineers have had to deal with negative
amounts of charge flowing through wires ever since. Imagine the awkwardness of having
to carry out business using currency printed only in negative denominations!
Check Your Understanding #1: In Charge of Opening Gifts
The gift you are about to unwrap is electrically neutral. You tear off the clingy wrapper and find that
it has a large negative charge. What charge does the gift itself have, if any?
Answer:

It has a large positive charge equal in amount to the wrapper’s negative charge.

Why: Since charge is a conserved physical quantity, the wrapper and gift must remain neutral
overall even after you separate them. The wrapper’s negative charge must be balanced by the gift’s
positive charge.

Coulomb’s Law and Static Cling
Although your sock and shirt pull together strongly when they’re only inches apart, you can
put on your shirt and go to the movies without fear of being attacked by your sock from the
other side of town. Evidently, the forces between charges weaken with distance.
Over two centuries ago, French physicist Charles-Augustin de Coulomb 2 studied
electrostatic forces experimentally and determined that the forces between two electric
charges are inversely proportional to the square of their separation (Fig. 10.1.2). For example, doubling the separation between your shirt and sock reduces their attraction by a factor
of four, which explains your uneventful night out on the town.

2 In 1781, after a career
as a military engineer in
the West Indies, French
physicist Charles-Augustin
de Coulomb (1736–1806)
returned to his native Paris
in poor health. There he
conducted scientific
investigations into the
nature of the forces
between electric charges
and published a series of
memoirs on the subject
between 1785 and 1789.
His research came to a
close in 1789 when he
was forced to leave Paris
because of the French
Revolution.

270

CHAPT ER 10 Electricity

(a)

+

+

(b)

Coulomb’s experiments also showed that the forces between electric charges are proportional to the amount of each charge. That means that doubling the charge on either your shirt
or your sock doubles the force each garment exerts on the other. Finally, changing the sign of
either charge turns attractive forces into repulsive ones or vice versa. If both garments were
either positively charged or negatively charged, they’d repel instead of attracting.
These ideas can be combined to describe the forces acting on two charges and can be
written as a word equation:

+ +
Fig. 10.1.2 The
electrostatic forces between
two charges increase
dramatically as they become
closer. As the distance
separating two positive
charges decreases by a
factor of 2 between (a) and
(b), the forces those two
charges experience increase
by a factor of 4.

force =

Coulomb constant · charge1 · charge2
(distance between charges) 2

,

(10.1.1)

in symbols:
F=

k · q1 · q2
r2

,

and in everyday language:
When there are enough like charges packed close together on your hair,
it’ll stand up.
The force on charge1 is directed toward or away from charge2, and the force on charge2 is
directed toward or away from charge1.
This relationship is called Coulomb’s law, after its discoverer. The Coulomb constant
is about 8.988 × 109 N ∙ m2/C2 and is one of the physical constants found in nature. Consistent with Newton’s third law, the force that charge1 exerts on charge2 is equal in amount
but oppositely directed from the force that charge2 exerts on charge1.

COULOMB’S LAW
The magnitudes of the electrostatic forces between two objects are equal to the Coulomb constant times the product of their two electric charges divided by the square of
the distance separating them. If the charges are like, then the forces are repulsive. If
the charges are opposite, then the forces are attractive.

In addition to protecting you from distant charged socks, this relationship between
electrostatic forces and distance gives rise to another intriguing feature of laundry static:
charged clothes can cling to objects that are electrically neutral! For example, a negatively
charged sock can stick to a neutral wall.
The origin of this attraction is a subtle rearrangement of charges within the wall. Even
though the wall has zero net charge, it still contains both positively and negatively charged
particles. When the negatively charged sock is near the wall, it pulls the wall’s positive
charges a little closer and pushes the wall’s negative charges a little farther away (Fig.
10.1.3). Although each individual charge shifts just a tiny distance, the wall contains so
many charges that together they produce a dramatic result. The wall develops an electric
polarization—it remains neutral overall but has a positively charged region nearest the
sock and a negatively charged one farthest from the sock.
The wall’s positive region attracts the sock, while its negative region repels the sock.
Although you might expect those two opposing forces to balance, Coulomb’s law says
otherwise. Since electrostatic forces grow weaker with distance, the sock is attracted more
strongly to the nearer positive region than it is repelled by the more distant negative region.
Overall, there is a net electrostatic attraction between the charged sock and the polarized
wall, so the sock clings to the wall!

Static Electricity
(a)

(b)

+
–
– +
–
+
–
+
–
+ –
+ +
–

–
–
–
–
–

(c)
+

+
+
+
+
+ +
– –

–
–
–
–

– –

+
– –
–
+
– +
+
+
–
+
+
– –

–
–
–
– –
–

Fig. 10.1.3 (a) A neutral wall contains
countless positive and negative charges. (b) As a
negatively charged sock approaches the wall, the
positive charges move toward it and the negative
charges move away from it. (c) The polarized
wall continues to attract the sock and holds it
in place.

Check Your Understanding #2: Wrapper Recycling
After opening your gift, you try to throw away its negatively charged wrapper. However, the wrapper
keeps returning to your hand. What attracts it to your electrically neutral hand?
Answer:
charge.

Its negative charge polarizes your hand and is then attracted to your hand’s nearby positive

Why: Although your hand is neutral, its charges rearrange in response to the nearby wrapper’s negative charge. Positive charge in your hand shifts toward the wrapper and attracts it.

Check Your Figures #1: Moving Out
You have two positively charged balls, each of which is experiencing a force of 1 N away from the
other. If you halve the distance separating the balls, what force will each exert on the other?
Answer:

4 N.

Why: According to Coulomb’s law, the force on each charge varies inversely with the square of their
separation. By halving that separation, you increase the electrostatic force by a factor of 4.

Transferring Charge: Sliding Friction or Contact?
While it’s clear that the dryer transfers charge between the clothes, why does that charge
move and what determines which garments gain charge and which lose it?
You might suppose that sliding friction is responsible for the transfer—that the dryer
rubs the clothes together and somehow wipes charge from one garment to the other. After
all, friction seems to help you charge a balloon as you rub it through your hair or against a
wool sweater. However, be careful—there are other cases of charge transfer that don’t
involve rubbing at all. For example, the plastic wrap you remove from a store package can
acquire a charge no matter how careful you are not to rub it against its contents. And an
antique car can build up enough charge to give you a nasty shock even when its pale rubber
tires never skid across the pavement.
Charge transfer is less the result of rubbing than it is of contact between dissimilar surfaces. When two different materials touch one another, a few electrons normally shift from
one surface to the other. That transfer results from the chemical differences between the two
touching surfaces and the associated change in an electron’s potential energy when it shifts.
In effect, some surfaces are “hungrier” for electrons than others, and whenever two dissimilar surfaces touch, the hungrier surface steals a few electrons from its “less hungry” partner.
The physics behind this theft has to do with chemical potential energy, energy stored
in the chemical forces that bind together a material’s constituent atoms and electrons. To
hold onto its electrons, a surface reduces their chemical energies to less than zero, meaning
that it would take additional energy to free those electrons from the surface. However, some
surfaces reduce the electron chemical potential energies more than others and thus bind
their electrons more tightly. If an electron on one surface can reduce its chemical potential
energy by shifting to the other surface, it will accelerate toward that “hungrier” surface and
eventually stick there. You can picture the electron as “rolling downhill” from a chemical
“valley” on one surface to an even deeper valley on the other surface.

271

272

CHAPT ER 10 Electricity

This transfer of electrons is self-limiting. As electrons accumulate on the lower
energy surface, they begin to repel any electrons that try to follow and the transfer process
soon grinds to a halt. It stops altogether when the electrons reach equilibrium—when the
forward chemical force an electron experiences is exactly balanced by the backward electrostatic force. The transfer won’t resume until you bring fresh uncharged surface regions
into contact.
That’s where rubbing enters the picture. Rubbing involves lots of surface contact and
almost endless opportunities for charge transfer between those surfaces. As clothes tumble
about in the dryer, touching one another and often rubbing, some fabrics steal electrons and
become negatively charged, while other fabrics lose electrons and become positively charged.
That said, you should be aware that the details of contact charging are messy. For
starters, the surfaces that actually touch one another are neither chemically pure nor free of
microscopic defects. Although it’s generally true that whichever fabric binds electrons
most tightly is the one most likely to develop a negative net charge, surface contamination
and defects can change the outcome radically. Even your choice of laundry detergent may
affect the fabric’s surface chemistry and thus how it charges. Furthermore, water molecules
cling to most surfaces and influence the contact charging process. Finally, while we’ve
concentrated on the exchange of electrons, it’s also possible for certain surfaces to exchange
ions, that is, electrically charged atoms, molecules, or small particles, along with electrons
and acquire net charges as a result.
Check Your Understanding #3: Sticky Tape
When you peel a piece of adhesive tape off a glass window, you find that the tape is attracted toward
the spot it left behind. How did the tape and glass acquire electric charges?
Answer: While the tape and glass were in contact, charge was unevenly distributed between their
surfaces. Removing the tape merely made that imbalance more obvious.
Why: The tape and glass have different chemical affinities for electrons and become oppositely
charged whenever they touch. In fact, the tape’s stickiness itself comes from electrostatic attraction.

Separating Your Clothes: Producing High Voltages
The dryer stops, and you take out your favorite shirt. It has several socks clinging to it,
so you begin to remove them. As you separate the garments, they crackle and spark.
Their attraction is obviously due to opposite charges, but why does separating them make
them spark?
To answer that question, let’s think about energy as you pull the negatively charged
sock steadily away from the positively charged shirt. Since the sock would accelerate
toward the shirt if you let go, you are clearly exerting a force on the sock. And because that
force and the sock’s movement are in the same direction, you are also doing work on the
sock. You are transferring energy to it.
That energy is stored in the electrostatic forces; the shirt and sock accumulate electrostatic potential energy. Electrostatic potential energy is present whenever opposite charges
have been pulled apart or like charges have been pushed together. With the negatively
charged sock now far from the positively charged shirt, both attraction and repulsion contribute to the electrostatic potential energy—opposite charges are separated on the two
garments, and like charges are assembled together on each garment.
The total electrostatic potential energy in the shirt and sock is the work you did to
separate them. However, that potential energy isn’t divided equally among the individual
charges on these garments. Depending on their locations, some charges have more electrostatic potential energy than others and are therefore more important when it comes to
sparks. In recognition of those differences, we need a proper way to characterize the electrostatic potential energy available to a charge at a particular location. The measure we’re

Static Electricity

seeking is voltage, the electrostatic potential energy available per unit of electric charge at
a given location, or
voltage =

electrostatic potential energy
.
charge

Voltage is a difficult quantity to conceptualize because you can’t see charge or sense
its stored energy. To help you understand voltage, let’s use a simple analogy. In this analogy, the role of charge will be played by water and the role of voltage will be played by
pressure. Where voltage is high, visualize water at high pressure. Where voltage is low,
picture water at low pressure. Just as water tends to flow from a higher pressure to a lower
pressure, so charge tends to flow from a higher voltage to a lower voltage.
This analogy works well because both voltage and pressure measure the energy per unit
of something. Voltage is the electrostatic potential energy per unit of charge and pressure is the
pressure potential energy per unit of volume (see Section 5.2). Both water at high pressure and
charge at high voltage are loaded with energy per unit and likely to do something exciting!
Since the SI unit of energy is the joule and the SI unit of electric charge is the coulomb,
the SI unit of voltage is the joule per coulomb, more commonly called the volt (abbreviated
V). Where the voltage is positive, (positive) charge can release electrostatic potential
energy by escaping to a distant neutral place, where the voltage is zero. Charge at positive
voltage is analogous to pressurized water, which can release pressure potential energy by
flowing into the open air. Where the voltage is negative, charge needs energy to escape to a
distant neutral place, where the voltage is zero. Charge at negative voltage is analogous to
water at less than atmospheric pressure, which needs energy to flow out into the open air.
In addition to the voltage ↔ pressure analogy, we can also draw a voltage ↔ altitude
one. In this second analogy, charges at high voltage are like bicyclists at high altitude. Just
as charges tend to flow from a higher voltage to a lower voltage, so bicyclists tend to roll
from a higher altitude to a lower altitude. In this analogy, altitude plays the role of voltage
and gravitational potential energy plays the role of electrostatic potential energy. The bicyclists release gravitational potential energy as they roll downhill from a mountain, and they
need energy to climb uphill from a valley.
Returning to those clothes, you’ll find that each point on the shirt or sock has its own
voltage. You can determine that voltage by taking a tiny amount of positive charge at that
point and moving it to a distant neutral place, where the voltage is zero. The point’s voltage
is simply the electrostatic potential energy the charge releases during that trip divided by
the amount of its charge. If the point you examine is on the positively charged shirt, you’ll
measure a large positive voltage—probably several thousand volts. If it’s on the negatively
charged sock, pulling positive charge away from that point will require considerable work,
so you’ll measure a large negative voltage—probably negative several thousand volts.
Whether positive or negative, these large or “high” voltages tend to cause sparks.
We’ll look at the physics of sparks and discharges soon, but you can already see why
oppositely charged clothes spark as you separate them: that’s when the high voltages
develop. As long as your sock is clinging tightly to your shirt, there isn’t much electrostatic
potential energy available. But as soon as you begin to separate them, watch out!
Check Your Understanding #4: High-Altitude Voltage
Although any cloud may contain opposite charges, only the violent updrafts inside thunderheads are
able to separate those charges and produce lightning. Why does such separation lead to lightning?
Answer: That separation takes work, which appears as electrostatic potential energy in the separated charges. The positively charged regions of the thunderhead acquire huge positive voltages, and
the negatively charged regions acquire huge negative voltages.
Why: When opposite charges are near each other, they don’t necessarily have much electrostatic
potential energy per charge and the voltages may be small. Separating those charges to great distances dramatically increases their stored energy and produces high voltages.

273

274

CHAPT ER 10 Electricity

Accumulating Huge Static Charges

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Charge
storage
sphere
Rubber
belt
Belt charger
and motordriven pulley

Fig. 10.1.4 Static
electricity can be produced
by mechanical processes.
In this Van de Graaff
generator, a moving rubber
belt transfers negative
charges from the base to
the shiny metal sphere.
This negative charge
creates dramatic sparks as
it returns through the air
toward the positive charge
it left behind.

We’ve seen that touching two different materials together causes a small transfer of charge
from one surface to the other and that separating those oppositely charged surfaces produces elevated voltages and perhaps sparks. However, the quiet crackling and snapping of
items in your laundry basket is nothing compared to the miniature lightning bolts you can
unleash after walking across a carpet on a dry winter day, stepping out of an antique car, or
playing with a static generator. To get a really big spark, you need to separate lots of charge,
and that usually requires repeated effort.
Walking across a carpet is just such a repetitive process. Each time your rubber-soled
shoe lands on an acrylic carpet, some (positive) charge shifts from the carpet to your shoe.
Although the transfer is brief and self-limiting, you now have a little extra charge on your
shoe. When you lift that shoe off the carpet, you do work on its newfound charge and your
shoe’s voltage surges to a high positive value. High-voltage charge tends to leak from one
place to another, and the shoe’s charge quickly spreads to the rest of your body. By the time
your foot lands again on a fresh patch of carpet, the shoe has given away most of its charge
and is ready to begin the process all over again.
Each time your foot lands on the carpet, it picks up some charge. Each time it lifts off
the carpet, that charge spreads out on your body. By the time you finally reach for the doorknob, you are covered with charge and have an enormous positive voltage. As your hand
draws close to the doorknob, it begins to influence the doorknob’s charges—pulling the
doorknob’s negative charges closer and pushing its positive charges away. You are polarizing the doorknob.
As we saw while separating your freshly laundered sock from your shirt, oppositely
charged objects that are close but not touching can have both large electrostatic potential
energies and strong electrostatic forces. That’s the situation here. The closer your hand
gets to the doorknob, the stronger the electrostatic forces become until finally the air itself
cannot tolerate the forces and a spark forms. In an instant, most of your accumulated electrostatic potential energy is released as light, heat, and sound. And that doesn’t include
any screams.
As good as walking is at building up charge, though, an antique car is even better. Its
pale rubber tires gather negative charge when they touch the pavement and develop large
negative voltages as they roll away from it. This charge migrates onto the car body so that,
after a few seconds of driving, the car accumulates enough charge to give anyone who
touches it a painful shock. Collecting tolls used to be hazardous work! Fortunately, modern
tires are formulated to allow this negative charge to return safely to the pavement, so now
cars rarely accumulate much charge. Instead, most shocks associated with cars now come
from sliding across the seat as you step in or out.
While cars try to avoid static charging, some machines deliberately accumulate separated charge to produce extraordinarily high voltages. The most famous of these static
machines is the Van de Graaff generator (Fig. 10.1.4). It uses a rubber belt to lift positive or
negative charges onto a metal sphere until the magnitude of that sphere’s voltage reaches
hundreds of thousands or even millions of volts.
A typical classroom Van de Graaff generator uses a motor-driven rubber belt to carry
negative charges from its base to its spherical metal top. Once inside the sphere, the belt’s
negative charges flow outward onto the sphere’s surface, where they can be as far apart as
possible. There they remain until something releases them.
Suspended at the top of a tall, insulating column, the Van de Graaff generator’s
sphere can accumulate an enormous negative charge. You may hear the motor struggling
as it pushes the belt’s negative charges up to the sphere, a reflection of how much negative voltage the sphere is developing. Eventually it releases its negative charge via an
immense spark.
Even without sparks, the Van de Graaff generator is an interesting novelty. If you isolate yourself from the ground and touch the metal sphere while it’s accumulating negative

Static Electricity

charges, some of those negative charges will spread onto you as well. If your hair is long
and flexible, and permits the negative charges to distribute themselves along its length, it
may stand up, lifted by the fierce repulsions between those like charges.
Check Your Understanding #5: Stop the Presses!
The paper in some printing presses moves through the rollers at half a kilometer per minute. If no
care is taken, dangerous amounts of static charge can accumulate on parts of the press. How does
the moving paper contribute to that charging process?
Answer: Contact between dissimilar materials puts charge on the paper, which then carries that
charge with it to isolated parts of the press. Enough charge can accumulate on those parts to be
dangerous.
Why: Nonconductive paper is an excellent transporter of electric charge. Once the paper picks
up a static charge by touching a dissimilar material, it can carry that charge with it as it moves
through the press. Not surprisingly, printing presses use various tools to suppress this static
charging.

Controlling Static Electricity: Fabric Softeners
and Conditioners
Now that we’ve seen what static electricity is and how to produce it, we’re ready to see how
to tame it. Static cling, flyaway hair, and electrifying handshakes aren’t everyone’s cup of
tea. The basic solution to static charge is mobility; if charges can move freely, they’ll eliminate static electricity all by themselves. Opposite charges attract, so any separated positive
and negative charges will join up as soon as they’re allowed to move.
Materials such as metals that permit free charge movement are called electrical conductors. Those such as plastic, hair, and rubber that prevent free charge movement are
called electrical insulators. Since charge movement eliminates static electricity, our troubles with static electricity stem mostly from insulators. If you wore metal clothing, you
wouldn’t have static problems with your laundry.
The simplest way to reduce static electricity is to turn the insulators into conductors.
Even slight conductors, ones that just barely let charges move, will gradually get rid of any
accumulations of separated charge. That’s one of the main goals of fabric softeners, dryer
sheets, and hair conditioners. They all turn insulating materials—fabrics and hair—into
slight electrical conductors. The result is the near disappearance of static electricity and all
its fashion inconveniences.
How these three items work is an interesting tale. They all employ roughly the same
chemical: a positively charged detergent molecule. A detergent molecule is a long molecule
that is electrically charged at one end and electrically neutral at the other end. Its charged
end clings electrostatically to opposite charges and is chemically “at home” in water. Its
neutral end is oil-like, slippery, and “at home” in oils and greases. This dual citizenship is
what makes detergents so good for cleaning.
While it might seem that positively and negatively charged detergent molecules would
clean equally well, that’s not the case. Since cleaning agents shouldn’t cling to the materials they’re cleaning, it’s important that the two not have opposite charges. Fabrics and hair
generally become negatively charged when wet—another example of a charge shift when
two different materials touch—so negatively charged detergent molecules clean much better than positively charged ones.
Positively charged detergents are still useful, however, although you mustn’t apply
them until after you’ve cleaned your clothes or hair. Because they cling so well to wet
fibers, these slippery detergent molecules will remain in place long after washing and give
fabrics and hair a soft, silky feel. They’ll also allow those materials to conduct electricity,
albeit poorly, so as to virtually eliminate static electricity!

275

276

CHAPT ER 10 Electricity

This conductivity is due principally to their tendency to attract moisture. Water is
a slight electrical conductor and damp surfaces allow charges to move around. That’s
why moist air decreases static electricity. By making fabrics and hair almost imperceptibly damp, the positively charged detergents allow separated charges to get back
together and do away with static hair problems and laundry cling. That’s why they’re
the main ingredients in fabric softeners, dryer sheets, hair conditioners, and even many
antistatic sprays.

Check Your Understanding #6: No Lightning at Work
The conveyor belts used to move flammable materials often have metal threads woven into their
fabric. Why are such conducting belts important for fire safety?
Answer: An insulating conveyor belt can separate enormous amounts of charge, leading to high
voltages, sparks, and possibly fire. A conductive belt can’t carry charge with it as it moves, so no
charge accumulates.
Why: When an insulating belt has charge on its surface, that charge must move with the belt. However, charges are mobile in a conductive belt and don’t normally move with it.

SECTION 10.2
Top document
feeder
Document
glass
Document
output tray
Lens
Toner reservoir
Photoconductor belt
Computer
forms basket
Rollers

Xerographic Copiers
Control
console
Power on/off
switch
Top output tray
Side document
feeder
Side output tray
Paper tray 1

Questions to Think About: How could you use static electricity to position black powder on a sheet of paper? How would
you put that static electricity on the paper? For characters to
appear on the sheet, how should its static electricity be distributed? In a copier, what should light do to the static electricity to produce a copy of the original? How can a device
spray static electricity onto a surface?

Finisher
Paper tray 2

The days of carbon paper and mimeograph machines are long
gone. What modern office could operate without a xerographic
copier? Advertisements for copiers are everywhere, and
although each manufacturer claims to make the best copiers,
that’s mostly just salesmanship. In reality, all xerographic copiers are based on the same principles, discovered in 1938 by
Chester Carlson. In this section, we’ll examine xerographic
copiers and the ideas that make them possible.

Experiments to Do: To get a feel for how a copier works, cut a
small sheet of paper into tiny squares, about 1 mm on a side.
Put the squares on a table and suspend a thin plate of clear
plastic above them, a few millimeters away. The top of a clear
plastic box will do. Now run a plastic comb through your hair
or against a sweater several times and touch it to the top of the
plastic plate. Squares of paper will leap off the table and stick
to the plastic plate. What’s holding the squares against the
plastic? If the paper were black, how could you form letters on
the surface of the plastic?

Xerography: Using Light to Print Copies
The image that a xerographic copier prints on a sheet of paper begins as a pattern of tiny
black particles or toner on a smooth, light-sensitive surface. The copier uses static electricity and light reflected from the original document to arrange this toner on the surface
and then carefully transfers the toner to the paper (Fig. 10.2.1). Invented in 1938 by
Chester Carlson 3 , this process is basically our old friend static electricity doing something useful.
At the heart of the xerographic copier is a thin, light-sensitive surface made from a
photoconductor, a normally insulating material that becomes a conductor while exposed
to light. Although the darkened photoconductor can keep positive and negative charges
apart, these charges quickly draw together when light hits the photoconductor (Fig. 10.2.2).

Xerographic Copiers

Fuser

Original
Transfer
charger

Flashlamps

Charge
erase
lamp

Paper
Cleaner
Charge
erase
lamp

Precharger
Photoconductor
belt
Real
image
Toner

Lens
Fig. 10.2.1 This xerographic copying machine uses a photoconductor belt to form black-and-white
images of an original document. The copying process begins with the precharger, which coats the
photoconductor with charge. The optical system then forms a real image on a flat region of the
photoconductor belt, producing a charge image. After the charge image picks up toner particles, the
first charge erase lamp eliminates the charge image and weakens the toner’s attachment to the belt.
The toner is then transferred and fused to the paper.

That flexibility allows light from the original document to determine the pattern of static
electricity on the photoconducting surface and consequently the placement of toner on the
piece of paper.
Each copying cycle begins in the dark with the copier spraying negative charges onto
its photoconductor. On the other side of the photoconductor is a grounded metal surface—
grounded in the sense that it’s electrically connected to Earth so that charges are free to
flow between the two. As negative charges land on the open surface of the photoconductor,
they attract positive charges onto the metal surface beneath it. When the charge-spraying
process is complete, the open surface of the photoconductor is uniformly coated with negative charges while the underlying metal surface is uniformly coated with positive charges
(Fig. 10.2.3a).
After this precharging, the copier uses a lens to cast a sharp image of the original
document onto the photoconducting surface. We’ll examine lenses and the formation of
images when we study cameras in Chapter 14. For now, what matters is that light hits the
photoconductor only in certain places, corresponding to the white parts of the original
document.
There are two standard techniques for exposing the photoconductor to light. Some
copiers illuminate the whole original document with the brilliant light of a flash lamp and
cast a complete image onto a flattened portion of a photoconductor belt. In other copiers,
a moving lamp or mirror illuminates the original a little at a time and the image is cast as
a moving stripe on a rotating photoconductor drum. Either way, charges move through any
regions of the photoconductor that are exposed to light, leaving these regions electrically
neutral (Fig. 10.2.3b). The result is a charge image, a pattern of electric charge on the
photoconductor’s surface that exactly matches the pattern of ink on the original document
(Fig. 10.2.3c).

277

3 Impoverished as a
youth, American inventor
Chester F. Carlson
(1906–1968) supported
his family by washing
windows and cleaning
offices after school. His
work in a print shop as a
teenager started him
thinking about copying
and he began to experiment with electrophotography. After attending
Caltech (the California
Institute of Technology),
he worked for Bell
Laboratories but was laid
off during the Depression.
While attending law
school, he continued his
experiments and invented
the xerographic copying
process in 1937–1938.
Development of commercial copiers was slow, and
it wasn’t until 1960 that
the Haloid Xerox
Corporation produced its
first successful copier,
Model 914. Carlson
became extremely wealthy
but gave most of his
money away anonymously.

(a)

Dark

– – – – – –

+ + + + + +
Photoconductor
Light
(b)

–

–
–
–
–
+ + + – +
+
+
Photoconductor
Fig. 10.2.2 (a) In the
dark, a photoconductor is an
electrical insulator so that
separated electric charges
on its surfaces remain there
indefinitely. (b) When the
photoconductor is exposed
to light, it becomes an
electrical conductor and the
opposite electric charges
soon join one another.

278

CHAPT ER 10 Electricity

Negative corona wire
Photoconductor
–
Metal
(a) – –
–––––––––– – – – – – – – ––

Velocity
+++++++++++++++++++

Light
(b)

–

––

–

Light

––––––––––

––––
–

+++++++++++++++++++

(c)

–

–––––––

–––

+

+++++++

+++

Toner
(d) +

(e)

+

+
+

+
+ + + +

+

+
+ + +

–

–––––––

–––

+

+++++++

+++

+

+ + + + +

+ + +

–

–––––––

–––

+

+++++++

+++

+

+ + + + +

Light
(f)

–
–

(g)

–

–
–

–

–

–

+ + +

–
–

–

+

+++++++

+++

+

+ + + + +

+ + +

Negative corona wire

–
– –
–––––––––– – – – – – – – – –

(h)

+

+ + + + +

Paper

+ + +

–––––––––– – – – – – – – – –

(i)

+

+ + + + +

Paper

+ + +

Heater

Fig. 10.2.3 The
photoconductor is first
coated (a) with a uniform
layer of negative charge.
Exposure to light (b) erases
some charge to form a
charge image (c). The
charge image attracts (d)
positively charged toner
particles (e). The charge
image is erased (f) to
release the toner particles
(g). The toner is transferred
to the negatively charged
paper (h) and fused to the
paper with heat (i).

To develop this charge image into a visible one, the xerographic copier exposes
the photoconductor to positively charged toner particles (Fig. 10.2.3d). This toner is a
fine, insulating plastic powder containing a colored pigment, usually black. Applying
toner to the photoconductor must be done gently, and it’s often accomplished with
the help of Teflon-coated iron balls. These tiny balls are held together in long filaments
by a rotating magnetic shaft, so that the shaft resembles a spinning brush with extraordinarily soft bristles. These bristles wipe toner particles out of their storage tray
and onto the photoconductor. Contact with the Teflon leaves the toner particles positively charged, so they stick to the negatively charged portions of the photoconductor
(Fig. 10.2.3e).
The photoconductor now carries a black image of the original document, an image that
the copier must transfer to the paper. Before attempting that transfer, the copier first weakens the photoconductor’s grip on the toner by exposing it to light from a charge erase lamp.
This light eliminates the photoconductor’s charge (Fig. 10.2.3f) and leaves the positively
charged toner particles clinging only loosely to its surface (Fig. 10.2.3g).
The copier then transfers the toner image to a blank sheet of paper by pressing that
paper lightly against the photoconductor while spraying negative charge onto the paper’s
back (Fig. 10.2.3h). The positively charged toner is attracted to the negatively charged
paper, and the two leave the photoconductor together. The copier then heats and presses the
copy, permanently fusing the toner onto the paper (Fig. 10.2.3i). Once the image has been
transferred to the paper, the copier cleans its photoconducting surface in preparation for the
next copy; a second charge erase lamp eliminates any remaining charge, and a brush or
squeegee mops up any residual toner.
With that introduction to xerography, you can already explain many things about copiers. For example, while fixing a copier jam, you may find that you have removed unfinished
copies—ones bearing toner images that haven’t yet been fused onto the paper. The toner of
an unfused copy comes off on your hand because it’s held in place only by electrostatic
forces. When you replace the toner cartridge in a personal copier, in addition to adding new
toner, you’re also installing a new precharge system, photoconductor drum, and toner
applicator (Fig. 10.2.4).
However, we’ve glossed over three important physics issues. Two we’ll leave for later
chapters: why a photoconductor becomes conducting when exposed to light (Chapter 13,
Light), and how a lens projects an image of the document onto the photoconductor (Chapter 14, Optics and Electronics). The third issue is relevant now, and so we’ll examine it
carefully—how the copier sprays charges onto surfaces.

Check Your Understanding #1: Sticky Copies
When the copies emerge from a xerographic copier, they tend to stick to things and attract lint. What
causes this effect?
Answer: The charge that was placed on the paper to attract the toner isn’t always removed completely. Moreover, the toner itself is charged.
Why: The final transfer process, lifting the toner particles from the photoconductor to the paper, is
done by charging the paper, and some of this charge remains on the paper when it leaves the copier.
Copier transparencies are particularly clingy because plastic retains charge so well.

Discharges and Electric Fields
At the start of the copy cycle, the xerographic copier coats its photoconducting surface
uniformly with electric charges. Because this precharging process is done in the dark,
while the surface is an electrical insulator, the charges must be sprayed onto it like paint.
The copier’s charge sprayer is a corona discharge, a gentle sustained spark that forms in
the air near a needle or fine wire that’s kept at high voltage.

Xerographic Copiers

It’s a type of discharge, a flow of electric charge through a gas. Air is normally an
insulator because its atoms and molecules are neutral and can’t convey charge from one
place to another. However, by seeding air liberally with individual charged particles, the
copier manages to turn that air into a conductor and then to produce a discharge in it.
How does the copier seed the air with charges and produce its discharge? And how does
it use that discharge to coat its photoconducting surface? To answer those questions, we
need to know more about electrostatic forces and voltages, and about a related concept,
electric fields.
Because free charges are hard to come by in the air, the copier begins with just a few
charged particles and uses them to generate more. The idea is simple: the copier uses electrostatic forces to accelerate those initial charges to enormous speeds and lets them smash
into air’s neutral particles. When hit hard enough, a neutral air particle breaks into oppositely charged fragments and thus adds two more free charges to the air. These new charges
join the mix, accelerating, colliding, and breaking up still more air particles. A cascade of
collisions ensues, and the air “breaks down,” transforming from an insulator to a conductor.
The copier then uses this conducting air to spray the photoconductor with charges.
Where do those initial charges come from? Surprisingly, they’re already there, the
products of cosmic rays and natural radioactivity! Every cubic centimeter of ordinary air
contains almost 2000 charged particles, roughly half positive and half negative. Considering that this same volume of air contains almost 3 × 1019 neutral particles, that’s not many
charges. But it’s enough to get the discharge started.
To parlay those initial charges into the vast numbers it needs, the copier must accelerate them aggressively. The neutral air particles are so densely packed that it’s difficult for
the charged ones to pick up much speed before they hit something and slow down. To give
each initial charge a good shot at breaking the first neutral particle it hits, the copier must
accelerate that charge very quickly.
The copier accelerates its charges using strong electrostatic forces. Up until now,
we’ve associated electrostatic forces with pairs of charges, each charge pushing or pulling
on the other. As long as there are only a handful of charges in a given situation, the individual electrostatic forces on a particular charge can be added together to obtain the overall
electrostatic force on that charge. However, in the copier’s wires and discharge, there are so
many individual charges that adding up their forces is virtually impossible. We need some
other way to characterize the overall electrostatic force on a particular charge.
Instead of thinking about the many interactions between one particular charge and all the
other charges around it, we can view the electrostatic force on our charge as the result of its
one interaction with something local: an electric field, an attribute of space that exerts an
electrostatic force on a charge. The surrounding charges create the electric field and that electric field pushes on our charge. The electrostatic force on our charge depends on the charge’s
location in space and time, so the value of the electric field also depends on space and time.
The electric field is an example of a field, a structure that associates a physical quantity
with each point in space and time. The term field suggests another structure that extends
across space and time—a field of growing wheat. Since the length of the wheat stalks
depends on where and when you look, stalk length is a field. Moreover, in windy weather,
the direction of those wheat stalks also depends on where and when you look, so the stalks
are actually vectors and form a vector field, a structure that associates a vector quantity
with each point in space and time. The electric field is also a vector field; at each point, its
magnitude is the amount of electrostatic force it exerts per unit of electric charge and its
direction is the direction in which it pushes a positive charge.
Figure 10.2.5a illustrates the electric field of a motionless positive charge. Each white
dot represents a point in space and time, and the red arrow passing through that dot represents the electric field at that point. The direction of the arrow indicates the direction of
the field, and its volume is proportional to the field’s magnitude. Also shown are the field’s
effects on two test charges, idealized positive charges that have no electric fields of their
own and thus no influence on their surroundings.

279

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Fig. 10.2.4 This
xerographic copier places
the photoconductor drum,
toner supply, and a corona
wire inside a disposable
cartridge. After the
paper passes through the
cartridge, toner is fused
onto its surface and it
leaves the copier.

280

CHAPT ER 10 Electricity

Fig. 10.2.5 (a) The
electric field of a
motionless positive charge,
represented by red arrows
at positions indicated by
white dots. Each field
vector points away from
the positive charge and its
magnitude is proportional
to one over the square
of the distance from the
charge. Each of two test
charges experiences an
electrostatic force equal
to the test charge’s charge
times the electric field at
its position. (b) The electric
field of a motionless
negative charge.

(a)

(b)

Electrostatic force
Test charge

Test charges don’t really exist, but they’re useful conceptual tools for examining electric fields. In the present case, the central positive charge’s electric field pushes each test
charge away from the positive charge with an electrostatic force that is inversely proportional to the distance from the positive charge. When the central charge is negative (Fig.
10.2.5b), its electric field is reversed and that field pushes each test charge toward the
central charge.
From this new perspective, the electrostatic force on a charge is exerted by the electric
field itself, not by the source of the electric field. That electrostatic force is equal to the
charge times the electric field at the charge’s position. We can write this relationship as a
word equation:
electrostatic force = charge · electric field,

(10.2.1)

in symbols:
F = qE,
and in everyday language:
Charged lint accelerates quickly in a region full of static electricity,
where the electrostatic force is in the direction of the electric field. Note that a particle
carrying a negative amount of charge (an electron) experiences a force opposite the electric
field. The SI unit of electric field is the newton per coulomb (abbreviated N/C).
At present, the electric field may seem like an unnecessary fiction. In later sections,
however, we’ll see that the electric field is much more than just a new way of thinking about
the forces between charges. That’s because the electric field truly exists in space, independent of the charges that produce it. In fact, electric fields are often created by things other
than charges and can influence things other than charges as well.
The copier employs a very strong electric field to “break down” the air so that it can
operate its discharge. That field accelerates charges so rapidly that collision cascades
occur and fill the air with free charges. Unfortunately, you can’t sense electric fields
directly, so it’s hard to visualize a strong one. We’ll work on that problem, but for now just
remember that strong electric fields can initiate discharges in air. That’s how thunderstorms produce lightning!

Xerographic Copiers

Check Your Understanding #2: Medical Electrons
A medical linear accelerator uses a strong electric field to accelerate electrons forward and give them
enormous kinetic energies. These high-energy electrons enter the patient and kill cancer cells. In
which direction does the accelerator’s electric field point?
Answer:

It points backward, away from the patient.

Why: Since electrons are negatively charged, they accelerate in the direction opposite to the field.
Since the accelerator must push the electrons forward, toward the patient, its field must point away
from the patient.

Check Your Figures #1: Lint Floats
A piece of charged lint refuses to fall because an electric field is exactly supporting its weight. If the
lint weighs 10−8 N and has a positive charge of 10−11 C, what electric field is supporting it?
Answer:

The lint is supported by an electric field of 1000 N/C in the upward direction.

Why: The electric field is equal to the force it exerts divided by the charge, or 10−8 N divided by
10−11 C. It must point upward to support the positively charged lint against the downward pull of
gravity.

Conductors and Voltage Gradients
A copier’s precharging system uses the gentle corona discharge that develops in the strong
electric field just outside a fine high-voltage wire. This discharge ferries charges to the
photoconductor surface and coats it uniformly. To understand why a strong electric field
exists outside a fine high-voltage wire and why the discharge it produces is “gentle,” we
need some background. Let’s start by looking at electric fields inside and outside electrical
conductors.
Consider the simplest conducting object—a solid metal ball. If you release some identical positive charges inside that ball (Fig. 10.2.6a), what happens to them? Because they
repel one another, those charges accelerate outward and move apart. In fact, they’d leave
the ball altogether if they weren’t chemically bound to its metal. After spending a moment
or two ridding themselves of extra electrostatic potential energy, principally as thermal
energy, the charges settle down in stable equilibria on the ball’s surface (Fig. 10.2.6b). At
its equilibrium point, the outward electrostatic force that each charge experiences from its
fellow charges is perfectly balanced by the inward chemical force it experiences from the
metal. The net force on it is zero.
At equilibrium, each charge has also minimized its total potential energy. After all, it
can’t stop accelerating until there is no direction in which it can move to lower its potential
energy further. What’s amazing about how the charges arrange themselves on the ball’s
surface is that each one ends up with the same total potential energy. That’s because if one
of them had less total potential energy than the rest, the other charges would accelerate
toward it to lower their total potential energies as well!
Since the only potential energy that significantly affects charges in our small homogeneous ball is electrostatic potential energy, every charge in our ball has essentially the same
electrostatic potential energy. Because voltage is the electrostatic potential energy per unit
of charge, equal potential energies on equal charges means equal voltages—the entire ball
has a single, uniform voltage! In our voltage ↔ altitude analogy, this observation is analogous to the fact that, at equilibrium, the water level in a swimming pool has a single uniform altitude.
Because of the ball’s perfect symmetry, charges in equilibrium are spread evenly on its
surface. Had we chosen a less symmetric conducting object, such as the copier’s fine metal
wire, charges in equilibrium would not be spread so evenly. Nonetheless, those charges
would still be on the outside of the object, and it would still have a single uniform voltage.

281

282

CHAPT ER 10 Electricity

Fig. 10.2.6 (a) When like charges are
placed inside a conducting sphere, they
repel one another and accelerate toward
the sphere’s surface. (b) When those
charges have settled in equilibrium on the
sphere’s surface, the sphere has a single,
uniform voltage and zero electric field
inside it. Outside the sphere, the voltage
decreases toward zero and there is an
electric field.

(a)

(b)

Electric ﬁeld

1000 volts

Voltage
0 volts

VOLTAGE AND CHARGE ON A CONDUCTING OBJECT
With its charges at equilibrium, a homogeneous conducting object has a single uniform
voltage and the net charge anywhere in its interior is zero.

Given a conducting object’s charges in equilibrium on its surface, we can make one
more remarkable observation: the electric field inside that object is zero! To see why, let’s
place a test charge inside the object. Putting a real charge inside the object would upset the
equilibrium, and that charge would be pushed toward the surface. A test charge, however,
has no electric field of its own and doesn’t influence its surrounding; it leaves the other
charges in equilibrium and merely responds to the existing electric field. Because the voltage is uniform throughout the object, the test charge’s electrostatic potential energy doesn’t
depend on its position and it therefore can’t reduce its electrostatic potential energy by
moving. It doesn’t accelerate, so it must be experiencing zero electrostatic force and zero
electric field.

ELECTRIC FIELD IN A CONDUCTING OBJECT
With its charges at equilibrium, a homogeneous conducting object has zero electric
field in its interior.

Although the voltage is uniform in and on the copier’s fine conducting wire, it varies
rapidly with position outside that wire (Fig. 10.2.6b). Accompanying this large spatial variation in voltage is a strong electric field, officially called a voltage gradient. You can think
of a spatial variation in voltage as a “slope” in the voltage. In our voltage ↔ altitude analogy, a voltage gradient is analogous to an altitude gradient, the slope of an ordinary hill.

Xerographic Copiers

Just as water accelerates swiftly down a steep slope toward a lower altitude, so (positive)
charge accelerates swiftly down a large voltage gradient toward a lower voltage. Both are
examples of the accelerations toward lower potential energy that we first examined in
Chapter 2. In our voltage ↔ pressure analogy, a voltage gradient is analogous to a pressure
gradient and charge accelerates toward lower voltage in the same way that water accelerates toward lower pressure.
Since both electric fields and voltage gradients cause charges to accelerate, it shouldn’t
surprise you to learn that a voltage gradient is an electric field. Although we’ll uncover a
second source of electric fields in the next chapter, we’ll treat a voltage gradient and an
electric field as equivalent for now. Their relationship can be written as a word equation:
electric field = voltage gradient =

voltage drop
,
distance

(10.2.2)

in symbols:
E = Gradient(V),
and in everyday language:
Charges rush down steep drops in voltage, much as bicycles rush down steep
drops in hill height,
where the electric field points in the direction of the most rapid voltage decrease.
This relationship gives us a second way to look at an electric field. In addition to being
the electrostatic force exerted per unit of charge, electric field is also the voltage drop
per unit of distance. The SI unit of electric field therefore has a second form: the volt per
meter (abbreviated V/m). The volt per meter is exactly the same unit as the newton per
coulomb. As an example of an electric field produced by a voltage drop, consider the top of
a normal 9-V battery. With its two terminals separated by just 0.005 m and a voltage drop
of 9 V between them, the space between those terminals contains an electric field of about
1800 V/m, pointing toward the negative terminal.
Check Your Understanding #3: Don’t Get Out of a Hot Car!
During a thunderstorm, a lightning strike places a huge static charge on your car. Why don’t you
notice this charge as long as you remain inside the car?
Answer: The accumulated charge is all on the outside of the conducting car, so it will affect you
only if you step outside and offer it a conducting path to the ground.
Why: Since the car body is an electrical conductor and its charges are in equilibrium, the car has a
uniform voltage and there is no electric field inside the car. Outside the car, however, there is a substantial electric field. If your body provides a conducting path to the ground, that electric field will
push charges through you and you will experience a shock. Similarly, if electric power lines ever fall
on your car, stay inside the car to avoid a potentially lethal shock.

Check Your Figures #2: Riding the Field
An electric field pushes charged particles through the tube of a fluorescent lamp, allowing it to produce light. To operate properly, a typical fluorescent tube needs an electric field of about 100 V/m.
If the average voltage difference between the two ends of a tube is 120 V, how long can that fluorescent tube be?
Answer:

It can be about 1.2 m (4 ft).

Why: With a voltage difference of 120 V between its ends and a length of 1.2 m, the tube’s electric
field will be 120 V divided by 1.2 m, or about 100 V/m. This result explains why so many fluorescent
lamps in the United States are about 1.2 m (4 ft) long.

283

284

CHAPT ER 10 Electricity
Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Fig. 10.2.7 These
two metal spheres are
1 cm apart. When their
difference in voltage is
about 30,000 V, the air
between them breaks down
and forms a spark.

Fine Wires and High Voltages: Corona Discharges
Ordinary air breaks down in an electric field of about 3 × 106 V/m, or, in customary units,
about 30,000 V per centimeter. At that field, free charges accelerate so rapidly that a cascade of charge-freeing collisions suddenly transforms air from a nearly perfect insulator
into a reasonably good conductor.
You can produce such a strong field all by yourself. On a dry winter day, you can coat
yourself with positive charges and raise your voltage to about 30,000 V simply by scuffing
your rubber-soled shoes across an acrylic carpet. As you then approach a grounded doorknob at 0 V, the voltage difference between the doorknob and your hand will be 30,000 V.
When your hand is about 1 cm from the doorknob, the electric field will reach 30,000 V per
centimeter and the air will break down with a brilliant spark (Fig. 10.2.7).
Because your hand and the doorknob are similar in size and shape, the voltage
changes smoothly between them (Fig. 10.2.8a). It varies steadily from 0 V on the doorknob to 30,000 V on your hand, so the voltage gradient or electric field is nearly uniform.
When two objects differ significantly in size, however, the larger object dominates voltages in the space between them. For example, if you hold a long pin in your hand as you
approach the doorknob, the doorknob will control the voltage most of the way to the pin
and nearly all the increase in voltage will occur just outside the pin’s point (Fig. 10.2.8b).
Rather than being uniform, the voltage gradient or electric field will be strongest near
that point.
(a)

30,000 volts

Uniform
electric
ﬁeld

0 volts

30,000 volts
Voltage
0 volts
(b)

Sharp pin
Strong electric ﬁeld
30,000 volts

0 volts

Weak electric
ﬁeld
30,000 volts
Voltage
0 volts
Fig. 10.2.8 Your voltage is 30,000 V when you reach for the 0-V doorknob. (a) Since your hand and
the doorknob are similar in size, the voltage decreases steadily between them and the electric field is
uniform. (b) When you hold out a pin, the voltage plummets near its sharp point and the electric field
there is extremely strong.

The copier makes good use of this nonuniform field. Its fine high-voltage wire is nearly
surrounded by a much larger metal shroud. The wire is so thin that its influence fades just
a hair’s breadth from its surface and the grounded shroud dominates voltage almost all the
way to the wire. Although the wire’s negative voltage is only −3000 V and it’s about 1 cm
from the shroud, the voltage changes so rapidly in the air just outside this wire that the
electric field there easily exceeds 30,000 V/cm and breaks down the air.
The discharge that forms near the fine wire is a special, self-regulating one—a corona
discharge (Fig. 10.2.9). While most discharges can’t control how many free charges they
produce, a corona discharge automatically maintains a steady production. Because free
charges form only in the strong electric field near its thin conductor, their production rate
is very sensitive to changes in that conductor’s effective thickness. If there are too many
free charges in the air near the conductor, their ability to conduct electricity effectively
thickens the conductor, weakens the electric field, and slows the production of free charges.
The discharge is correcting its own mistake.
Because of this stabilizing effect, the air in a corona discharge maintains a steady electrical conductivity that’s ideal for charging a copier’s photoconductor. However, corona
discharges were common long before copiers. They often occur spontaneously near sharp
points or fine wires at high voltages, leading to charge leakage from power transmission
lines and occasionally producing a glow called St. Elmo’s fire on the masts and rigging of
sailing ships (see 4 ).

285

Courtesy Lou
Bloomfield

Xerographic Copiers

Fig. 10.2.9 The electric
field near this sharp, highvoltage pin is so strong that
it breaks down the air and
forms a corona discharge.
The resulting glow is
produced by air particles
that receive energy from
the discharge.

Check Your Understanding #4: A Safety Pin
You can avoid the shock of static electricity by holding out a sharp needle as you reach for a metal
doorknob or wall. How does that needle protect you from static electricity?
Answer:

The needle emits charge into the air via a corona discharge.

Why: The needle acts as your personal lightning rod. When you are carrying a net electric charge,
some of that charge settles onto the needle. The strong electric field near the needle’s tip initiates a
corona discharge, and much of your accumulated charge leaves through it. This discharge limits your
net electric charge and thus the size of any shock you experience.

Getting Ready to Copy: Charging by Induction
A corona discharge does more than just turn air into a conductor; it also produces an
outward spray of electric charges. Those charges are pushed outward by the electric
field surrounding the corona wire. Since the copier’s corona wire has a negative voltage, the surrounding electric field points toward that wire. Because negative charges
accelerate opposite an electric field, the copier’s corona produces a shower of outgoing
negative charges. They spray onto the photoconducting surface as it moves steadily
past the corona, and the photoconductor thus acquires a uniform coating of negative
charges.
As each negative charge lands, it draws a positive charge onto the grounded metal
surface beneath the photoconductor and the attraction between those two opposite charges
holds them firmly in place. While the photoconductor’s open surface is acquiring its uniform negative charge, the metal layer underneath is acquiring an equivalent positive charge
(Fig. 10.2.3a). This process, whereby a grounded conductor acquires a charge through the
attraction of nearby opposite charge, is called “charging by induction.”
The induced positive charge on the metal side of the photoconductor is important to
the xerographic process for several reasons. First, it lowers the electrostatic potential energy
of the negative charge so that the surface’s negative voltage isn’t as enormous. Second,
without that positive layer nearby, repulsion between like charges would tend to push negative charges on the open surface toward the edges of the photoconductor and distort the
resulting images.

4 Contrary to popular
belief, lightning rods
don’t simply attract
lightning strikes so as to
protect the surrounding
roof. Instead, they
produce corona discharges
that diminish any local
buildups of electric
charge. By neutralizing
the local electric charge,
the lightning rod reduces
the chances that lightning
will strike the house.
Similar devices, called
static dissipaters, are
found near the tips of
airplane wings and protect
planes from lightning
strikes.

286

CHAPT ER 10 Electricity

Most significantly, however, the positive charge layer gives the negative charge layer
somewhere to go when the photoconductor is exposed to light! Wherever light from the
original document turns a patch of the photoconductor into a conductor, the negative and
positive charge layers rush together and cancel. The resulting uncharged portion of the photoconductor subsequently attracts no toner and produces a white patch on the finished copy.
Having come full circle, we can now see how the copier achieves its goal. It uses a
corona discharge to coat a photoconducting surface with negative charge and then selectively erases portions of that charge layer with light from the original document. The
remaining charged patches on the photoconductor attract positively charged black toner,
which is then transferred permanently to the paper.
It’s worth mentioning that, for technical reasons, some copiers precoat their photoconductors with positive rather than negative charges and then use that charge to attract negatively charged toner. These copiers put high positive voltages on their fine wires so that
their coronas spray positive charges.
Check Your Understanding #5: Hot Rod
A thick wire connects the lightning rod on the courthouse steeple to the ground and normally ensures
that the rod is electrically neutral. However, when a negatively charged cloud floats overhead, what
charge does that rod acquire?
Answer:

The rod becomes positively charged.

Why: The lightning rod charges by induction—the cloud’s negative charge attracts positive charge
up the wire and onto the rod. The rod’s sharp point initiates a corona discharge, spraying positive
charge toward the cloud and gradually decreasing the cloud’s charge. In that fashion, the lightning
rod acts to suppress lightning strikes.

(a)

(b)

Capacitors

Metal
plates
0.02 μF

Outside of
capacitor

Insulator
layer

μF

Inside of
capacitor

(c)
Symbol for capacitor

Fig. 10.2.10 (a) A
capacitor is usually a
disk or cylinder with
two protruding wires. Its
capacitance is printed
on its surface. Inside
(b), the wires are connected
to two conducting plates
that are separated by a
thin insulating layer.
(c) In a schematic diagram
of an electronic device, the
capacitor is represented by
two parallel lines.

When it’s in the dark, the copier’s photoconductor system is an example of a capacitor, a
device that stores separated positive and negative charge. Capacitors are common in modern technology, and most consist of two oppositely charged surfaces separated by a thin
insulating layer. To make adding or removing charge easy, those surfaces are usually made
of metals or other electrical conductors (Fig. 10.2.10). The copier’s capacitor, however, has
only one metal surface on its insulating photoconductor layer; the other surface is open and
nonconducting (Fig. 10.2.3a). The copier uses its corona discharge to put charge on that
open surface, and it uses light to remove that charge.
The two conducting surfaces of an ordinary capacitor are often called plates. When one
plate is positively charged and the other is negatively charged, the attraction of opposite charges
on those plates offsets the repulsion of like charges on each plate. The plates thus manage to
store large quantities of separated charge while leaving the overall capacitor electrically neutral.
You can “charge” a capacitor’s plates by transferring (positive) charge from its negative plate to its positive one. Since each charge you move experiences an electrostatic force
in the opposite direction, you must do work on that charge as you push it from the negative
plate to the positive plate. Your work is stored in the capacitor as electrostatic potential
energy, and that stored energy is released when you let the separated charge get back
together. Since (positive) charge has more electrostatic energy on the positive plate than on
the negative plate, the voltage of the positive plate is higher than the voltage of the negative
plate. The voltage difference between plates is proportional to the separated charge on
them; the more separated charge the capacitor is holding, the larger the voltage difference.
This voltage difference also depends on the physical structure of the capacitor. Increasing the surface area of each plate decreases the repulsion of its like charges. Thinning the
insulating layer between the plates increases the attraction of their opposite charges. Both
changes lower the separated charge’s electrostatic potential energy and, consequently, the

Flashlights

287

voltage difference between the plates. The bigger and closer the plates, the less energy it
takes to store separated charge on them.
Changes that allow the capacitor to store separated charge more easily increase its
capacitance, the amount of separated charge the capacitor holds divided by the voltage
difference between its plates. The SI unit of capacitance is the coulomb per volt, also called
the farad (abbreviated F). A capacitor with a farad of capacitance stores an incredible
amount of separated charge, even at a low voltage difference, but a capacitor with a billionth of a farad of capacitance is much more typical. A capacitor’s capacitance is marked
on its wrapper, often in an abbreviated form. A Greek letter μ appearing in front of the F
means millionths of a farad (μF, or microfarads), a letter n appearing in front of the F means
billionths of a farad (nF, or nanofarads), and a letter p appearing in front of the F means
trillionths of a farad (pF or picofarads).
Check Your Understanding #6: Recycling Charges
As you recycle old computer parts, you come across a capacitor and wonder if it has separated charge
in it. How can you tell?
Answer:

If it has separated charge, it will have a voltage difference between its two plates.

Why: If the capacitor contains no separated charge, its two plates will have the same voltage. In
other words, the energy per charge on the two plates will be equal. If the plates store separated
charge, however, their voltages will be different. The plate containing extra positive charge will have
more energy per charge and thus a greater voltage than the plate containing extra negative charge.

Batteries

Contact
spring

–

Switch Magnet

–

Switch
contact

+

Reflector Bulb

Flashlights

+

S E C TIO N 1 0 . 3

There isn’t much to a typical flashlight; you can see the few
parts it has when you open it to replace its batteries. A flashlight isn’t a mechanical device, though; it’s electrical. It contains an electric circuit, and most of its components are
involved in the flow of electricity. To understand how a flashlight works, we need to understand how an electric circuit
works and how electricity carries power from batteries to a
lightbulb or LED. As we’ll see, flashlights aren’t as simple as
they appear.

Questions to Think About: Why are some flashlights brighter
than others? Why is it important that all the batteries point in
the same direction? What is the difference between old batteries and new ones? What makes a flashlight suddenly become
dim or bright when you shake it?
Experiments to Do: Find a flashlight that uses two or more removable batteries. Turn it on. What did the switch do to make the
flashlight produce light? With the flashlight turned on, slowly open
the battery compartment. The lamp will probably become dark.
You should be able to turn the flashlight on and off by opening and
closing the battery compartment. Why does this method work?
Replace the flashlight’s batteries with older or newer ones
and compare its brightness. Turn one or more of the batteries
around backward, and see how that change affects the flashlight. What happens when you put a piece of paper or tape
between two of the batteries? What happens when you carefully clean the metal surfaces of each battery with a pencil
eraser before putting the batteries in the flashlight? Does it
matter whether the flashlight uses a bulb or an LED?

Electricity and the Flashlight’s Electric Circuit
A basic, old-fashioned flashlight has just three components—a battery, a lightbulb, and a
switch—connected together by metal strips. When the switch is on, the strips transfer
energy from the batteries to the bulb. How does energy move through the strips, and why
does the switch start or stop that energy transfer? To answer these questions, we must first
understand electricity and electric circuits, so that’s where we’ll begin.

CHAPT ER 10 Electricity

Switch
+

–

+

–

Bulb Reflector Contact spring

Fig. 10.3.1 A flashlight
contains one or more
batteries, a lightbulb, a
switch, and several metal
strips to connect them all
together. When the switch
is turned on (as shown), the
components in the flashlight
form a continuous loop
of conducting materials.
Electrons flow around this
loop counterclockwise.
(a)

+ 1.5 V –

Switch closed
or “on”

(b)

+ 1.5 V –

Bulb
filament
(hot)

+ 1.5 V –

Switch open
or “off”

+ 1.5 V –

Bulb
filament
(cold)

Fig. 10.3.2 (a) When the
flashlight’s switch is on, it
closes the circuit so that
current can flow continuously
from the batteries, through
the bulb’s filament, and
back through the batteries.
It follows this circuit over
and over again. (b) When
the flashlight’s switch is off,
it opens the circuit so that
current stops flowing.

Switch closed
or “on”

(b)

+ 1.5 V –

(a)
+ 1.5 V –

Bulb
filament
(cold)

When you turn on a flashlight, electricity conveys energy from the batteries to the bulb.
An electric current, a current of electric charges, flows through these components, carrying the energy with it. We’ll examine the exact nature of this current soon; for now, you can
picture it as a steady stream of tiny positive charges following a circular route that takes
them through the batteries, through the bulb, and then back to the batteries for another trip
(Fig. 10.3.1). As long as the flashlight is on, charges flow around this loop, receiving energy
from the batteries and delivering it to the bulb, over and over again. On route, the charges
carry this energy mostly as electrostatic potential energy.
The looping path taken by charges in a flashlight is called an electric circuit.
Because a circuit has no beginning or end, charges can’t accumulate in one place, where
their mutual repulsion would eventually stop them from flowing. Circuits are present in
virtually all electric devices, and they explain the need for at least two wires in the
power cord of any home appliance: one wire carries charges to the appliance to deliver
energy, and the other wire carries those charges back to the power company to receive
some more.
But what role does the switch play in all this? As part of one conducting path
between the batteries and bulb, the switch can make or break the flashlight’s circuit
(Fig. 10.3.2). When the flashlight is on, the switch completes the loop so that charges
can flow continuously around the closed circuit (Fig. 10.3.2a). A closed circuit appears
in Fig. 10.3.3a.
However, when you turn off the flashlight, the switch breaks the loop to form an open
circuit (Fig. 10.3.2b). Although one conducting path still connects the batteries and bulb,
the loop now has a gap in it and can no longer carry a continuous current. Instead, charges
accumulate at the gap and current stops flowing through the flashlight. Since energy can no
longer reach the bulb, it goes dark. An open circuit appears in Fig. 10.3.3b.
There’s one other type of circuit worth mentioning. A short circuit forms when the
two separate paths connecting the batteries to the bulb accidentally touch one another
(Fig. 10.3.4). This unintended contact creates a new, shorter loop around which the charges
can flow. Because the bulb is expected to extract energy from the charges, it’s designed to
impede their flow and to convert their electrostatic potential energy into thermal energy and
light. This opposition to the flow of electricity is called electrical resistance. Since the
shortened loop offers little resistance, most of the charges flow through it, bypassing the
bulb. The bulb dims or goes out altogether.
Since the bulb is the only part of the flashlight that’s designed to consume electric
energy, a short circuit leaves the charges without a safe place to get rid of their electrostatic
potential energy. They deposit it dangerously in the batteries and the metal paths, making
them hot. Since short circuits can start fires, flashlights and other electric equipment are
designed to avoid them.

Fig. 10.3.4 When an
unwanted conducting path
allows current to bypass
the flashlight’s filament,
it forms a short circuit.
Because it has no proper
place for electrons to
deposit their energy, the
short circuit becomes hot.

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

288

Fig. 10.3.3 When the switch is on (a), current flows around the closed circuit and carries power from
the battery to the lightbulb. When the switch is off (b), no current flows through the open circuit.

Flashlights

Many modern flashlights use one or more light-emitting diodes (LEDs) in place of
the old-fashioned bulb. However, an LED is more complicated than a bulb, and operating several LEDs at once complicates the flashlight’s electric circuit. For simplicity,
we’ll start with a single bulb in our flashlight and replace it with one or more LEDs later
in this section.
Check Your Understanding #1: Cutting the Power
If you remove just one of the wires from an automobile’s battery, the vehicle will not start at all. Why
doesn’t the other wire supply any energy?
Answer: Removing a single wire from the battery breaks the circuit and prevents a steady flow of
electric current through the car’s electric system.
Why: Neither the battery nor the rest of the car can accumulate charges indefinitely. Without one
wire to carry charges from the battery to the car and a second wire to return those charges from the
car to the battery, accumulation will occur and charge movement will stop.

The Electric Current in the Flashlight
Each of the tiny charged particles flowing through the flashlight’s circuit carries with it just
a single elementary unit of electric charge and a miniscule amount of electrostatic potential
energy. However, because those charges flow in astonishing numbers, they convey a considerable amount of energy per second—the quantity we know as power (see Section 2.2)
and measure in watts (abbreviated W). The bulb needs a certain amount of power to keep
its filament glowing brightly, and you can determine how much power is reaching the bulb
by multiplying the number of elementary charges passing through the bulb each second by
the amount of energy each one delivers.
There are too many elementary charges to count, though. You’ll do much better to measure the circuit’s current, that is, the amount of charge passing a particular point in the circuit
per unit of time. The SI unit of current is the coulomb per second, more commonly called the
ampere (abbreviated A). One ampere corresponds to 1 C of charge passing by the designated
point each second. One coulomb is roughly 6.25 × 1018, or 6,250,000,000,000,000,000, elementary charges, so even a 1-A current involves a tremendous flow of elementary charges.
Using electric current instead of counting charges, you can determine how much
power is reaching the bulb by multiplying that current by its electrostatic energy per coulomb—the quantity we already know as voltage. For example, a current of 2 A (2 C/s) at a
voltage of 3 V (3 J/C) will bring 6 W of power (6 J/s) to the bulb. Brighter flashlights
involve larger currents, greater voltages, or both.
Current has a direction, pointing along the route of positive charge flow. When you
turn on the flashlight in Fig. 10.3.1, charge flows around the circuit clockwise, from the
battery chain’s positive terminal, through the bulb’s filament, through the switch, and
into the battery chain’s negative terminal. However, now it’s time to address an awkward issue: the positive charges that flow clockwise around this circuit are fictitious. In
reality, the electric current is carried by negatively charged electrons heading in the
opposite direction!
As mentioned before, this issue dates back to Franklin’s unfortunate choice of which
charge to call positive and which to call negative. By the time scientists discovered the
electron and realized that these negatively charged particles carry currents in wires, current
had already been defined as pointing in the direction of positive charge flow. Since it was
far too late to make current and electron flow point in the same direction, scientists and
engineers simply pretend that current is carried by fictitious positive charges heading in the
current’s direction.
This fiction actually works extremely well, as illustrated by a simple example. When
negatively charged electrons flow to the right through a neutral piece of wire, the wire’s

289

290

CHAPT ER 10 Electricity

(a)

–

–
Before

++

– –
After

(b)

+

+

Before

++

right end becomes negatively charged and its left end becomes positively charged (Fig.
10.3.5a). But exactly the same thing would happen if a current of fictitious positively
charged particles were to flow to the left through that same piece of wire (Fig. 10.3.5b).
Without sophisticated equipment, you can’t tell whether negative charges are flowing to the
right or positive charges are flowing to the left because the end results are essentially indistinguishable.
We, too, adopt this fiction and pretend that current is the flow of positively charged
particles. In this and subsequent chapters, we’ll stop thinking about electrons and imagine
that electricity is carried by positive charges moving in the direction of the current. There
are only a few special cases in which the electrons themselves are important, and we’ll
consider those situations separately when they arise.

– –
After

Fig. 10.3.5 A current
of negatively charged
particles flowing to the
right through a piece
of wire (a) can’t easily
be distinguished from
a current of positively
charged particles flowing to
the left (b). The end result
of both processes is an
accumulation of positive
charge on the left end
of the wire and negative
charge on its right end.

Check Your Understanding #2: Don’t Touch That Pipe
A walk across wool carpeting in rubber-soled shoes has left you covered with negative charges. If you
bring your hand near a large piece of metal, the negative charges will leap through the air as a spark
to reach the metal. Which way is current flowing in this spark?
Answer:

The current flows from the metal toward your hand.

Why: Because current is defined as the flow of positive charges, it points in the direction opposite
the flow of negative charges. Thus, the current flows from the metal toward your hand. These charges
move only briefly because there is no circuit. For the charges to move continuously, they would have
to be recycled and a circuit would be essential.

Batteries
While a battery is basically a portable source of electric power, here are two other interesting ways to think of it. The first is rather abstract: a battery is a type of pump. It “pumps”
charge from low voltage to high voltage, much as a water pump pumps water from a low
altitude to a high altitude or as a second water pump pumps water from low pressure to high
pressure. Once again, our voltage ↔ altitude and voltage ↔ pressure analogies are helpful.
Each pump moves something against its natural direction of flow, pushing it forward and
doing work on it in the process. The battery increases a charge’s electrostatic potential
energy by pushing it up a voltage gradient. The first water pump increases water’s gravitational potential energy by pushing it up an altitude gradient. The second water pump
increases water’s pressure potential energy by pushing it up a pressure gradient.
The second perspective on batteries is more mechanical: a battery is a chemically
powered machine. It uses chemical forces to transfer charges from its negative terminal to
its positive terminal. As positive charges accumulate on the battery’s positive terminal, the
voltage there rises, and as negative charges accumulate on the battery’s negative terminal,
the voltage there drops. Since the battery does work transferring charges from low voltage
to high voltage, it is converting its chemical potential energy into electrostatic potential
energy in these separated charges.
A battery’s rated voltage reflects its chemistry, specifically the amount of chemical
potential energy it has available for each charge transfer. As the voltage difference between
its terminals increases, so does the energy required for each charge transfer. Eventually, the
chemicals can’t do enough work on a charge to pull it away from the negative terminal and
push it onto the positive terminal, so the transfers stop. The battery is then in equilibrium—
the electrostatic forces opposing the next charge transfer exactly balance the chemical
forces promoting it. A typical alkaline battery reaches this equilibrium when the voltage of
its positive terminal is 1.5 V above the voltage of its negative terminal. Lithium batteries,
with their more energetic chemistries, can achieve voltage differences of 3 V or more.
When you turn on the flashlight, you upset its equilibrium by allowing charges to leave
the battery’s positive terminal for its negative terminal. With fewer separated charges now

A lead-acid automobile battery provides 12 V between its negative terminal and its positive terminal.
It actually contains six individual batteries, connected in a chain. How much voltage does each individual battery provide?
Answer:

Each individual battery provides 2 V.

Why: The voltages of the individual batteries add, so it takes six 2-V batteries to yield a 12-V chain.
If one of the batteries becomes weak, through damage, loss of fluid, or consumption of its chemical
potential energy, the voltage of the chain will drop below 12 V. Pushing current backward through a
lead-acid battery recharges it.

–

0.0 V
+

–

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Fig. 10.3.6 When
two 1.5-V batteries are
connected in a chain, their
voltages add so that the
chain’s positive terminal
has a voltage that is 3.0
V higher than the chain’s
negative terminal. If the
chain’s negative terminal
is at 0 V, then the chain’s
positive terminal is at 3.0 V.

– –

+

++

Fig. 10.3.8 When one
battery in a chain of
three is reversed, the
reversed battery’s voltage
is subtracted from the sum
of the others. The chain’s
positive terminal has a
voltage only 1.5 V higher
than its negative terminal.
The reversed battery
recharges.

0.0 V

1.5 V

0.0 V

Fig. 10.3.7 A 9-V battery
actually contains six small
1.5-V cells, connected in
a chain. Positive charges
that enter the chain at the
battery’s negative terminal
pass through all six cells
before arriving at the
battery’s positive terminal.

+

Check Your Understanding #3: Car Batteries

291

1.5 V

+

1.5 V

on its terminals, the battery’s voltage difference decreases slightly and it begins pumping
charges again. That renewed charge transport replenishes the terminals’ separated charges
and opposes any further decrease in the battery’s voltage. In this manner, a 1.5-V alkaline
battery maintains a nearly steady voltage difference of 1.5 V between its terminals, whether
its flashlight is on or off.
That alkaline battery is powered by an electrochemical reaction in which powdered
zinc at its negative terminal reacts with manganese dioxide paste at its positive terminal.
This reaction resembles controlled combustion. In effect, the battery “burns” zinc to obtain
the energy it needs to pump charges from its negative terminal to its positive terminal.
However, as the battery consumes its chemical potential energy, its ability to pump charges
diminishes. When its chemicals are nearly exhausted, the battery’s increasing disorder
reduces its voltage. An aging battery can pump less current than a fresh one, and it provides
that current with less voltage. Ultimately, less power reaches the flashlight’s bulb and it
goes dim.
Most flashlights use more than one battery. When two alkaline batteries are connected
together in a chain, so that the positive terminal of one battery touches the negative terminal
of the other, the two batteries work together to pump charges from the chain’s negative
terminal to its positive terminal (Fig. 10.3.6). Each battery pumps charges until its positive
terminal is 1.5 V above its negative terminal, so the chain’s positive terminal is 3.0 V above
its negative terminal. Because charges never leave the flashlight’s circuit, only relative
voltages matter in that circuit. We’ll find it convenient to ignore the flashlight’s absolute
voltages and define the voltage of the battery chain’s negative terminal to be 0 V (Fig.
10.3.6). With that choice, the voltage of its positive terminal becomes 3.0 V.
The more batteries in the flashlight’s chain, the more energy a charge receives overall
and the more the voltage will increase from the chain’s negative terminal to its positive
terminal. A flashlight that uses six alkaline batteries in its chain has a positive terminal that
is 9 V above its negative terminal. A typical 9-V battery actually contains a chain of six
miniature 1.5-V batteries, arranged so that their voltages add up to 9 V (Fig. 10.3.7).
If you reverse one of the batteries in a chain, the reversed battery will extract energy
from any charge passing through it (Fig. 10.3.8). While the chain may still pump charge
from its negative terminal to its positive terminal, its overall voltage will be reduced
because, instead of adding 1.5 V to the chain’s overall voltage, the reversed battery will
subtract that amount. If the chain has three batteries, two will add energy to the charge
while the third will subtract it, and the chain’s overall voltage will be only 1.5 V.
As the reversed battery extracts energy from the charges passing through it, at least
some of that extracted energy is converted into chemical potential energy. The reversed
battery is recharging! Battery chargers follow that concept, pushing current backward
through a battery—from its positive terminal to its negative terminal—to restore the chemical potential energy in a rechargeable battery. However, normal alkaline batteries are
“nonrechargeable,” meaning that they turn most of the recharging current’s energy into
thermal energy instead of chemical potential energy. Nonrechargeable batteries may overheat and explode during recharging.

3.0 V

Flashlights

–

292

CHAPT ER 10 Electricity

Bulbs and Metal Strips
Whereas a battery gives charges electrostatic potential energy by pushing them up a voltage
gradient, a bulb releases that electrostatic potential energy by letting charges slide down
another voltage gradient. Those two devices make a perfect pair: the battery provides electric power, and the bulb consumes it. The bulb uses this power to heat its tungsten filament
so hot that it glows yellow-white—but how does electricity heat the filament?
Consider a flashlight with two alkaline batteries (Fig. 10.3.9a). The bulb’s filament is
a fine wire, and its two ends are electrically connected to the battery chain’s terminals. With
one end at 3.0 V and the other at 0.0 V, the filament has a voltage gradient across it and
therefore an electric field. How is that possible? While discussing copiers, we observed that
a conductor has a uniform voltage throughout. Isn’t the filament violating that rule?
No, it isn’t. While a conductor has a uniform voltage when its charges are in equilibrium, the charges in the bulb are in equilibrium only when the flashlight is off. When you
switch the flashlight on, you impose a 3.0-V difference between the two ends of the filament and the filament’s charges immediately begin accelerating down the voltage gradient
toward the 0.0-V end.
In our voltage ↔ altitude analogy, it’s as though you suddenly tilted a level field to
create a hill and water that had been lying motionless on that field now accelerated downhill.
However, a better analog to the individual charges that we’re considering at the moment
would be bicyclists. Picture hundreds of bicyclists on a level field that suddenly tilts to form
a hill. All the bicyclists that were at equilibrium on the level field now accelerate downhill.
(a)
Filament
(hot)

Metal strip

0v

3v

olt

olt

s

s

Metal strip

Switch
(on)

Batteries
+ 1.5 V – + 1.5 V –

+

(b)

+
Filam

+

+

s

+
+
Batt

erie

0 volts

s

+

+

+

(c)

alt

itu

de

=0

me

ter

s

al
10 titud
0m e=
ete
rs

Fig. 10.3.9 (a) Current
in a flashlight’s circuit
conveys power from the
batteries to the filament.
(b) Its voltage rises in the
batteries and decreases in
the filament. The filament’s
voltage drop leads to an
electric field that keeps the
charges moving forward at
constant velocity despite
many collisions in the
filament. (c) This behavior
is analogous to bicyclists
pedaling up a smooth hill
and then rolling down
a rough one at constant
velocity.

+

0v
olt

3v

olt

s

ent

Flashlights

If the filament were a perfect conductor of electricity, each charge would accelerate
steadily down the voltage gradient and convert its electrostatic potential energy into kinetic
energy. However, the filament has a large electrical resistance—it significantly impedes the
flow of electric current. Instead of accelerating smoothly from one end of the filament to
the other, each charge bounces its way down the voltage gradient, colliding frequently with
the filament’s tungsten atoms and giving up kinetic energy with each collision (Fig.
10.3.9b). What began as ordered electrostatic potential energy in the charges becomes thermal energy in the tungsten atoms, and the filament glows brightly. Referring again to our
voltage ↔ altitude analogy, picture the bicyclists riding down a rough hill strewn with
rocks and trees (Fig. 10.3.9c). They pick up bruises instead of speed.
What about the metal strips connecting the flashlight’s batteries and bulb? These strips
are excellent conductors, but like all ordinary electrical wires, they’re not quite perfect.
Each strip has a small electrical resistance, so charges can’t coast through it because of
inertia alone. Instead, the charges need a small voltage gradient to keep them moving forward, and they emerge from the strip at a slightly lower voltage than where they entered.
The missing energy has become thermal energy, slightly heating the metal strip. In general,
the less electrical resistance in the strips carrying current to and from the bulb, the less
power is wasted on route and the more power reaches the bulb. That’s why it’s so important
to use thick metal strips or even the flashlight’s metal case in the connections.
A poor connection anywhere in the circuit can spoil this efficient transfer of power. If
there is dirt or grease on a battery terminal or worn materials in the switch, the current will
have to pass through a large electrical resistance and waste power. Improving that connection, either by shaking the flashlight or by cleaning the metal surfaces, will increase the
current flow through the circuit, reduce the wasted power, and brighten the flashlight.

Check Your Understanding #4: You Get What You Pay For
The battery in your car is dead, so you use cheap jumper cables to connect the electric system in your
car to the electric system in your friend’s car. When you try to start your car, too little power reaches
it to start its engine. What’s wrong with those cables?
Answer:

The cables have relatively large electrical resistances.

Why: Starting your car requires a huge current, and the wires supplying that current must not limit
it or waste its energy. Cheap jumper cables have too much electrical resistance to fulfill those requirements. There is no substitute for good, thick jumper cables—they’re worth the extra money.

Voltage, Current, and Power in Flashlights
When you turn on the flashlight, an electric current carries power from its two alkaline
batteries to its bulb. Let’s suppose that a current of 1 A is flowing through the flashlight’s
circuit and take a look at how much power is being transferred.
A bulb consumes electric power because the current passing through it slides down the
voltage gradient and there is a drop in voltage between where the current arrives at the filament and where it leaves the filament. This voltage drop measures the electrostatic potential energy each unit of charge loses while struggling through the filament. Multiplying the
voltage drop by the current passing through the bulb gives you the power consumed by
the bulb. This observation can be written as a word equation:
power consumed = voltage drop · current,
in symbols:
P = V · I,

(10.3.1)

293

294

CHAPT ER 10 Electricity

and in everyday language:
A large electric current dropping from high voltage to low voltage is like the
torrent of water dropping from high to low over Niagara Falls: both release a lot
of power.
Since the voltage drop across the bulb is 3.0 V and the current passing through it is 1.0 A,
it’s consuming 3.0 W of power.
A battery chain produces electric power because the current passing through it is
pushed up a voltage gradient and there is a rise in voltage between where the current
arrives at the battery chain and where it leaves the battery chain. This voltage rise measures the electrostatic potential energy each unit of charge gains while being pumped
through the batteries. Multiplying the voltage gain by the current passing through the
batteries gives you the power provided by the batteries. This observation can be written as
a word equation:
power provided = voltage rise · current,

(10.3.2)

in symbols:
P = V · I,
and in everyday language:
Raising a large current from low voltage to high voltage is like pumping a huge
stream of water from low to high to fight a fire at the top of a skyscraper: both
require a lot of power.
Since the voltage rise across the chain is 3.0 V and the current passing through it is 1.0 A,
it’s providing 3.0 W of power.

Check Your Understanding #5: Current Trends in Music
A large battery powers your portable radio. Current enters the radio through one wire and leaves
through another. Which wire has a higher voltage?
Answer:

The wire through which current enters the radio.

Why: The radio is consuming power, so the current passing through it is experiencing a voltage
drop. The current has a higher voltage when it enters the radio than when it leaves.

Check Your Figures #1: When You Turn the Ignition Key
When you first start your car, its cold engine is difficult to turn and a 200-A current flows through its
starter motor. If there is a voltage drop of 12 V between where the current enters the starter and
where it leaves the starter, how much power is being consumed?
Answer:

2400 W of power is begin consumed.

Why: The voltage drop across the starter motor is 12 V (each coulomb of charge loses 12 J of energy
in passing through it), and the current through it is 200 A (200 C of charge pass through it each
second). We can use Eq. 10.3.1 to determine the power the motor is consuming:
power consumed = voltage drop · current
= 12 V · 200 A = 2400 W.

Flashlights

Check Your Figures #2: When You Turn the Ignition Key Again
When you restart the car, its warm engine is easier to turn and a smaller current of 150 A flows
through the car’s starter motor. The battery is supplying power to this current, and there is a voltage
rise of 12 V between where the current arrives at the battery and where it leaves the battery. How
much power is the battery providing?
Answer:

It is providing 1800 W of power.

Why: The voltage rise across the battery is 12 V (each coulomb of charge gains 12 J of energy in
passing through it), and the current through it is 150 A (150 C of charge pass through it each second). We can use Eq. 10.3.2 to determine the power the battery is providing:
power provided = voltage rise · current
= 12 V · 150 A = 1800 W.

Choosing the Bulb: Ohm’s Law
Our flashlight’s bulb is designed to operate properly with a voltage drop of 3.0 V. Subjected
to that voltage drop, it will carry a current of 1 A and thus consume 3 W of electric power—
just enough to make it glow properly. If you were to use the wrong bulb in this flashlight,
one designed for a different voltage drop, its filament would carry the wrong amount of
current and receive the wrong amount of power. Too much power would quickly burn out
its filament, while too little power would make the filament glow dimly.
The bulb’s filament must clearly match the flashlight, particularly the voltage of the
flashlight’s battery chain. For example, flashlights that use many batteries require bulb filaments that are designed to operate with large voltage drops. Why is the current carried by
a particular bulb filament related to the voltage drop across it, and why do different bulbs
respond differently to a particular voltage drop?
The relationship between current and voltage drop is the result of collisions. Charges
effectively stop each time they crash into metal atoms, so they need the push of an electric
field to keep them moving forward (Fig. 10.3.10). Doubling that electric field doubles each
charge’s average speed and, because the number of mobile charges in the filament is fixed,
also doubles the overall current flowing through the filament. Since the electric field that
propels this current is the filament’s voltage gradient, doubling the voltage drop through the
filament doubles the current as well.
Returning to our voltage ↔ altitude analogy, picture bicyclists riding on extremely
rocky terrain without pedaling. These lazy bicyclists effectively stop each time they crash
into rocks, so they need the push of a slope to keep them moving forward. Doubling the

0 volts

2 volts

+

+

+

3 volts

+

1 volt

Electric field:

Fig. 10.3.10 This filament has
a voltage drop of 3 V between
its two ends. Charges moving
through this filament are pushed
forward by the resulting electric
field. They maintain a constant
speed despite frequent collisions
with tungsten atoms.

295

296

CHAPT ER 10 Electricity

5 German physicist
Georg Simon Ohm
(1787–1854) served as a
professor of mathematics,
first at the Jesuits’ college
of Cologne and then at the
polytechnic school of
Nuremberg. His numerous
publications were
undistinguished, with the
exception of one pamphlet
on the relationship
between current and
voltage. This extraordinary document, written in
1827, was initially
dismissed by other
physicists, even though it
was based on good
experimental evidence and
explained many previous
observations by others. In
despair, Ohm resigned his
position at Cologne, and it
was not until the 1840s
that his work was
accepted. He was finally
appointed professor of
physics at Munich only
two years before his
death.

slope’s altitude gradient—the altitude drop per meter of downhill travel—doubles each
bicyclist’s average speed and, because the number of bicyclists who can fit on the hill at one
time is fixed, also doubles the overall current of bicyclists rolling down the hill. Since the
slope that propels this bicyclist current is the hill’s altitude gradient, doubling the hill height
doubles the current of bicyclists as well.
The influence of filament choice on current flow reflects the different electrical resistances of those filaments. Anything that increases the number of mobile electric charges
across the filament’s width or allows those charges to maintain a higher average speed for a
given voltage drop will decrease the filament’s electrical resistance and increase the current
flowing through it. In fact, electrical resistance is defined as the voltage drop through the
filament divided by the current that arises as a result. Making the filament thicker or shorter
will lower its resistance, as will changing its composition to make collisions less frequent.
Again our voltage ↔ altitude analogy with bicyclists on a hill is helpful. Anything
that increases the number of bicyclists across the hill’s width or allows those bicyclists to
maintain a higher average speed for a given hill height will decrease the hill’s “bicycle
resistance” and increase the current of bicyclists rolling down it. In fact, “bicycle resistance” is defined as the hill height divided by the current of bicyclists it produces. Making
the hill wider or shorter will lower its bicycle resistance, as will changing its rockiness to
make collisions less frequent.
Combining these observations, we see that the current flowing through the filament is
proportional to the voltage drop through it and inversely proportional to the filament’s
electrical resistance, which can be written:
current =

Wire

Wire

(10.3.3)

This relationship is called Ohm’s law, after its discoverer Georg Simon Ohm 5 .
Structuring the relationship this way separates the causes (voltage drop and electrical resistance) from their effect (current flow). However, this equation is often rearranged to eliminate the division. The relationship then takes its customary form, which can be written as a
word equation:

Poor conductor

(a)

voltage drop
.
electrical resistance

voltage drop = current · electrical resistance,

(10.3.4)

in symbols:

Inside of resistor

V = I · R,

(b)

and in everyday language:
Outside of resistor
(c)
Symbol of resistor
Fig. 10.3.11 (a) A
resistor is two wires with
an imperfect conductor of
electricity between them.
(b) It’s usually encased in
a cylindrical shell, with
colored stripes to indicate
its resistance. (c) In a
schematic diagram of an
electronic device, the
resistor is represented by a
zigzag line.

Long, skinny jumper cables have large resistances. When you connect them to
a battery to jumpstart your car, they’ll carry a relatively small current and your
car probably won’t start.
The SI unit of electrical resistance, the volt per ampere, is called the ohm (abbreviated
Ω, the Greek letter omega). Despite its simplicity, Ohm’s law is extremely useful in physics
and electrical engineering. It applies to so many systems that nearly everything is ohmic,
that is, can be characterized by an electrical resistance. Once an object’s electrical resistance is known, the current flowing through it can be calculated from its voltage drop or its
voltage drop can be calculated from the current flowing through it. Devices that obey
Ohm’s law are common in modern technology, often as simple electronic components
known as resistors (Figs. 10.3.11). A resistor carries a current equal to its voltage drop
divided by its resistance, and it experiences a voltage drop equal to the current it carries
times its resistance.

Flashlights

OHM’S LAW
The voltage drop through a wire is equal to the current flowing through that wire times
the wire’s electrical resistance.

Finally, an object’s electrical resistance is typically temperature dependent. Rising
temperature increases the number of mobile charges in an object but also makes them collide more frequently with the jiggling atoms. If the increasing collision frequency dominates, as it does in metals, an object’s resistance increases with temperature. For example,
a filament carries less and less current as it approaches operating temperature, a behavior
that helps it avoid overheating. However, if the increase in mobile charges dominates, as it
does in semiconductors, an object’s resistance decreases with temperature. This explains
why semiconductor-based computer chips carry more and more current as they get hotter
and will self-destruct at excessive temperatures.
Check Your Understanding #6: Skin Protection
Your skin has a much larger electrical resistance than your tissues. If you touch the two terminals of
a battery with your fingers, where is the larger voltage drop—in your skin or in your tissues?
Answer:

The larger voltage drop is in your skin.

Why: The fluids in your body resemble saltwater when exposed to voltages; they conduct current
relatively well. If it weren’t for your skin’s large electrical resistance, even battery voltages would be
capable of pushing large currents through you and might disrupt your heart and other functions.
However, your skin’s high resistance protects you from battery voltages. As long as your skin is dry
and intact, it usually takes higher voltages to push enough current through you to cause injury.

Check Your Figures #3: Light Resistance
Two 3-W flashlight bulbs have different resistances: 3 Ω and 12 Ω. Which bulb is meant to operate
from two 1.5-V alkaline batteries?
Answer:

It’s the 3-Ω bulb.

Why: Equation 10.3.3 indicates that, with the voltage drop of 3 V supplied by the two alkaline
batteries, the 3-Ω bulb will carry:
voltage drop
electrical resistance
3V
=
= 1 A.
3Ω

current =

Equation 10.3.1 then shows that this bulb consumes the specified 3 W:
power consumed = voltage drop · current
= 3 V · 1 A = 3 W.
With a voltage drop of 3 V, the 12-Ω bulb will carry a current of 0.25 A and consume just 0.75 W of
power. It needs a voltage drop of 6 V to consume 3 W.

LED Flashlights: Series and Parallel Circuits
Unfortunately, lightbulbs drain flashlight batteries quickly and burn out at inconvenient
times. Since LEDs are much more energy efficient than bulbs and last almost forever, it’s
no surprise that LED flashlights are rapidly replacing bulb flashlights.

297

298

CHAPT ER 10 Electricity

LEDs are sophisticated semiconductor devices that we’ll examine in Chapter 13. I
have ignored them until now because they’re nonohmic; that is, they don’t obey Ohm’s law
and cannot be characterized by resistance. Instead, an LED conducts zero current when the
voltage drop across it is less than a threshold voltage of about 2–4 V, depending on color,
and it conducts a large, potentially damaging current when the voltage drop is significantly
more than that threshold. Because small changes in voltage drop across the LED dramatically change the current passing through it, the LED is difficult to control on its own. That’s
why an LED is often paired with a resistor.
In a simple LED flashlight, current leaving the positive terminal of the batteries flows
sequentially through a resistor and an LED before returning to the negative terminal of
the batteries (Fig. 10.3.12a). That arrangement, in which the same current flows sequentially through each component, is known as a series circuit. Although all the components
in a series circuit carry the same current, they share the circuit’s overall voltage drop
(Fig. 10.3.12b). To apply the voltage ↔ altitude analogy, a current of charge flowing through
a series of components is like a current of water flowing down a series of waterfalls
(Fig. 10.3.12c).
The overall voltage drop available to the LED flashlight’s power-consuming components is equal to the voltage rise provided by its batteries. Because they are in series, the
resistor and the LED must share that overall voltage drop (neglecting the small voltage
drops in the metal strips and switch). Since they also carry the same current, the resistor’s
ohmic behavior limits the current passing through the entire circuit, including the LED. In
effect, the resistor and LED negotiate—each component takes enough of the overall voltage drop to allow it to conduct the same current as the other component. Following the
negotiation, the voltage drop across the LED is slightly more than its threshold voltage
and the rest of the overall voltage drop is taken by the resistor. The resistor is chosen so
that, when subject to that voltage drop, it conducts the right amount of current to power
the LED properly.
When an LED flashlight has more than one LED, the flashlight must supply each with
current. This is usually done by dividing the current from the batteries into parts and sending one part through each of the LEDs (Fig. 10.3.13a). That arrangement, in which the
current is divided into parts that flow simultaneously through each component, is known as
a parallel circuit. Although each component in a parallel circuit carries its own fraction of
the overall current, all the components experience the same voltage drop (Fig. 10.3.13b). In
the voltage ↔ altitude analogy, a current of charge flowing through components in parallel
is like a current of water flowing down waterfalls in parallel (Fig. 10.3.13c).
In a typical multiple-LED flashlight, each LED is actually paired with a resistor to
regulate its current. The flashlight thus combines parallel and series circuits. Each LED and
its resistor are connected in series, so they carry the same current but share the overall
voltage drop. The multiple LED-resistor pairs are connected in parallel, so they carry separate portions of the circuit’s overall current but experience the same voltage drop.
Check Your Understanding #7: Electric Defrosters
Your car has an electric defroster on its rear window. That defroster consists of 12 thin metal strips
bonded to the inside surface of the glass. All the driver-side ends join together and all the passenger-side ends join together. When you switch on the defroster, current flows from the positive terminal
of the battery to the driver-side end of the defroster and from the passenger-side end of the defroster
to the negative terminal of the battery. Do the individual defroster strips form a series circuit or a
parallel circuit?
Answer:

The defroster strips form a parallel circuit.

Why: Current from the battery’s positive terminal is divided into 12 portions, one for each of the 12
defroster strips. After flowing through the strips, those portions rejoin into a single current to return
to the battery’s negative terminal. Because the strips are connected in parallel, they carry separate
currents but experience the same voltage drop.

Flashlights
(a)
LED

4.5

0v
olt
s

vo
lts

Resistor

+ 1.5 V – + 1.5 V – + 1.5 V –

+

+

(b)

4.5

stor

+
LED

vo
lts

Resi

+

+
+

erie
s

0v

+

Batt

0 volts

olt

s

+
+

+

+

© JasonMichael/Flickr/Getty Images, Inc.

(c)

Fig. 10.3.12 (a) Current in an LED flashlight’s series circuit flows sequentially through the resistor and
LED. (b) The voltage rises in the batteries and drops in the resistor and the LED. Because the resistor
and LED are in series, they carry the same current but share the overall voltage drop. (c) These waterfalls
are in series. The waterfalls carry the same current of water, but they share the overall altitude drop.

Epilogue for Chapter 10
This chapter has dealt with three venues in which charge and electricity play important
roles. In Static Electricity, we introduced the concept of electric charge and discussed the
attractive and repulsive forces that charged particles exert on one another. We studied the
electrostatic potential energies stored in those charge forces and the relationship between
this energy and the voltages of various locations. We learned how different objects acquire

299

300

CHAPT ER 10 Electricity

(a)

(c)
LED

+ 1.5 V – + 1.5 V – + 1.5 V –

+

+

(b)

Resi

4.5

+
LED

vo
lts

stor

+

+
+
olt

s

+
erie

0v

+

Batt

0 volts

s

+

+

+

Fig. 10.3.13 (a) Current in a two-LED flashlight’s parallel circuit divides into two portions that flow
in parallel through the two LEDs, each paired with its own resistor. (b) Because the two LED-resistor
pairs are in parallel, they experience the same voltage drop but share the overall current. (c) These
waterfalls are in parallel. The waterfalls experience the same altitude drop, but they share the overall
current of water.

net charges through contact and how high voltages can be produced by separating large
quantities of opposite charge.
In Xerographic Copiers, we studied electric fields and saw how those fields can be
used to move charges from one place to another. We examined the corona discharges that
form in the strong electric fields around sharp points or thin wires at high voltages. We also
saw how placing a charge on one object can induce an opposite charge on a grounded
object nearby.
In Flashlights, we examined circuits to see how a current of electric charges can transfer power from batteries to a lightbulb. We found that both voltage and current contribute
to this power transfer, and we learned how the bulb’s electrical resistance governs the
power it consumes.

Explanation: Moving Water without Touching It
This experiment uses contact between dissimilar materials to give the comb a net electric
charge. Electrons shift from your hair to the comb, leaving your hair positively charged and
the comb negatively charged. Because the comb is an electrical insulator, its negative
charge remains trapped on its surface for a long time.
As you hold the negatively charged comb near the water stream, the comb attracts
positive charges present in the water and repels negative charges. Because the water conducts electricity somewhat, positive charges can travel down the water stream from the
faucet while negative charges travel the other way. The water thus acquires a net positive
charge in the presence of the negatively charged comb, an example of charging by induction. Since the oppositely charged water and comb attract one another, the water accelerates toward the comb and arcs sideways as it falls.

© Jerry and Marcy Monkman/Aurora Photos, Inc.

4.5

0v
olt
s

vo
lts

Resistor

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations

301

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Static Electricity Works: When clothes tumble about in the dryer, contact between
dissimilar materials transfers negatively charged electrons from one item to the other. As a
result of this contact-charging effect, the various garments acquire net charges, some positive and others negative. When the clothes are subsequently separated, the work done in
pulling them apart becomes electrostatic potential energy and the clothes develop high voltages. High voltages can also develop when you walk across a carpet or drive your car along
the road. Since high voltage tends to push charges into the air as leaks and sparks, static
charging can be a nuisance. You can control it with the help of conducting materials; allowing charge to move spontaneously from high voltage to low voltage prevents large quantities
of separated charge from accumulating so that high voltages can’t develop.
How Xerographic Copiers Work: The photoconductor in a xerographic copier allows light to
control the distribution of electric charge on its surface. This photoconductor is uniformly
precoated with charge by passing it near a corona discharge. An optical image of the original
document is then projected onto this charged photoconductor. Wherever light hits the photoconductor, the surface charge escapes. The result is a charge image on the photoconductor.
Tiny black toner particles, oppositely charged from the unilluminated portions of the photoconductor, are brought near the charge image. These toner particles stick to the charged
portions of the photoconductor, forming a visible image of the document. The toner particles
are then transferred to and fused onto a sheet of paper to create a finished copy.
How Flashlights Work: A flashlight produces light when a current flows through its electric
circuit. This circuit consists of a chain of batteries, a lightbulb, a switch, and several metal
strips, all connected in a continuous loop. The current obtains power as it passes through the
battery, and it releases this power as it passes through the filament of the lightbulb, heating
that filament white hot.
The switch provides a way to control the flow of current in the circuit. When the switch is
off, it breaks the circuit and prevents current from flowing completely around the circuit. Without a steady current to carry power from the batteries to the bulb, the bulb is dark. When the
switch is on, it completes the circuit so that power can reach the bulb and the bulb lights up.

1. Coulomb’s law: The magnitude of the electrostatic force
between two objects is equal to the Coulomb constant times the
product of their two electric charges divided by the square of the
distance separating them, or

force =

Coulomb constant · charge1 · charge2
(distance between charges) 2

.

(10.1.1)

If the charges are like, then the forces are repulsive. If the charges
are opposite, then the forces are attractive.
2. Force exerted on a charge by an electric field: A charge exper-

iences a force equal to its charge times the electric field, or
force = charge · electric field,

(10.2.1)

where the force points in the direction of the electric field.
3. Electric field due to a voltage drop: A voltage drop produces

an electric field equal to that voltage drop divided by the distance over which the drop occurs, or
electric field = voltage gradient =

voltage drop
,
distance

(10.2.2)

where the field points in the direction of the most rapid voltage
decrease.
4. Power consumption: The electric power consumed by a

device is the voltage drop across it times the current flowing
through it, or
power consumed = voltage drop · current.

(10.3.1)

5. Power production: The electric power provided by a device is
the voltage rise across it times the current flowing through it, or

power provided = voltage rise · current.

(10.3.2)

6. Ohm’s law: The voltage drop through an ohmic object is
equal to the current flowing through it times its electrical resistance, or

voltage drop = current · electrical resistance.
This equation does not apply to nonohmic devices.

(10.3.4)

11

Magnetism and
Electrodynamics
ike electricity, magnetism is an important part of daily life. We use it to post notes on the
refrigerator and to figure out which way is north. The story of magnetism wouldn’t be complete,
though, without including electricity. As we’ll see, these two topics are related to one another
through change and motion. For example, moving electric charges give rise to magnetism, and
changing magnetism gives rise to electricity.
In this chapter, we’ll examine magnetism itself, as well as several objects that use the relationships between electricity and magnetism to perform useful tasks. Since the word dynamics covers
change and motion, these relationships are part of a field of physics known as electrodynamics.
Brevity isn’t the only reason for omitting reference to magnetism in the title of this field; the other
reason is that most magnetism is actually produced by electricity. In other words, most magnetism
is actually electromagnetism.

L 

ACTIVE LEARNING
EXPERIMENTS

A Nail and Wire Electromagnet

To explore the relationships between electricity and
magnetism, try building a simple electromagnet. For this
project, you need a large steel nail or bolt, a meter or so
of insulated wire, a fresh 1.5-V AA battery, and
some small steel objects such as paper clips. The wire’s
metal conductor should be at least 0.65 mm in diameter
(22 gauge or larger) to carry the current you’ll send
through it without becoming too hot.

Wind the wire tightly around the nail or bolt to form
a coil. You should complete at least 50 turns of wire, all in
the same direction. The exact number of turns isn’t important, and you can make several layers. Be sure that the
two ends of the wire are still accessible and remove the
insulation from each end so that you can connect them to
the battery.

WARNING

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

The electromagnet that you construct in this experiment will become hot during use.
Be prepared to drop the electromagnet if it becomes uncomfortably hot. Don’t work
near flammable materials.

302

Household Magnets

Now test your electromagnet. Connect one uninsulated end of the coil to each terminal of the battery. You
can either hold the wires on the terminals with your fingers or use tape. A 1.5-V battery can’t give you a shock
unless your skin is broken, but you should be prepared
for the wire to get hot as current flows through it. If it
gets too hot to hold, let go and make sure that the wire
detaches from the battery so that it doesn’t start a fire.
Don’t use a battery larger than AA or the wire may get
dangerously hot.

303

While current is flowing through the wire, the nail
will act as a strong magnet, an electromagnet. Try picking
up steel objects with this electromagnet. As you touch
each object with the nail, it should stick to the nail’s surface. Your electromagnet will temporarily magnetize the
steel object and attract it. What happens when you touch
this magnetized steel object to a second object? What
happens when you stop the flow of electric current
through the coil of the electromagnet? Why does the coil
get hot while current is flowing through it?

Chapter Itinerary
This chapter will examine (1) household magnets and (2)
electric power distribution. In Household Magnets, we look
at the forces that bind magnets to refrigerators and see why
compasses point northward. We also examine electromagnets to explain how electric doorbells work. In Electric
Power Distribution, we see how electricity and magnetism
are used to transport electric power from a distant power

SECTION 11.1

plant to your home and how that electric power differs from
the power supplied by batteries. Although there are many
other magnetic and electromagnetic objects that we encounter daily, these two topics are representative of most of the
basic electromagnetic phenomena. For a more complete
preview, turn ahead to the Chapter Summary and Important
Laws and Equations at the end of the chapter.

Household Magnets
We’re so used to having magnets around that we take
them for granted. Along with being useful, household magnets
also let us experiment with another of the basic forces in
nature. Although we’ll see that magnetism is so intimately
related to electricity that the two are ultimately a single unified
whole, we’ll find it helpful to begin our study of magnetism by
treating it as a separate phenomenon and bring electricity into
the picture gradually.
Questions to Think About: Why do two magnets attract or repel
each other, depending on how they’re oriented? If a magnet is
attracted to two different refrigerators, why don’t those two
refrigerators attract or repel one another? How can two strong
magnets grip one another from opposite sides of your hand?
Why isn’t your hand involved in that magnetic attraction? How
can some magnets be turned on or off using electricity?

How would a family stay organized without refrigerator magnets? How would the doorbell ring if it couldn’t use a magnet
to strike its bells? How would a scout navigate in the woods
without a compass? How would you get cash or charge purchases without magnetic strips on plastic cards?

Experiments to Do: Find two button-type refrigerator magnets—simple cylinders that resemble small hockey pucks. If
you try to stack these magnets, you’ll find that they either
attract or repel one another. How do those forces depend on the
orientations of the magnets? on their separation? See whether
you can float one magnet on top of the other using the repulsive
force. What happens when you let go of the top magnet?
Now hold one of the button magnets near a refrigerator or
another steel object and study the forces that arise. Can you
find a way to make the two objects repel one another? Will a
magnet stick to things that aren’t made of steel? What about
stainless steel?

304

CHAPT ER 11 Magnetism and Electrodynamics

Now find two identical sheet-type refrigerator magnets—
flexible strips that may have advertising printed on their surfaces.
Experiment with their interactions. You’ll find that simply flipping
one over doesn’t change the forces from attraction to repulsion.
Instead, you’ll have to slide the strips across one another. As they
slide, they’ll alternately attract and repel. How is that possible?
Finally, obtain iron powder or make some by filing down a
piece of steel (steel is mostly iron, and they are magnetically

quite similar). Sprinkle some of this powder on your collection
of magnets. Notice that it forms strands that seem to bridge
the gaps between various points on the magnets. What is the
powder bridging? If you sprinkle your powder on a credit card
or magnetic ID card, you’ll find that it also forms bridges. However, those bridges are tiny and spaced at irregular intervals.
Could there be information encoded in these erratically spaced
magnetic features?

Button-Shaped Refrigerator Magnets

(a)
North
South
(b)
North
South
North
South
(c)
North

North

South

South

Fig. 11.1.1 (a) A typical
button magnet has a north
pole on one face and a
south pole on the other. Its
net pole is zero. (b) Slicing
it between its poles or
(c) breaking it through its
poles always yields a pair
of magnets, each with zero
net pole.

1 Since magnetic
monopoles apparently
don’t exist, magnets and
magnetic materials must
obtain their magnetic
poles through other
means. As we’ll see later
in this section, electric
currents are magnetic and
electric current loops act
as magnetic dipoles.
Circulating currents exist
deep within all magnetic
materials and are
responsible for their
magnetism. Some of those
currents are associated
with charged electrons
orbiting atomic nuclei, but
most are associated with
the rotating nature of
electrons, a fundamental
characteristic known as
spin. Every electron is a
tiny magnetic dipole.

Refrigerator magnets come in all shapes and sizes, and some are more magnetically complicated than others. It’s always best to start simple, so we’ll begin with button-shaped magnets.
As you bring two button magnets together, they begin exerting forces on one another.
You’ll find that those forces can be either attractive or repulsive, depending on how the
magnets are oriented, but they always grow weaker with greater distance. Such magnetic
forces resemble the electric ones you encounter while removing clothes from a hot dryer,
but there are at least two important differences. First, reorienting two electrically charged
garments won’t turn their attraction into repulsion or vice versa. Second, no matter how
you arrange two button magnets, you can’t get a magnetic spark to jump from one to the
other. Electricity and magnetism are evidently similar yet different. What’s the story?
Magnetism is a phenomenon that closely resembles electricity. Just as there are two
types of electric charges that exert electrostatic forces on one another, so there are two types
of magnetic poles that exert magnetostatic forces on one another. The word pole serves to
distinguish magnetism from electricity; poles are magnetic, while charges are electric.
The two types of poles are called north and south, and in keeping with this geographical
naming, they’re exact opposites of one another. Both types of poles carry just one physical
quantity: magnetic pole. North poles carry positive amounts of magnetic pole, while south
poles carry negative amounts. It should come as no surprise that like poles repel each other,
while opposite poles attract. Furthermore, the magnetostatic forces between two poles grow
weaker as they move apart and are inversely proportional to the square of the distance
between them. So far, the similarities between electricity and magnetism are striking.
However, we now come to a crucial difference between electricity and magnetism:
while subatomic particles that carry pure positive or negative electric charges are common,
particles that carry pure north or south magnetic poles have never been found. Called magnetic monopoles, such pure magnetic particles may not even exist in our universe. That
cosmic omission explains why there are no magnetic sparks: without monopoles, there is
no magnetic equivalent of an electric charge that can leap from one place to another as a
magnetic current, let alone a magnetic spark.
Although isolated magnetic poles aren’t available in nature, pairs of magnetic poles
are. These pairs consist of equal north and south poles, spatially separated from one another
in an arrangement called a magnetic dipole. Since the two opposite poles have equal magnitudes, they sum to zero and the magnetic dipole has zero net magnetic pole.
A simple button magnet has both a north pole and a south pole, usually on opposite
faces of the button (Fig. 11.1.1a). There are no purely north buttons or purely south buttons.
Amazingly enough, even slicing that button magnet in half won’t yield separated north and
south poles (Fig. 11.1.1b). Instead, new poles will appear at the cut edges and each piece
of the original magnet will end up with zero net pole! Breaking the button magnet in half
(Fig. 11.1.1c) will also produce pieces with zero net pole. For a discussion of why button
magnets always have zero net magnetic pole, see 1 .
We can now explain why two of these magnets sometimes attract and sometimes repel.
With two poles on each magnet, we have to consider four interactions: two repulsive interactions between like poles (north-north and south-south) and two attractive interactions

Household Magnets
Net force

(a)

Fig. 11.1.2 (a) When like poles of two
button magnets are turned toward one
another, the magnets repel. (b) When
opposite poles are turned toward one
another, they attract.

(b)

North

North

South

South
Net force
Net force

South

North

North
Net force

South

between opposite poles (north-south and south-north). Although it might seem that all
these forces should cancel, the distances separating the various poles and therefore the
forces between them depend on the magnets’ orientations. Since the closest poles experience the strongest forces, they dominate. If you turn two like poles toward one another, the
two magnets will push apart (Fig. 11.1.2a). If you turn their opposite poles toward one
another, they’ll pull together (Fig. 11.1.2b). If you tip them at an angle, they’ll experience
torques that tend to twist opposite poles together and like poles apart.
Because there are no monopoles, we’re going to need some imagination to understand
magnetism well. Let’s start with units. Even though we can’t collect a unit of pure north
pole, we can still define such a unit and understand its behavior. The SI unit of magnetic
pole is the ampere-meter (abbreviated A·m). That astonishing choice, an electric unit
appearing in a magnetic unit, foreshadows the profound connections between electricity
and magnetism that we’ll soon encounter.
Just as there is a Coulomb’s law for electric charges, there is a Coulomb’s law for magnetic poles. Coulomb’s magnetic experiments, which were complicated by the fact that he had
to work with magnetic dipoles rather than individual poles, showed that the forces between
magnetic poles are proportional to the amount of each pole and inversely proportional to the
square of their separation. The exact relationship can be written as a word equation:
force =

permeability of free space · pole1 · pole2
4π · (distance between poles) 2

,

(11.1.1)

in symbols:
F=

μ 0 · p1 · p2
4πr 2

,

and in everyday language:
Don’t hold two strong magnetic poles near one another unless you’re prepared
to be pushed around hard as they attract or repel each other.
The force on pole1 is directed toward or away from pole2, and the force on pole2 is directed
toward or away from pole1. The permeability of free space is 4π × 10−7 N/A2. Consistent
with Newton’s third law, the force that pole1 exerts on pole2 is equal in amount but oppositely directed from the force that pole2 exerts on pole1.

COULOMB’S LAW FOR MAGNETISM
The magnitudes of the magnetostatic forces between two magnetic poles are equal to
the permeability of free space times the product of the two poles divided by 4π times
the square of the distance separating them. If the poles are like, then the forces are
repulsive. If the poles are opposite, then the forces are attractive.

305

306

CHAPT ER 11 Magnetism and Electrodynamics

Check Your Understanding #1: Two Halves Make a Whole
You have a disk-shaped permanent magnet. The top surface is its north pole and the bottom surface
is its south pole. If you crack the magnet into two half circles, the two halves will push apart. Why?
Answer: The top surfaces of both halves are still north poles, and the bottom surfaces are still south
poles. The two tops repel, as do the two bottoms.
Why: This puzzling phenomenon, in which a shattered permanent magnet opposes attempts to reassemble it, is an illustration of the potential energy contained in a permanent magnet. The magnet is
a collection of many tinier magnets, all aligned with their north poles together and their south poles
together. Like poles repel one another, so the tiny magnets are difficult to hold together. Given a
chance, the magnet will push apart into fragments. Very strong permanent magnets release so much
potential energy when they break that they practically explode when cracked.

The Refrigerator: Iron and Steel
Two button magnets can push or pull on one another, but what if you have only one? The
easiest way to observe magnetic forces in that case is to hold that single magnet near your
refrigerator or another piece of iron or steel. The magnet is attracted to the refrigerator.
However, if you flip the button magnet over, thinking that it will now be repelled by the
refrigerator, you’ll be disappointed. Although the refrigerator is clearly magnetic, its magnetism somehow responds to the button magnet so that the two always attract.
Actually, the refrigerator’s behavior isn’t all that mysterious. Its steel is composed
of countless microscopic magnets, each with a matched north pole and south pole
(Fig. 11.1.3). Normally those individual magnetic dipoles are oriented semirandomly
(Fig. 11.1.3a), so the refrigerator exhibits no overall magnetism. However, as you bring one
pole of a button magnet near the refrigerator, its tiny magnets evolve in size, shape, and
orientation (Fig. 11.1.3b). Overall, opposite poles shift closer to the button magnet’s pole
and like poles shift farther from the button magnet’s pole. The steel develops a magnetic
polarization and consequently attracts the pole of the button magnet.
This polarization remains strong only as long as the button magnet’s pole is nearby.
When you remove the button magnet, most of the tiny magnets in the steel resume their
semirandom orientations and the steel’s magnetic polarization shrinks or disappears.
When you then bring the button magnet’s other pole close to the refrigerator, its steel
develops the opposite magnetic polarization and again attracts the button magnet’s pole.
No matter which pole or assortment of poles you bring near the refrigerator, its steel will
polarize in just the right way to attract those poles.
N

S

(a)

Fig. 11.1.3 (a) The countless
microscopic magnets in iron or steel
are normally oriented somewhat
randomly. (b) But when a strong
magnetic pole is nearby, those
tiny magnets reorient to attract it.
In soft magnetic materials, this
reorientation is only temporary.
(c) Hard magnetic materials, however,
remain magnetized long after the
external pole has departed.

Balanced domains

(b)

Domain growth

(c)

Magnetized material

Household Magnets

307

If you try this trick with a plastic or aluminum surface, the button magnet won’t stick.
What’s special about steel that allows it to develop such a strong magnetic polarization?
The answer is that ordinary steel, like its constituent iron, is a ferromagnetic material—it
is actively and unavoidably magnetic on the size scale of atoms.
To understand ferromagnetism, we must start by looking at atoms and the subatomic
particles from which they’re constructed: electrons, protons, and neutrons. For complicated
reasons, all those subatomic particles have magnetic dipoles, particularly the electrons, and
the atoms they form often display this magnetism. Despite a tendency for the subatomic
particles to pair up with opposite orientations so that their magnetic dipoles cancel one
another, most isolated atoms have significant magnetic dipoles.
Although most atoms are intrinsically magnetic, most materials are not. That’s because
another round of pairing and canceling occurs when atoms assemble into materials. This
second round of cancellation is usually so effective that it completely eliminates magnetism at the atomic scale. Materials such as glass, plastic, skin, copper, and aluminum retain
no atomic-scale magnetism at all, and your button magnet won’t stick to them. Even most
stainless steels are nonmagnetic.
However, there are a few materials that avoid this total cancellation and thus manage
to remain magnetic at the atomic scale. The most important of these are the ferromagnets,
a class of magnetic materials that includes ordinary steel and iron. If you examine a small
region of ferromagnetic steel, you’ll find that it is composed of many microscopic regions, or
magnetic domains, that are naturally magnetic and cannot be demagnetized (Fig. 11.1.3a).
Within a single domain, all the atomic-scale magnetic dipoles are aligned and together they
give the overall domain a substantial net magnetic dipole.
While common steel always has these magnetic domains, magnetic interactions orient
nearby domains so that their magnetic dipoles oppose one another and cancel. The microscopic magnets balance one another so well that the steel appears nonmagnetic. That’s too
bad; the appliance showroom would be a much more exciting place to visit if the cancellation weren’t so good.
However, when you bring a strong magnetic pole near steel (Fig. 11.1.3b), the individual domains grow or shrink, depending on which way they’re oriented magnetically.
The steel undergoes magnetization and becomes magnetized (Fig. 11.1.3c). The atoms
themselves don’t move during this process; the change is purely a reorientation of the
atomic-scale magnetic dipoles. Domains that attract your button magnet’s pole grow
while those that repel it shrink, and the button magnet sticks to the refrigerator.

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

(a)

(b)

Fig. 11.1.4 (a) Although
these paper clips were
initially unmagnetized, the
pole of a strong permanent
magnet magnetizes
them as a chain. (b)
After the magnetizing
magnet is removed, the
clips retain some of their
magnetization.

308

CHAPT ER 11 Magnetism and Electrodynamics

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Check Your Understanding #2: Chain Links
If you touch the north pole of a permanent magnet to one end of a steel paper clip, the clip’s other
end will become magnetic. What pole will that other end have?
Answer: It will have a north pole.

Fig. 11.1.5 Iron powder
forms bridges between
the magnetic poles of this
plastic sheet magnet.

Why: The paper clip will become magnetically polarized with its south pole nearest the permanent
magnet’s north pole. The other end of the paper clip will have a north pole and will be able to polarize other paper clips. These polarized clips attract one another strongly enough to cling together in a
long chain.

Plastic Sheet Magnets and Credit Cards

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Fig. 11.1.6 Iron powder
discloses the locations of
magnetic poles on this
credit card’s magnetic
strip. Information is stored
by choosing where those
poles are located.

When you remove your button magnet from the refrigerator, the steel returns to its original
nonmagnetic state—it undergoes demagnetization and becomes demagnetized. Well,
almost demagnetized. The demagnetization process isn’t perfect because some of the
domains get stuck. Although magnetic forces within the steel favor a complete return to
apparent nonmagnetism, chemical forces can make it hard for the domains to grow or
shrink. Adjacent domains are separated by domain walls, boundary surfaces between one
direction of magnetic orientation and another. These domain walls must move if the
domains are to change size. However, flaws and impurities in the steel can interact with a
domain wall and keep it from moving. When that happens, the steel fails to demagnetize
itself completely (Fig. 11.1.4). To remove the last bit of residual magnetism from steel, you
must help the domain walls move, typically with heat or mechanical shock.
A soft magnetic material is one that demagnetizes itself easily when all nearby poles
are removed. Chemically pure iron, which has few flaws or impurities, is a soft magnetic
material—easy to magnetize and easy to demagnetize. A hard magnetic material is one
that does not demagnetize itself easily and that tends to retain whatever domain structure is
imposed on it by its most recent exposure to strong nearby poles (Fig. 11.1.3c). Your button
magnet is made from a hard magnetic material!
Like steel, the material in your button magnet is ferromagnetic (or closely related to
ferromagnetic). Unlike steel, however, your button magnet’s domains do not shrink or
grow easily. During its manufacture, the button magnet was magnetized by exposing it to
such strong magnetic influences that its domains rearranged to give it permanent magnetic poles. It now has a north pole on one face and a south pole on the other. Unless you
expose the button to extremely strong magnetic influences or heat it or pound it, it will
retain its present magnetization almost indefinitely. In that respect, the button is a permanent magnet.
Not all permanent magnets are as simple as button magnets. Depending on how they
were magnetized, they can have their north and south poles located in unexpected places
and even have more than one pair of poles. Plastic sheet magnets are a good example of
multiple-pole magnets: each has a repeating pattern of alternate poles along its length. The
exact patterns vary, but most have poles that form alternating parallel stripes. You can find
these stripes by letting them polarize and attract iron powder (Fig. 11.1.5) or by sliding two
identical sheet magnets across one another. The sheets will attract and bind together most
strongly when opposite poles are aligned across from each other. They’ll repel when you
shift one of the magnets so that like poles are aligned.
A hard magnetic material’s ability to “remember” its magnetization can be useful for
saving information. Once magnetized in a particular manner so as to represent a piece of
information, the material will retain its magnetization and the associated information until
something magnetizes it differently. Information retention in hard magnetic materials
forms the basis for most magnetic recording and storage, including the magnetic strips
on credit cards, magnetic tapes, computer disks, and magnetic random access memory
(MRAM) (Fig. 11.1.6).

Household Magnets

Check Your Understanding #3: Now for the Flip Side
If you bring the north pole of a large strong magnet near the north pole of a small weak magnet that
you are holding in place, what will happen to that small magnet?
Answer: Its magnetic poles will interchange.
Why: Even though the small magnet can’t move, its magnetic poles can. When the repulsion between
the two north poles becomes strong enough, the poles of the small magnet will interchange and it
will then present its south pole to the north pole of the large magnet. You will have permanently
reversed the small magnet’s poles.

Compasses
If you’ve spent time hiking, you may well own a magnetic compass. Like a button magnet,
the needle of that compass is a simple permanent magnet with one north magnetic pole and
one south magnetic pole. This needle aids navigation because Earth itself has a magnetic
dipole and that dipole affects the orientation of the needle—the needle’s north magnetic
pole tends to point northward.
Already, we can guess what must be located near Earth’s north geographic pole—a
south magnetic pole. Attraction from that south magnetic pole is what draws the compass’s
north magnetic pole toward the north. However, the full story is more complicated. To
begin with, Earth’s magnetic poles are actually located far beneath its surface and aren’t
perfectly aligned with the geographic poles. To make matters worse, magnetically active
materials in everything from distant mountains to nearby buildings assert their own magnetic influences on the compass needle. Overall, the compass needle is responding to the
influences of countless magnetic poles, both near and far. Given how difficult it would be
to sum up all those separate influences, it is easier to view the compass needle as interacting
with something local—a magnetic field, an attribute of space that exerts a magnetostatic
force on a pole. According to this new perspective, the compass needle responds to the
local magnetic field, a field that’s created by all the surrounding magnetic poles.
As with an electric field, the magnetic field here appears to be acting merely as an
intermediary; various poles produce the magnetic field, and this magnetic field affects our
compass needle. As we’ll see, however, a magnetic field is more than just an intermediary
or a fiction. It is quite real and can exist in space, independent of the poles that produce it.
Just as electric fields can be created by things other than charge, so magnetic fields can be
created by things other than pole.
The magnetic field at a given location measures the magnetostatic force that a unit of
pure north pole would experience if it were placed at that point. More specifically, the
magnetostatic force is equal to the pole times the magnetic field at the pole’s position. We
can write this relationship as a word equation:
magnetostatic force = pole · magnetic field,

(11.1.2)

in symbols:
F = pB,
and in everyday language:
If you place a strong magnet in a big magnetic field, expect to be pushed around,
where the magnetostatic force is in the direction of the magnetic field. Note that a negative
amount of pole (a south pole) experiences a force opposite the magnetic field. The SI unit
of magnetic field is the newton per ampere-meter, also called the tesla (abbreviated T).

309

310

CHAPT ER 11 Magnetism and Electrodynamics

2 Earth’s magnetic poles
are not particularly well
aligned with its geographical poles and have
actually moved about
1100 km over the past
century. Earth’s south
magnetic pole is presently
drifting northwest across
the Canadian arctic at
about 40 kilometers per
year. Moreover, Earth’s
magnetic poles have been
trading places about once
every 700,000 years for
the past 330 million years.
The most recent reversal
was about 780,000 years
ago.

Earth’s magnetic field is relatively weak, about 0.00005 T in a roughly northward direction (see 2 ). (For comparison, the field near your button magnet may be 0.1 T or more.)
Earth’s field pushes the compass needle’s north pole northward and south pole southward
(Fig. 11.1.7). Unless the compass needle is perfectly aligned with that field, it experiences a
torque and undergoes angular acceleration. Since its mount allows the needle to rotate only
horizontally and it experiences mild friction as it does, the needle soon settles down with its
north pole pointing roughly northward. If its mount allowed it to rotate vertically as well as
horizontally, the needle’s north pole would dip downward in the northern hemisphere and
upward in the southern hemisphere. In general, the needle minimizes its magnetostatic
potential energy by pointing along the direction of the local magnetic field and is thus in a
stable equilibrium when orientated that way. After a few swings back and forth, your compass needle points along the local magnetic field, which, we hope, points northward.
Because Earth’s magnetic field is so uniform in the vicinity of your compass, its northward push on the needle’s north pole exactly balances its southward push on the needle’s
south pole and the needle experiences zero net force. However, if you bring your compass
near a button magnet, the local magnetic field will not be uniform and the needle may
experience a net force. The magnetic field gets stronger near one of the button’s poles and
the compass needle will experience a net force toward or away from that pole, depending
on which way it’s orientated.
When the needle is aligned with a nonuniform field—its north pole pointing in the
same direction as the local field—the forces on its two opposite poles won’t balance and it
will experience a net force in the direction of increasing field. If it is aligned against the
field, it will experience a net force in the direction of decreasing field. In practice, as you
bring the compass near your button magnet, its needle will first pivot into alignment with
the local field and then find itself pulled toward increasing field, toward the nearest pole of
the button magnet. The same thing happens when you bring two button magnets together;
each pivots into alignment with the other’s magnetic field, and the two then leap at each
other. Watch out for your fingers!
A piece of steel exhibits similar behavior when you hold it near a button magnet: it
becomes magnetized along the direction of the local magnetic field and then finds itself
pulled toward increasing field, toward the button magnet’s nearest pole. That’s how the
button magnet holds your notes to the refrigerator!
Check Your Understanding #4: Crazy Compass

Earth's magnetic field

You lock the needle of your compass and move its north pole near the north pole of a powerful button
magnet. Will the needle experience a magnetostatic force toward strong field or weak field?
Answer: The needle will experience a force toward weak magnetic field (away from the button magnet).

N
S

Why: With its magnetic poles aligned opposite to the button’s magnetic field, the compass needle
experiences a force toward weaker magnetic field. Actually, if you continue to push the needle closer
to the button magnet, you can accidentally remagnetize that needle; its poles will permanently interchange and it will subsequently point south rather than north! Not to worry, though, because you can
simply repeat this procedure to restore the compass to normal.

Check Your Figures #1: Careful with That Wrench!

Fig. 11.1.7 A compass
needle aligns with the
local magnetic field. Its
north pole experiences a
magnetostatic force in the
direction of the field, and
its south pole experiences
a force opposite the field.

You mistakenly place a long steel wrench in the 1-T field near a strong magnet. The field magnetizes
the wrench, and it develops a north pole of 1000 A·m at its near end and an equal south pole at its
distant end. Only the near end of the wrench is in the 1-T field and experiences a magnetic force.
What force does the field exert on the wrench and its north pole?
Answer: It exerts almost 1000 N (225 lb) in the direction of the field.
Why: According to Eq. 11.1.2, the force exerted on the wrench’s north pole is equal to its 1000-A·m
pole times the 1-T magnetic field. Since 1 T = 1 N/A·m, that product is 1000 N and points in the
direction of the field. Such large forces are not unusual when steel or iron objects are exposed to a
strong magnetic field, so be careful working near big magnets!

Household Magnets

Iron Filings and Magnetic Flux Lines
Magnetic fields seem abstract; it would be helpful if you could see them. Remarkably
enough, you can—just sprinkle iron filings into the field! Although you’ll need to support
their weight with paper or a liquid, an interesting pattern will form. Like tiny compass
needles, the iron particles magnetize along the local magnetic field and then stick together,
north pole to south pole, in long strands that delineate the magnetic field (Fig. 11.1.8)!
These strands map the magnetic field in an interesting way. First, at each point on a
strand, the strand points along the local magnetic field. Second, the strands are most tightly
packed where the local magnetic field is strongest. In other words, the strands follow along
the local magnetic field direction and have a density proportional to that local field. The
lines highlighted by these strands are so useful that they have their own name, magnetic
flux lines.
Flux lines are often helpful when exploring a magnetic field. If you’re studying the
magnetic field in a large area, you probably don’t want to use iron filings. Instead, you can
hold a compass in your hand and walk in the direction its needle is pointing—the direction
of the magnetic field. The path you’ll follow in this compass-guided walk is a magnetic flux
line. If you repeat this trip from many different starting points, you’ll explore the whole
magnetic field, flux line by flux line. Since a magnetic field tends to point away from north
poles and toward south poles, these tours will typically take you from north poles to south
poles. In fact, for our permanent magnets, every magnetic flux line begins at a north pole
and ends at a south pole.
That last observation about flux lines is quite general: they never start at or end on
anything other than a magnetic pole. While flux lines emerge in all directions from a north
pole and converge from all directions on a south pole, that’s it; flux lines never begin or end
in empty space. If you’re following a magnetic flux line with your compass, you will either
reach a south pole or walk forever!
The possibility of that endless walk is somewhat disconcerting; if the flux line you’re
following doesn’t end at a pole, what created its magnetic field? The answer reveals a
deep connection between magnetism and electricity. Some magnetic fields aren’t produced by magnetic poles at all; they’re produced by electricity! To see how that’s possible, let’s take a look at another common household magnet—the electromagnet in an
ordinary doorbell.

Check Your Understanding #5: Building Bridges
If you sprinkle iron filings onto the magnetic strip of a credit card, a pattern of tiny iron bridges will
form. Where are the magnetic poles relative to those bridges?
Answer: The poles are at the ends of the bridges.
Why: The iron filings follow the magnetic flux lines, which extend from north poles to south poles.
Thus, one end of each bridge is a north pole and the other end is a south pole.

Electric Doorbells and Electromagnets
A classic electric doorbell uses a magnet and a spring to drive a piece of iron into two
chimes, “ding-dong.” When you press the doorbell button, you close an electric circuit and
the resulting electric current pushes the iron magnetically into the first chime, “ding.”
When you release the button, you open the circuit, stopping the current and its magnetism
so that the spring can push the iron back into the second chime, “dong.”
The big news here is that electric currents can produce magnetic forces. In fact, there
is nothing optional about this connection—electric currents are magnetic. More specifically, moving electric charge produces a magnetic field.

311

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Fig. 11.1.8 Supported by
a liquid, this iron powder
shows the magnetic flux
lines around the magnet.

312

CHAPT ER 11 Magnetism and Electrodynamics

3 Self-educated before
the French Revolution,
during which his father
was executed, French
physicist André-Marie
Ampère (1775–1836)
became a science teacher
in 1796. He served as a
professor of physics or
mathematics in several
cities before settling at the
University of Paris system
in 1804. In 1820, only a
week after learning of
Oersted’s experiment
showing that an electric
current causes a compass
needle to deflect, Ampère
published an extensive
treatment of the subject.
Evidently, he had been
thinking about these ideas
for a long time.

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Fig. 11.1.9 Iron powder
shows that flux lines
around a current-carrying
wire form concentric rings
around that wire.

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

FIRST CONNECTION BETWEEN ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM
Moving electric charge produces a magnetic field.

Imagine the surprise of Danish physicist Hans Christian Oersted (1777–1851) when
he observed in 1820 that current in a wire caused a nearby compass needle to rotate.
Until that moment, electricity and magnetism had appeared to be independent phenomena. Inspired by Oersted’s experiment, French physicist André-Marie Ampère 3 undertook a 7-year study of the relationships between electricity and magnetism, and started
the revolution that eventually unified them within a single overarching conceptual
framework.
When we use iron powder to disclose the magnetic flux lines surrounding a long,
straight, current-carrying wire, we too are in for a surprise (Fig. 11.1.9). Those flux lines
circle the wire like concentric rings, growing more widely separated as the distance from
the wire increases. The wire is an electromagnet, a device that becomes magnetic when it
carries an electric current. However, because an electromagnet has no true magnetic poles,
the magnetic flux lines can’t stretch from north pole to south pole. Instead, each flux line of
an electromagnet is a closed loop. If you took a compass-guided walk along one of these
flux lines, you’d retrace your steps over and over.
Since the flux lines are packed tightest near the surface of the current-carrying wire,
that’s where the magnetic field is strongest. Recalling that a piece of iron is pulled toward
increasing magnetic field, we see that the wire will attract iron to it whenever it’s carrying
a current.
The magnetic field around a current-carrying wire is fairly weak, however, and a practical doorbell winds that wire into a coil to concentrate and strengthen its field. Although
the magnetic field around a current-carrying coil is complicated, we can use iron powder to
make it visible (Fig. 11.1.10). Remarkably enough, the flux lines outside the coil resemble
those outside a button magnet of similar dimensions (Fig. 11.1.11). It’s as though the coil
has a north pole at one end and a south pole at the other! Because there are no true poles
present, however, the flux lines don’t end anywhere. Instead, they continue right through
the middle of the coil and form complete loops.
When current flows through the coil, nearby iron finds itself magnetized along the
local magnetic field and then pulled toward increasing field—toward the tightly packed
flux lines at the coil’s end. But why stop there? Since the flux lines continue right into the
coil and grow even more tightly packed inside, the iron will be pulled inward toward
the very center of the coil!
That’s how the doorbell works. When you press the doorbell button, current flows
through a coil of wire and the resulting magnetic field yanks an iron rod into the center of
(a)

(b)
North

South

Current

Fig. 11.1.10 Iron powder
shows that flux lines pass
straight through a currentcarrying coil and return
outside it, much like the
flux lines around a similarly
shaped bar magnet.

Current
loop

Magnetic
dipole

Fig. 11.1.11 (a) The magnetic field around a loop of current-carrying wire points up through
the loop and down around the outside of the loop. The magnetic field arrow passing through each
black dot indicates the magnitude and direction of the force a north test pole would experience at
the dot’s location. (b) The field produced by a two-pole button magnet is almost identical to that
of the loop.

Electric Power Distribution

that coil. About the time the rod reaches the center, part of it hits the first chime. When you
then open the switch, stopping the current and its magnetism, a spring pushes the iron rod
back out of the coil and it hits the second chime. These two chimes make the familiar dingdong!
While current is flowing through the coil and the iron rod is inside it, the two objects
act as a single powerful electromagnet. The magnetic field surrounding the pair is the sum
of the coil’s modest magnetic field and the magnetized iron’s much stronger field. In effect,
the current in the coil magnetizes the iron and the iron then creates most of the surrounding
magnetic field. Practical electromagnets, which control switches and valves in your furnace or air conditioner and can lift cars at the scrap yard, generally use iron or related
materials to dramatically enhance the magnetic field produced by a current in a coil of
wire (Fig. 11.1.12).

313

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Fig. 11.1.12 This electric
switch is controlled by
an electromagnet and is
called a relay.

Check Your Understanding #6: Current Technology
In magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), a patient is immersed in an intense magnetic field. That field
is created entirely without permanent magnets or even iron. How is that possible?
Answer: The magnetic field is created by the current in a coil of wire.
Why: MRI requires a magnetic field that is intense, uniform, and spacious enough for a patient to fit
inside. The best way to create such a colossal field is with a current-carrying coil. In fact, the field is
so enormous that its flux lines extend far from the magnet and can attract iron or steel objects from
across the room. Understandably, magnetic materials are forbidden near MRI magnets.

Electric Power Distribution

SECTION 11.2
Pylon

High-voltage
transmission line

Insulators

Power plant

Step-up
transformer
Step-down
transformer
(substation)

Step-down
transformer

Insulators
Utility pole

Electricity
meter

Electricity is a particularly useful and convenient form of
ordered energy. Because it’s delivered to our homes and offices
as a utility, we barely think about it, except to pay the bills. The
wires that bring it to us never plug up or need cleaning and
work continuously except when there’s a power failure, blown
fuse, or tripped circuit breaker.
Just how does electricity get to our homes? In this section,
we’ll look at the problems associated with distributing electricity far from the power plant at which it’s generated. To understand these problems, we’ll examine the ways in which wires
affect electricity and see how electric power is transferred and
rearranged by devices called transformers.

Questions to Think About: Why do power distribution systems
use alternating current? What is the purpose of high-voltage
wires? Why does the power company place large electric
devices on the utility poles near homes or on the ground near
neighborhoods? What are the advantages and disadvantages of
120-V versus 230-V electric power?
Experiments to Do: Experiments with electric power distribution are rather dangerous, but you can observe the ways in
which your local electric power is distributed. If your area is
connected to a major electric power network, you’ll be able to
find an entire hierarchy of power-conversion facilities. The
power should travel from the power plant to your town on highvoltage wires, normally located overhead on tall pillars or
pylons. These wires should end at a large power-conversion
facility, where enormous devices transfer power to the lowervoltage power lines that fan out across your town. In some
places, these wires are overhead; in others, they’re underground. However, this power is still not ready for household
use. It goes through at least one more stage of conversion
before it reaches individual homes.
All these conversion steps are performed by transformers.
You can find transformers as boxes or cylinders on utility poles
or on the ground outside homes. In cities, transformers are
often located inside buildings, out of sight. Even though you
may have trouble finding these transformers, they’re there. In
this section, we’ll see why they’re necessary.

314

CHAPT ER 11 Magnetism and Electrodynamics

WARNING
Electricity is dangerous, particularly when it involves high voltages. The principal hazard is that an electric current will pass through your body in the vicinity of your heart
and disrupt its normal rhythm. Very little current is needed to cause trouble, but your
skin is such a poor conductor that it normally prevents harmful currents from passing
through you. Be careful around high voltages, however, because they can propel dangerous currents through your skin and put you at risk. Although your body usually has
to be part of a closed circuit for you to receive a shock, don’t count on the absence of
an identifiable circuit to protect you from injury—circuits have a tendency to form in
surprising ways whenever you touch an electric wire. Be especially careful whenever
you’re near voltages of more than 50 V, even in batteries, or when you’re near any
voltages if you’re wet or your skin is broken. That said, voltages of 12 V or less are so
unlikely to injure you that they are generally considered safe. Nearly all household
batteries provide voltages in that safe range and can be handled individually with little
risk of shock. Similarly, most power adapters for electronic devices provide 12 V or less
and thus rarely cause shocks.

Direct Current Power Distribution

4 Lewis Howard Latimer
(African American
scientist and inventor,
1848–1928) was only 8
years old when the U.S.
Supreme Court’s Dred
Scott decision made his
escaped-slave father a
fugitive and forced him to
disappear. Left behind
with his mother, Latimer
did well in school and
became a skilled draftsman and engineer. While
working for Edison’s
rival, Hiram Maxim,
Latimer became an expert
in fabricating carbon
filaments for incandescent
lamps. When Latimer
later joined Edison’s team
of inventors, the “Edison
Pioneers,” his sturdy
carbon filaments quickly
replaced Edison’s own
fragile bamboo ones and
provided the crucial
ingredient necessary for
Edison’s lamps to become
a commercial success.

Batteries may be fine for powering flashlights, but they’re not very practical for lighting
homes. Early experiments that placed batteries in basements were disappointing because
the batteries ran out of energy quickly and needed service and fresh chemicals all too
frequently.
A more cost-effective source for electricity was coal- or oil-powered electric generators. Like batteries, generators do work on the electric currents flowing through them and
can provide the electric power needed to illuminate homes. But although generators produce electricity more cheaply than batteries, early ones were large machines that required
fresh air and attention. These generators had to be built centrally, with people to tend them
and chimneys to get rid of the smoke.
This was the approach taken by the American inventor Thomas Alva Edison (1847–
1931) in 1882 when he began to electrify New York City following his development of a
practical incandescent lightbulb 4 . Each of the Edison Electric Light Company’s generators acted like a mechanical battery, producing direct current (DC) that always left the
generator through one wire and returned to it through another. Edison placed his generators
in central locations and conducted the current to and from the homes he served through
copper wires. However, the farther a building was from the generator, the thicker the copper wires had to be. That’s because wires impede the flow of current and making them
thicker allows them to carry current more easily.
Wire thickness is important because, like the filament of the flashlight bulb we studied
in Chapter 10, wires have electrical resistance. In accordance with Ohm’s law (Eq. 10.3.4),
the voltage drop through a wire is equal to its electrical resistance times the current passing
through it. In the case of a wire conducting current from a generating plant to a home, our
primary concern is how much power the wire wastes as thermal power. We can determine
this wasted power by combining Ohm’s law with the equation for power consumed by a
device (Eq. 10.3.1):
power consumed = voltage drop · current
= (current · electrical resistance) · current
= current2 · electrical resistance.

(11.2.1)

Electric Power Distribution

The wire’s wasted power is proportional to the square of the current passing through it!
This relationship became all too clear to Edison when he tried to expand his power distribution systems. The more current he tried to deliver over a particular wire, the more power
it lost as heat. Doubling the current in the wire quadrupled the power it wasted.
Edison tried to combat this loss by lowering the electrical resistances of the wires. He
used copper because only silver is a better conductor of current. He used thick wires to
increase the number of moving charges. He also kept the wires short so that they didn’t
have much chance to waste power. This length requirement forced Edison to build his generating plants within the cities he served. Even New York City contained many local power
plants. (For an interesting tale about the early days of electric power, see 5 .)
Edison also tried to minimize waste by decreasing the currents in the wires while
increasing the voltage differences between those wires. Delivered power is equal to the
current times the voltage drop (see Eq. 10.3.1), so while less current flowed through each
home, the larger voltage drop left the delivered power unchanged.
The voltage difference between the two wires carrying current to and from a home is
often referred to as the voltage of the electric power. Using that terminology, Edison needed
to provide large-voltage or “high-voltage” DC electric power to his customers. High voltage power is dangerous, however, because it can cause fire-starting sparks and nasty shocks.
It could be handled safely outside a home, but bringing it inside was another matter. Edison
used the highest voltage power that safety allowed.
Although scientists have discovered a number of materials that lose their electrical
resistance at extremely low temperatures and become perfect electrical conductors, or
superconductors (Fig. 11.2.1), these superconductors are still too impractical for powerdistribution systems. Their use is limited to local applications such as large electromagnets
and specialized electronic devices.

315

5 Love Canal is the most
famous U.S. toxic waste
dump. The dump was
created in the 1920s at an
abandoned section of
canal constructed in 1892
by William T. Love.
Love intended his canal
to connect the upper and
lower Niagara Rivers so
that the descending water
could be used to generate
DC electric power for the
citizens of Niagara Falls,
New York. The advent of
AC power transmission
systems in 1896 made the
canal less useful, and it
was never finished.

Check Your Understanding #1: The Trouble with DC Electric Power
If Edison doubled the length of his delivery wires, while keeping the currents through them the same,
what would happen to the power they consumed?

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Answer: The power would roughly double.
Why: Doubling the length of a wire is like placing two identical wires one after the next. If each wire
uses 1 unit of power, then two wires should use roughly 2 units of power. Electrical resistance is
proportional to the length of a wire and inversely proportional to the cross-sectional area of that wire.
Shortening and thickening a wire reduce its resistance.

Introducing Alternating Current
The real problem with distributing electric power via direct current is that there’s no easy
way to transfer power from one DC circuit to another. Because the generator and the lightbulbs must be part of the same circuit, safety requires that the entire circuit use low voltages
and large currents. DC power distribution therefore wastes much of its power in the wires
connecting everything together.
However, as we’ll soon see, alternating current (AC) makes it easy to transfer power
from one AC circuit to another so that different parts of the AC power-distribution system
can operate at different voltages with different currents. Most significantly, the wires that
carry the power long distances are part of a high-voltage, low-current circuit and therefore
waste little power.
An alternating current is one that periodically reverses direction—it alternates. For example, when you plug a toaster into an AC electrical outlet and switch it on, the current that flows
through the toaster’s heating element reverses its direction of travel many times each second.
The power company propels this alternating current through the toaster by subjecting
it to an alternating voltage drop, a voltage drop that periodically reverses direction. As you

Fig. 11.2.1 A magnetic
cylinder floats above the
surface of a superconductor
at 78 K. Currents flowing
freely in the superconductor
make it magnetic and cause
it to repel the magnetic
cylinder.

316

CHAPT ER 11 Magnetism and Electrodynamics

Fig. 11.2.2 This electric
outlet follows the U.S.
standard for 120-V AC,
15-A service. The wide
slots (left) are neutral, the
narrow slots (right) are
hot, and the curved holes
(center) are ground. This
outlet provides groundfault circuit interruption
(GFCI) protection; if any
current leaving hot fails to
return to neutral, or vice
versa, the outlet shuts off
instantly until it is reset.
The test button simulates
a current leak and will
shut off the outlet if its
protection is functioning
properly.

(a)

Hot wire
Current

Neutral wire

Current

(b)

Current
Current

Fig. 11.2.3 When a
toaster is plugged into a
U.S. 120-V AC outlet, the
voltage of its hot wire varies
with time. The voltage of its
neutral wire remains at
0 V. Since current always
flows through the toaster
from higher voltage to lower
voltage, that current reverses
each time the voltage of the
hot wire reverses.

may recall from Section 10.3 on flashlights, current in a filament, heating element, or any
other device that obeys Ohm’s law flows down a voltage gradient, from a higher voltage to
a lower voltage, much as bicyclists roll down an altitude gradient from a higher altitude to
a low altitude or as water flows down a pressure gradient from a higher pressure to a lower
pressure. While a flashlight’s battery subjects the flashlight’s filament to a steady voltage
drop and obtains a direct current, the power company subjects the toaster’s heating element
to an alternating voltage drop and obtains an alternating current.
Alternating voltages are present at any AC electrical outlet. In the United States, an
ordinary AC outlet offers three connections: hot, neutral, and ground (Fig. 11.2.2). In a
properly installed outlet, the absolute voltage of neutral remains near 0 V, while the absolute voltage of hot alternates above and below 0 V. Ground, which is an optional safety
connection that we’ll discuss later, also remains near 0 V absolute.
One of the toaster’s wires is connected to hot and the other to neutral (Fig. 11.2.3).
Since current always flows through the toaster’s heating element from higher voltage to
lower voltage, it flows from hot to neutral when hot has a positive voltage (Fig. 11.2.3a).
and from neutral to hot when hot has a negative voltage (Fig. 11.2.3b).
In normal AC electric power, the hot voltage varies sinusoidally—it’s proportional to the
trigonometric sine function with respect to time (Fig. 11.2.4). This smoothly alternating voltage propels a smoothly alternating current through the toaster. During each reversal, the current in the heating element gradually slows to a stop before gathering strength in the opposite
direction. In the United States, AC voltages reverse every 120th of a second, yielding 60 full
cycles of reversal (back and forth) each second (60 Hz). In Europe, the reversals occur every
100th of a second, so AC voltages complete 50 full cycles of reversal each second (50 Hz).
Fortunately, these reversals have little effect on many household devices. Toasters,
electric heaters, and incandescent lightbulbs consume power because of their electrical
resistances and don’t care which way current passes through them. In fact, power consumption in such simple ohmic devices is used to define an effective voltage for AC electric
power. An outlet’s nominal AC voltage—technically, its root mean square (RMS) voltage—is defined to be equal to the DC voltage that would cause the same average power
consumption in an ohmic device. Thus, 120-V AC power delivers the same average power
to a toaster as 120-V DC power.
However, the reversals of AC power aren’t without consequence. First, some electrical
and most electronic devices are sensitive to the direction of current flow and must handle
the reversals carefully. Second, the power available from an ordinary AC outlet rises and
falls with each voltage reversal and is momentarily zero at the reversal itself. The toaster’s
heating element actually varies slightly in temperature because of these power fluctuations,
and devices that can’t tolerate even an instant without power must store energy to avoid
shutting down during the reversals.
Finally, AC power’s sinusoidally varying voltages peak well above their nominal values, exceeding those values by a factor of the square root of 2 (about 1.414). For example,
the voltage of the hot connection in an ordinary 120-V AC power outlet actually swings
between +170 V and −170 V. Those higher peak voltages are important for insulation and
electrical safety.
Check Your Understanding #2: Timing Is Everything
Sticking your fingers into an electrical outlet is never a good idea, but is there a moment when you
could do it without getting a shock?
Answer: Yes, you could do it at the moment the voltages are reversing.
Why: While the ground and neutral wires of the electrical outlet are normally without charge and
therefore relatively safe, the hot wire is usually charged and dangerous. That hot wire’s voltage alternates rapidly between high positive voltage and high negative voltage. Only when it’s passing through
0 V can you touch it without risking a shock. However, that safe moment is so brief that you can’t
realistically avoid a shock. Don’t try it!

Voltage (volts)

Electric Power Distribution
150
100
50
–50
–100
–150

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

317

Fig. 11.2.4 The voltage of the hot wire of a U.S.
120-V AC outlet varies sinusoidally in time and
completes 60 full cycles per second. Although it
peaks at 6170 V, its effective time average or root
mean square (RMS) voltage is 120 V. The voltage
of the neutral wire is always 0 V.

Time (seconds)

Magnetic Induction
Edison was adamantly opposed to alternating current, which he viewed as dangerous and
exotic. Indeed, its fluctuating voltages and moments without power don’t make alternating
current look attractive at all.
The champion of alternating current was Nikola Tesla (1856–1943), a Serbian American inventor who was backed financially by the American inventor and industrialist George
Westinghouse (1846–1914). The advantage that Tesla and Westinghouse saw in alternating
current was that its power could be transformed—it could be passed via electromagnetic
action from one circuit to another by a device called a transformer.
A transformer uses two important connections between electricity and magnetism to
convey power from one AC circuit to another. The first is familiar: moving electric charge
creates magnetic fields. This connection allows electricity to produce magnetism. The second connection, however, is something new: magnetic fields that change with time create
electric fields. Discovered in 1831 by Michael Faraday 6 , this relationship allows magnetism to produce electricity!

SECOND CONNECTION BETWEEN ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM
Magnetic fields that change with time produce electric fields.

Whether you wave a permanent magnet back and forth, or switch an electromagnet on
and off, you are changing a magnetic field with time and thereby producing an electric
field. If there are mobile electric charges around to respond to that electric field, they’ll
accelerate and you’ll have created or altered an electric current and possibly done work on
it as well. This process, whereby a time-changing magnetic field initiates or influences an
electric current, is called magnetic induction.
A transformer combines these two connections in sequence—electricity produces
magnetism produces electricity. However, rather than returning electric power to where it
started, the transformer moves that power from the current in one coil of wire through a
magnetic field to the current in a second coil of wire.

Check Your Understanding #3: Electric Phonographs
In the days of vinyl records, a phonograph reproduced sound by sliding a diamond stylus through a
record’s undulating groove. A magnet attached to that stylus moved up and down with each undulation and produced a current in a nearby coil of wire. Why did the magnet’s motion affect the coil?
Answer: The moving magnet produced an electric field, which pushed mobile charges through that
wire coil.
Why: The tiny vibrating magnet affected the coil’s current via magnetic induction.

6 With only a primary
education, English chemist
and physicist Michael
Faraday (1791–1867)
apprenticed with a
bookbinder at 14. At 21,
he became a laboratory
assistant to Humphry
Davy, a renowned chemist.
Faraday’s experiments
with electrochemistry and
his knowledge of work by
Oersted and Ampère led
him to think that, if
electricity can cause
magnetism, then magnetism should be able to
cause electricity. Through
careful experimentation,
he found just such an
effect. Toward the end of
his career, Faraday
became a popular lecturer
on science and made a
particular effort to reach
children.

318
(a)

CHAPT ER 11 Magnetism and Electrodynamics

Alternating Current and a Coil of Wire

No
current

Increasing
current

(c)

Constant
current

Magnetic
ﬁeld

Induced emf

(b)

Induced electric

ﬁeld
Magnetic
ﬁeld

To help us understand the power transfer that takes place in a transformer, let’s start with a
simpler case. What happens when you send an alternating current through a single coil of
wire?
Because currents are magnetic, the coil becomes an electromagnet. However, since the
current passing through it reverses periodically, so does its magnetic field. Also, because a
magnetic field that changes with time produces an electric field, the coil’s alternating magnetic field produces an alternating electric field.
This induced electric field has a remarkable effect—it pushes on the very alternating
current that produces it! Although it’s not obvious how this electric field should affect that
current, the result turns out to be simple (Fig. 11.2.5). As the coil’s current increases,
the induced electric field pushes that current backward and thereby opposes its increase
(Fig 11.2.5b). As the coil’s current decreases, the induced electric field pushes that current
forward and thereby opposes its decrease (Fig 11.2.5d). No matter how the coil’s current
changes, the induced electric field always opposes that change!
This opposition to change is universal in magnetic induction, where it’s known as
Lenz’s law: when a changing magnetic field induces a current in a conductor, the magnetic
field from that current opposes the change that induced it. In other words, the effects of
magnetic induction oppose the changes that produce them. In the present case, self-directed
magnetic induction or “self-inductance” leads our coil to oppose its own changes in current. A wire coil’s natural opposition to current change makes it quite useful in electrical
equipment and electronics, where it’s called an inductor (Fig. 11.2.6).

LENZ’S LAW
When a changing magnetic field induces a current in a conductor, the magnetic field
from that current opposes the change that induced it.
Decreasing
current

Magnetic
ﬁeld

Induced emf

(d)

Induced electric

ﬁeld

Fig. 11.2.5 (a) A
current-free inductor has
no magnetic field. (b) As
the inductor’s current and
magnetic field increase,
its induced electric field
opposes the current increase
and its induced emf takes
energy from the current.
(c) A constant current has a
constant magnetic field and
zero induced emf. (d) As
the inductor’s current and
magnetic field decrease,
its induced electric field
opposes the current decrease
and its induced emf gives
energy to the current.

However, our coil’s induced electric field does more than just push the current around;
it can also do positive or negative work on that current and thereby shift that current from
one voltage to another. The coil’s overall voltage shift, from one end of the coil to the other,
is known as its induced emf (short for electromotive force). Current enters the coil at one
voltage and exits at another voltage, courtesy of the coil’s induced emf.
For comparison, a battery has an electrochemical emf; current enters the battery at one
voltage and exits at another voltage, thanks to the battery’s electrochemical emf. But while
a battery’s electrochemical emf is fixed, a coil’s induced emf can change with time. When
an alternating voltage difference is applied to the coil, its induced emf alternates and exactly
matches the applied voltage difference.
A coil’s ability to shift an alternating current gracefully from one voltage to another
makes it possible to plug a properly designed coil into an AC electric outlet without causing
disaster. As the outlet’s voltage difference alternates, the coil’s induced emf follows that voltage difference perfectly. Magnetic induction keeps the coil’s current small and, if we neglect
the coil’s tiny electrical resistance, none of the AC electric power is wasted as thermal power.
As the coil’s voltage difference and induced emf alternate, the coil’s current keeps
trying to flow from higher voltage to lower voltage. The coil’s opposition to current change,
however, delays the current’s response so that its alternating current lags a quarter of an AC
cycle behind its alternating voltage difference. For example, the current reaches its peak
flow toward the top of the coil a quarter of an AC cycle after the voltage at the top of the
coil reached its peak positive value. Although the coil’s voltage difference and current both
vary sinusoidally with time, the current has a phase shift or phase delay of 90° relative to
the voltage difference.

Electric Power Distribution

Because of this phase shift, current flows through the coil from higher voltage to lower
voltage only half the time. The other half, current flows from lower voltage to higher voltage. When current flows toward lower voltage, the induced emf removes electrostatic
potential energy from the current. When current flow toward higher voltage, the induced
emf returns electrostatic potential energy to the current. Energy alternately leaves the current and returns, but where does that energy reside when it’s not in the current?
The missing energy is in the coil’s magnetic field! Magnetic fields contain energy. The
amount of energy in a uniform magnetic field is half the square of the field strength times
the volume of the field divided by the permeability of free space. We can write this relationship as a word equation:
magnetic field · volume
,
2 · permeability of free space

(a)
Magnetizable
core

Copper
coil

Inductor
(b)

2

energy =

319

(11.2.2)
Symbol for inductor

in symbols:
B2 · V
U=
,
2 · μ0
and in everyday language:
Strong permanent magnets store so much magnetic energy that they
can be dangerous if you break them. The pieces will flip around violently,
and you may get pinched.

COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS: Magnets as Limitless Sources of Energy
Misconception: Magnets are infinite sources of energy that could provide electric or mechanical
power forever!
Resolution: Although a magnet’s field does contain energy, that energy is limited and was invested
in it during its magnetization. To extract that energy, you’d have to demagnetize and thus destroy
the magnet.

In effect, our coil is playing with the alternating current’s energy, storing it briefly in
the magnetic field and then returning it to the current. The coil stores energy while the
magnitude of the current increases—the field strengthens and the current loses voltage. The
coil returns energy while the magnitude of the current decreases—the field weakens and
the current gains voltage. Because the coil’s self-induced emf is responsible for bouncing
this energy back to the current, it’s frequently called a back emf.

Check Your Understanding #4: Slow Fall
If you drop a strong magnet onto a nonmagnetic but highly conducting surface, the magnet will
descend remarkably slowly. What’s delaying the magnet’s fall?
Answer: The falling magnet is inducing currents and magnetism in the surface. In accordance with
Lenz’s law, that induced magnetism opposes the change that produces it; it acts to slow the magnet’s
descent.
Why: A strong magnet induces such powerful magnetic opposition in a good conductor that moving
the magnet is difficult. This effect is most evident with a superconductor, that is, a material that
conducts electricity perfectly and can sustain induced currents forever. A superconductor can slow a
falling magnet to a stop and hold it suspended indefinitely (Fig. 11.2.1).

Fig. 11.2.6 (a) An
inductor is a coil of wire
that stores energy in
its magnetic field. To
increase its inductance,
the coil may contain a
magnetizable core of
iron or ferrite. (b) In a
schematic diagram of
an electronic device, the
inductor is represented by
a stylized coil.

320

CHAPT ER 11 Magnetism and Electrodynamics

Check Your Figures #1: Field the Energy
An MRI diagnostic unit fills about 0.1 m3 of space with a 4-T magnetic field. How much energy is
contained in that field?
Answer: The field contains about 640,000 J.
Why: Since 1 T is equivalent to 1 N/A·m, Eq. 11.2.2 gives us the energy of a 4-T field occupying
0.1 m3 as:
energy =

(4 N/A · m) 2 · 0 .1 m3
2 · (4π × 10 −7 N/A2 )

= 640,000 N · m = 640,000 J.

Two Coils Together: A Transformer
A single coil experiences only self-inductance. Any energy removed from the coil’s current by its induced emf must eventually be returned to that same current; it has nowhere
else to go. But when two coils share the same electromagnetic environment, they experience mutual inductance and can exchange energy via magnetic induction. Energy removed
from one coil’s current by its induced emf can be given to the other coil’s current by its
induced emf.
That possibility is the basis for a transformer, a device that transfers electric power
from one circuit to another. In its simplest form, a transformer consists of two coils, primary and secondary, wrapped around a magnetizable core that enhances magnetic induction and allows them to share the same electromagnetic environment. When alternating
current flows through the primary coil, it produces an induced electric field that affects both
coils and both coils develop induced emfs. The induced emf in the primary coil removes
energy from its alternating current while the induced emf in the secondary coil gives that
energy to its alternating current.
I’ll explain how this energy transfer works by starting with the transformer shown in
Fig. 11.2.7a. A generator provides its primary coil with 120-V AC electric power, while its
secondary coil is an open circuit.
With the generator subjecting the primary coil to an alternating voltage difference, the
primary coil behaves like an inductor. It carries an alternating current and develops an
induced emf that exactly matches the voltage difference imposed by the generator. Although
the coil’s current naturally tries to flow from higher voltage to lower voltage, the coil’s
self-inductance opposes current changes and delays the current’s response. As a result, the
coil’s alternating current lags a quarter of an AC cycle or 90 degrees in phase behind the
coil’s alternating voltage difference.
Because of its 90-degree phase lag, this alternating current conveys no average power
from the generator to the primary coil. Nonetheless, it plays an important role in the transformer: it alternately magnetizes and demagnetizes the transformer’s core and thereby
produces the induced emfs in both coils. For that reason, it is known as the magnetizing
current.
The transformer’s secondary coil is identical to its primary coil, except for being
upside down on the right side of the magnetizable core. The secondary coil’s induced emf
is therefore identical to that of the primary coil, except for being upside down. Though it’s
an open circuit and can’t carry a significant current, the secondary coil has a voltage
difference across it due to the induced emf and it can thus act as a source of 120-V AC
electric power!
In Fig. 11.2.7b, the transformer’s secondary is connected to a lightbulb. Because the
lightbulb’s filament obeys Ohm’s law, its current remains proportional to the voltage difference across it, even if that voltage difference alternates. With the secondary coil imposing
an alternating voltage difference on the filament, that filament carries an alternating current

Electric Power Distribution

Magnetic ﬁeld

Magnetizable
core

10 turns

Induced emf

Induced emf

Magnetizing
current

Primary coil
Secondary coil

(a)

10 turns

Primary
circuit
120 V AC

Secondary
circuit
120 V AC
Isolation transformer

(b)
Secondary
current
1A

Induced emf

Magnetic ﬁeld

Induced emf

Load
current
1A

10 turns

120 V bulb
120 W

10 turns

Primary
circuit
120 V AC

Secondary
circuit
120 V AC
Isolation transformer

that is synchronized with the voltage difference. That current always flows toward lower
voltage in the filament, dropping off energy, and toward higher voltage in the secondary
coil, picking up energy. Provided with 120-V AC power by the secondary coil, this particular lightbulb filament carries an AC current of 1 A.
The current that is now flowing through the secondary coil has its own magnetic effect
on the transformer. Fortunately, that effect is surprisingly simple: it causes an additional
current to flow through the primary coil.
Known as the load current, this additional current shares the same conducting path as
the magnetizing current, like two fleets of cars sharing the same two-lane road. Unlike the
magnetizing current, however, the load current is synchronized with the voltage difference
across the primary coil and its two effects are different. It produces a magnetic field that
exactly cancels the magnetic field of the secondary current and it conveys electric power
from the generator to the primary coil.
I’ll start with the magnetic cancellation. When a current travels in a circle, the magnetic
field inside the circle is proportional to the current. A wire coil guides its current in a circle
multiple times, effectively multiplying that current by the number of turns in the coil.
The magnetic field inside a coil of wire is thus proportional to the current in the wire times
the number of turns in the coil.

321

Fig. 11.2.7 (a) When 120V AC electric power causes
a magnetizing current to
flow in the primary coil of
this isolation transformer,
both coils develop 120-V
AC induced emfs. (b) When
a lightbulb completes
the secondary circuit, the
resulting secondary current
causes an additional load
current to flow in the
primary circuit. Overall, the
transformer transfers power
from its primary circuit to
its secondary circuit.

322

CHAPT ER 11 Magnetism and Electrodynamics

Since the transformer’s primary and secondary coils are identical, they have the same
number of turns. If the currents in those two coils are equal in amount but opposite in direction, their magnetic fields will cancel.
The transformer naturally adjusts its load current to achieve that magnetic cancellation. Since the secondary coil has a 1-A alternating current flowing through it toward higher
voltage, the primary coil acquires a 1-A alternating load current flowing through it toward
lower voltage. Their magnetic fields cancel perfectly, leaving the magnetizing current
solely responsible for the transformer’s magnetic field and its induced emfs.
Because the coils are identical, their induced emfs are both 120-V AC. The negative
work that the primary coil’s induced emf does on its 1-A current is therefore equal in
amount to the positive work that the secondary coil’s induced emf does on its 1-A current.
Overall, the transformer is transferring an AC power of 120 W from the current in its primary circuit to the current in its secondary circuit.
To maintain their magnetic cancellation, the load current automatically mirrors any
changes in the secondary current. For example, if we add a second lightbulb to the secondary circuit and thereby double the current in the secondary coil, the load current will also
double. Because of this mirroring effect, the transformer always consumes as much power
from its primary circuit as is consumed by its secondary circuit.
Check Your Understanding #5: Use Only with AC Power
If you send direct current through the primary coil of a transformer, no power will be transferred to
the secondary circuit. Explain.
Answer: When direct current flows through the transformer’s primary coil, it creates a constant magnetic field around the iron core. Since that field doesn’t change, it doesn’t create any electric fields
and doesn’t induce current in the transformer’s secondary coil.
Why: The current through the primary coil must change so that the magnetic field in the coils will
change and current will be induced in the secondary coil. Transferring power from one circuit to
another is so useful that there are many DC-powered devices that switch their power on and off to
mimic alternating current so that they can use transformers.

Changing Voltages
When a source of AC electric power is connected to a transformer’s primary coil, the transformer’s primary and secondary coils both develop induced emfs. If the secondary coil is
identical to the primary coil (Fig. 11.2.7), their induced emfs are equal and the secondary
coil becomes a source of AC power at the same voltage as that received by the primary coil.
For example, if you plug the transformer’s primary coil into a 120-V AC outlet, its secondary coil will provide 120-V AC electric power to the secondary circuit.
A transformer with identical coils is known as an isolation transformer and it provides an
important measure of electrical safety. Since its primary and secondary circuits are electrically
isolated, charge can’t move between those circuits and cause trouble. For example, when lightning strikes the power company’s wires, the resulting burst of charge on the primary circuit
can’t pass to any appliances or instruments that are part of the secondary circuit. Not surprisingly, hospitals often employ isolation transformers to protect patients from shocks.
Most transformers, however, have unequal coils and therefore different induced emfs
in those coils. They provide AC power at voltages that are different from those they receive.
The primary coil’s induced emf naturally matches the voltage difference applied to it,
but the secondary coil’s emf can vary. It depends on the number of secondary turns—the
number of times the secondary coil’s wire encircles the magnetizable core. The more loops
the secondary current makes around the core, the more positive or negative work the transformer’s induced electric field does on that current and the larger the secondary coil’s
induced emf.

Electric Power Distribution

Secondary
current
10 A

12 V bulb
120 W

Induced emf

Magnetic ﬁeld

Induced emf

Load
current
1A

30 turns

3 turns

Primary
circuit
120 V AC

Secondary
circuit
12 V AC
Step-down transformer

Since the secondary coil’s induced emf is proportional to its number of turns, it acts as
a source of AC power with a voltage equal to the voltage applied to the primary coil times
the ratio of secondary turns to primary turns, or
secondary voltage = primary volatge ·

secondary turns
primary turns

(11.2.3)

An isolation transformer is simply the special case in which the turn numbers are equal
and their ratio is 1.
When a transformer has fewer secondary turns than primary turns (Fig. 11.2.8), it
provides a secondary voltage that is less than the primary voltage and is called a step-down
transformer. Step-down transformers are common in electronic devices and power adapters, where they step household AC voltages down to much smaller AC voltages. For example, if a transformer’s ratio of secondary turns to primary turns is 0.1 and you supply 120-V
AC power to its primary coil, its secondary coil will act as a source of 12-V AC power.
Not surprisingly, there are also step-up transformers that have more secondary turns than
primary turns and that provide secondary voltages that are greater than their primary voltages
(Fig. 11.2.9). The transformer that powers a neon sign typically has 100 times as many turns
in its secondary coil as in its primary coil. When its primary coil is supplied by 120-V AC
power, its secondary coil provides the 12,000-V AC power needed to illuminate the neon tube.
Even when a transformer has unequal coils, the magnetic fields produced by the load
current in its primary coil and the secondary current in its secondary coil must still cancel.
Since each coil’s magnetic field is proportional to its current times its number of turns, the
coil with fewer turns must compensate by carrying a larger current. As a result, a transformer’s secondary current is equal to its primary load current times the ratio of primary turns
to secondary turns, or
secondary current = primary load current ·

primary turns
,
secondary turns

(11.2.4)

where those currents flow in opposite directions; the primary load current flows toward
lower voltage in the primary coil while the secondary current flows toward higher voltage
in the secondary coil.
As you can see, changing a transformer’s ratio of secondary turns to primary turns
affects both the voltage and the current in the secondary circuit. The secondary voltage is
proportional to that ratio, while the secondary current is inversely proportional to that ratio.

323

Fig. 11.2.8 Because this
step-down transformer has
1/10th as many turns in
its secondary coil as in its
primary coil, its secondary
coil provides 1/10th of the
AC voltage provided to its
primary coil. It transforms
120-V AC power into 12-V
AC power for the lowvoltage bulb. Its secondary
current is 10 times its
primary load current.

CHAPT ER 11 Magnetism and Electrodynamics

Load
current
1A

Magnetic ﬁeld

3 turns
Primary
circuit
120 V AC

Secondary
current
0.01 A

Induced emf

Fig. 11.2.9 Because
this step-up transformer
has 100 times as many
turns in its secondary coil
as in its primary coil, its
secondary coil provides
100 times the AC voltage
provided to its primary coil.
It transforms 120-V AC
power into 12,000-V AC
power for the neon sign.
Its secondary current is
1/100th its primary load
current.

Induced emf

324

Neon
sign

300 turns

Step-up transformer

Secondary
circuit
12,000 V AC

The product of those two quantities, secondary voltage and secondary current, no longer depends on the turn ratio and it’s the power provided to the secondary circuit. It’s also
equal to the primary voltage times the primary load current, which is the power received
from the primary circuit. The transformer is providing the same power to its secondary
circuit as it’s receiving from its primary circuit!
With that in mind, we can look again at the three types of transformers. An isolation
transformer (Fig. 11.2.7) transfers AC power without any change in voltage or current; the
secondary circuit has the same voltage and the same current as in the primary circuit. With
a step-down transformer (Fig. 11.2.8), the secondary circuit has a smaller voltage and a
larger current than in the primary circuit. With a step-up transformer (Fig. 11.2.9), the
secondary circuit has a larger voltage and a smaller current than in the primary circuit.
Check Your Understanding #6: Travel Trouble
Your portable lava lamp operates on 120-V AC power, but you’re visiting a country with 240-V AC
power. You plug a travel adapter into the 240-V AC outlet and its transformer provides your lamp with
the 120-V AC power it expects. Compare the numbers of turns in the transformer’s two coils.
Answer: The transformer’s secondary coil has half as many turns as its primary coil.
Why: To step down the voltage, a transformer must have fewer turns in its secondary coil than in its
primary coil. Fewer turns leads to a smaller emf in the secondary coil and a smaller output voltage
for the transformer.

Real Transformers: Not Quite Perfect
Although we’ve been pretending that inductors and transformers are flawless and that their
wires conduct electricity perfectly, that’s not quite true. In reality, the wires used in those
devices have electrical resistances and waste power in proportion to the squares of the
currents they carry. To minimize this wasted power, real inductors and transformers are
designed to minimize their resistances. To the extent it is practical, they employ thick wires
made of highly conducting metals and those wires are kept as short as possible.
Unfortunately, inductors and transformers built from wires alone can’t develop strong
magnetic fields and large induced emfs unless they carry large magnetizing currents or
have long, many-turn coils. To avoid those current or coil problems, many inductors and
virtually all transformers wrap their coils around magnetizable cores. Those cores respond
magnetically to the alternating currents around them, enhancing their magnetic fields

Electric Power Distribution

and increasing the induced emfs. Aided by those magnetizable materials—typically iron or
iron alloys—cored inductors and transformers work well even with short, few-turn coils.
A core provides another crucial benefit to a transformer; it guides the transformer’s
magnetic flux lines so that nearly all of them pass through both coils, even when those coils
are somewhat separated in space. Sharing their flux lines in that manner gives the coils a
common electromagnetic environment and permits them to exchange electric power easily.
Making two separate coils share their flux lines isn’t easy. Since a coil has no net magnetic pole, each flux line that emerges from it must ultimately return to it. Without a core,
however, most flux lines leaving a coil return to it almost directly and remain nearby
throughout their trip. Those unadventurous flux lines are unlikely to pass through a second,
separate coil. Not surprisingly, a coreless transformer works well only when its two coils
are wound so closely together that they can’t help but share the same flux lines.
Winding both coils around a ring-shaped magnetic core makes it easy for the flux lines
to pass through both coils because those flux lines are drawn into the core’s soft magnetic
material and follow it as if in a pipe. Although the flux lines leaving a coil must still return
to it eventually, most of them complete that trip by way of the core—a journey that then
takes them through the other coil. With nearly all the flux lines channeled by the core
through both coils, power can flow easily from one coil to the other.
A core thus provides a transformer with great flexibility; its coils can be practically
anywhere as long as they encircle that core. However, cores aren’t quite perfect pipes for
flux; they leak slightly. Therefore, the most efficient transformers have coils that are wound
nearby or on top of one another.
Although magnetizable cores make small efficient transformers practical, they also
introduce a few problems. First, the cores must magnetize and demagnetize easily to keep
up with the magnetizing current in the primary coil. If they lag behind, they’ll waste power
as thermal power. Sadly, perfect magnetic softness is unobtainable and all cores waste at
least a little power through delays in their magnetizations.
Second, because these cores are subject to the same electric fields that push currents
around in the coils, they shouldn’t conduct electricity. If they do, they’ll develop useless
internal currents known as eddy currents and thereby waste power heating themselves up.
Since most soft magnetic materials are electrical conductors, transformer cores are frequently divided up into insulated particles or sheets so that little or no current can flow
through them. Despite best efforts at minimizing resistive heating in their coils, and magnetization and eddy current losses in their cores, all transformers still waste some power.
Even the best transformers are only about 99% energy efficient.
Check Your Understanding #7: Winds of Change
Large power transformers have cooling fins and often fans to blow air across them. Why does a transformer need this cooling?
Answer: Its magnetic core converts some of the electric power into thermal power. Unless that thermal power is eliminated, the transformer will overheat.
Why: Transformers aren’t perfectly energy efficient; they convert a small fraction of the electric power
they handle into thermal power. Their magnetic cores contribute to that inefficiency because their
limited magnetic softness and electric conductivity cause them to heat up. Fins and fans are essential for keeping large transformers cool.

Alternating Current Power Distribution
We’re finally prepared to deal with the basic conflicts of power transmission. To minimize
resistive heating in the power lines connecting a power plant with a distant city, electric
power should travel through those lines as small currents at very high voltages. To be practical, though, as well as to avoid shock and fire hazard, electric power should be delivered
to homes as large currents at modest voltages.

325

326

CHAPT ER 11 Magnetism and Electrodynamics

Medium-voltage AC
local circuit

High-voltage AC
cross-country circuit

3 turns

300 turns
Step-up transformer
at power plant

Medium-voltage AC
local circuit

300 turns

3 turns
Step-down transformer
near communities

Fig. 11.2.10 Power from an AC generator is transmitted cross-country by stepping it up to very
high voltage at the power plant, transmitting it long distance as a small current at very high voltage,
and stepping it back down to medium voltage near the communities that are to be served. The three
circuits used in this delivery system are electrical insulated from one another.

Although there is no simple way to meet both requirements simultaneously with direct
current, transformers make it easy to satisfy them both with alternating current. We can use
a step-up transformer to produce the very-high-voltage AC electric power suitable for
cross-country transmission and a step-down transformer to produce the low-voltage AC
electric power that’s appropriate for delivery to communities (Fig. 11.2.10).
At the power plant, the generator pushes a huge alternating current through the
primary circuit of a step-up transformer at a supply voltage of about 5000 V AC. The
current flowing through the secondary circuit is only about 1/100 the current in the

Very-high-voltage circuits

Medium-high-voltage
circuits

Fig. 11.2.11 This giant
transformer transfers
millions of watts of power
from the very-high-voltage
cross-country circuits
above it to the mediumhigh-voltage neighborhood
circuits to its left. Fans
keep the transformer from
overheating.

Transformer and cooling equipment

Electric Power Distribution
Medium-high-voltage circuits

Fig. 11.2.12 The three metal cans on this utility
pole are transformers. They transfer power from the
medium-high-voltage neighborhood circuits above
them to the low-voltage household circuits at the
lower right.

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Transformers

Low-voltage
circuits

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

primary circuit, but the voltage supplied by the secondary coil is much higher, typically
about 500,000 V AC.
This transformer’s secondary circuit is extremely long, extending all the way to the
city where the power is to be used. Since the current in this circuit is modest, the power
wasted in heating the wires is within tolerable limits.
Once it arrives in the city, this very-high-voltage AC electric power passes through the
primary coil of a step-down transformer (Fig. 11.2.11). The voltage provided by the secondary coil of this transformer is only about 1/100 the voltage supplied to its primary coil,
but the current flowing through the secondary circuit is about 100 times the current in its
primary circuit.
Now the voltage is reasonable for use in a city. Before entering homes, this voltage is
reduced still further by other transformers. The final step-down transformers can frequently
be seen as oil-drum-size metal cans hanging from utility poles (Fig. 11.2.12) or as green
metal boxes on the ground (Fig. 11.2.13). Current enters the buildings at between 110 and
240 V AC, depending on the local standards. Although 240-V AC electricity wastes less
power in home wiring, it’s more dangerous than 110-V AC power. The United States has
adopted a 120-V AC standard, and Europe has a 230-V AC standard.

Fig. 11.2.13 This transformer transfers power
from a medium-voltage underground circuit
to a low-voltage underground circuit used by
nearby homes. It handles 50 kV·A or 50,000
W of power.

327

328

CHAPT ER 11 Magnetism and Electrodynamics

Check Your Understanding #8: High-Voltage Wires
If a power utility were able to increase the voltage of its transmission line from 500,000 to 1,000,000 V,
how would that affect the power lost to heat in the wires?
Answer: It would reduce the amount of heat produced to only 25% of the previous value.
Why: At 1,000,000 V, the transmission line would be able to carry the same power as a 500,000-V
transmission line with only half the current. Since the power wasted by the transmission line itself is
proportional to the square of the current, halving the current would reduce the power waste to 25%.

AC Electric Generators and Motors
As we’ve seen, a transformer “converts” electric power into electric power—it extracts
electric power from a primary circuit and delivers electric power to a secondary circuit.
However, electric power and mechanical power are physically equivalent, and mechanical
power can substitute for electric power. What if we replace one of the electric circuits in a
transformer with a mechanical system?
If we replace the transformer’s primary circuit with a mechanical system, we obtain a
generator. A generator is a device that extracts mechanical power from machinery and
delivers electric power to a circuit. Figure 11.2.14a shows a simple generator, one that
(a)
Coil
current

Induced emf

Magnetic ﬁeld

Magnetic
rotor

AC generator
(b)

Fig. 11.2.14 (a) This AC
generator resembles the
transformer in Fig. 11.2.7,
except that it receives
power from the motion of
its spinning magnetic rotor
rather than from an electric
current in a primary coil.
(b) This AC synchronous
motor also resembles the
transformer, except that
it provides power in the
motion of its spinning
magnetic rotor rather than
in an electric current in a
secondary coil.

Magnetic ﬁeld

Induced emf

Load
current

Magnetizing
current

Magnetic
rotor

AC synchronous motor

Electric Power Distribution

looks strikingly like the transformer in Fig. 11.2.7. Both devices have a (secondary) coil
wrapped around a magnetizable core. However, in place of the transformer’s primary coil,
the generator has a spinning magnet, or rotor. As the generator’s magnetic rotor spins, it
produces a sinusoidally alternating magnetic field in the core. This alternating magnetic
field, in turn, produces an alternating electric field and an alternating induced emf in the
coil. That emf propels an alternating current through the circuit that delivers electric power
to the lightbulb.
The current in the generator’s coil has consequences for its rotor. The rotor turns
slightly ahead of the generator’s alternating magnetic field, so that the rotor’s magnetic
field cancels the current’s magnetic field. Because the rotor is a little ahead the generator’s
alternating magnetic field, it experiences a backward torque and has mechanical power
extracted from it. To keep the rotor spinning, the machinery must continue to supply
mechanical power to the generator. Overall, the generator is converting mechanical power
into electric power.
If we replace the transformer’s secondary circuit with a mechanical system, we obtain
a motor. A motor is a device that extracts electric power from a circuit and delivers mechanical power to machinery. Figure 11.2.14b shows a simple motor, one that again resembles
the transformer in Fig. 11.2.7. Like the transformer, the motor has a (primary) coil wrapped
around a magnetizable core. In place of the transformer’s secondary coil, however, the
motor has a spinning magnetic rotor. As an alternating current flows through the motor’s
circuit and coil, it produces a sinusoidally alternating magnetic field in the coil. That alternating magnetic field interacts with the magnetic rotor and delivers mechanical power to it.
The rotor’s motion has consequences for the current in the motor’s coil. If the rotor is
spinning freely and remains perfectly synchronized with the core’s alternating magnetic
field, it has no effect on the core’s magnetic field or the current in the coil. If the rotor is
doing mechanical work, however, it needs a forward torque to keep it spinning and it
obtains that torque by turning slightly behind the motor’s alternating magnetic field. The
rotor’s magnetic field then causes a load current to flow through the motor’s coil. That load
current delivers power to the motor and its magnetic field cancels the rotor’s magnetic field.
Overall, the motor is converting electric power into mechanical power.
Notice that Figs. 11.2.14a and 11.2.14b are almost mirror images of one another.
That’s because generators and motors are wonderfully similar devices. In fact, a single
device can often act as either a generator or a motor. If you supply electric power to its
circuit, its rotor will spin and provide mechanical power. If you supply mechanical power
to its rotor, current will flow through its circuit and provide electric power.
Check Your Understanding #9: Electric Biking
When you pedal a high-tech exercise bicycle, you are probably spinning the rotor of an electric generator. That generator supplies power to a heating filament with an adjustable electrical resistance.
How should the bicycle alter that electrical resistance to make pedaling more difficult?
Answer: It should reduce the heater’s resistance.
Why: By lowering the heater’s resistance, the bicycle increases the current flowing through the circuit. That increased current carries more power from the generator to the heater, so the generator
extracts more mechanical work from the bicyclist.

Epilogue for Chapter 11
In this chapter, we studied magnetism and the ways in which magnetism relates to electricity. In Household Magnets, we looked at the concept of magnetic pole and the attractive or
repulsive forces that poles exert on one another. We examined magnetic materials and saw
how their magnetic properties make them useful for various purposes. We also encountered
electromagnets and began to see that magnetism isn’t independent of electricity. In Electric

329

330

CHAPT ER 11 Magnetism and Electrodynamics

Power Distribution, we saw how alternating electric currents make it possible to transfer
power from one circuit to another by way of a transformer and its electromagnetic properties. We learned that transforming electric power to extremely high voltages and small
currents minimizes the power wasted between power plants and cities.

Explanation: A Nail and Wire Electromagnet
When you connect the wire from one terminal of the battery to the other, a current flows
from the positive terminal to the negative terminal through the wire. (In reality, negatively
charged electrons move from the battery’s negative terminal, through the wire, to its positive terminal, but we’ve adopted a fiction that positive charges are heading the other way.)
This current produces a magnetic field around the wire. Because the wire is coiled around
the nail, this magnetic field passes through the nail and causes its magnetic domains to
resize until most of them are aligned with the field. Without any current in the wire, the
magnetic domains in the steel point in many different directions, so the nail appears nonmagnetic. However, with the current orienting the domains, they together produce a large
magnetization. The nail becomes magnetic and exerts strong magnetic forces on other
nearby objects.

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Household Magnets Work: Common refrigerator magnets are composed of hard magnetic materials that were permanently magnetized by their manufacturers. Simple button
magnets have a single pair of magnetic poles, one north and one south, but plastic sheet
magnets usually have many poles. These magnets stick to a refrigerator’s surface by temporarily magnetizing that surface’s soft magnetic materials and then becoming attracted to the
opposite poles on that surface.
A compass is another permanent magnet, but one designed to align with Earth’s magnetic field. In fact, that magnetic field can be mapped out using a compass. The magnetic
fields around smaller magnets can be made visible with iron filings instead. However, permanent magnets aren’t the only sources of magnetic fields; we found that when current flows
through the coil in a doorbell, it becomes a magnet as well—an electromagnet.
How Electric Power Distribution Works: To minimize power losses in the transmission lines
between power plants and cities, power distribution systems use alternating currents and
transformers. Near the power plant, relatively low-voltage, high-current electric power is transformed into very-high-voltage, low-current power for transmission through cross-country power
lines. Because the power consumed by these high-voltage wires depends on the square of the
currents they carry, the power losses are greatly reduced by this technique. When the power
arrives at a city, it’s transformed into medium-voltage, high-current power for distribution to
neighborhoods. Finally, in neighborhoods, step-down transformers transform this power to
low-voltage, very-high-current power for distribution to individual homes and offices.

1. Coulomb’s law for magnetism: The magnitudes of the magnetostatic forces between two magnetic poles are equal to the
permeability of free space times the product of the two magnetic
poles divided by 4π times the square of the distance separating
them, or

force =

permeability of free space · pole1 · pole2
4π · (distance between poles) 2

If the charges are like, then the forces are repulsive. If the
charges are opposite, then the forces are attractive.
2. Force exerted on a pole by a magnetic field: A pole experiences a force equal to its pole times the magnetic field, or

magnetostatic force = pole · magnetic field, (11.1.2)
. (11.1.1)
where the force points in the direction of the field.

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations

3. Lenz’s law: When a changing magnetic field induces a cur-

rent in a conductor, the magnetic field from that current opposes
the change that induced it.
power consumed = current2 ∙ electrical resistance. (11.2.1)
5. Energy in a magnetic field: The energy in a magnetic field is
equal to the square of that field times its volume, divided by
twice the permeability of free space, or

energy =

magnetic field2 · volume
.
2 · permeability of free space

applied to its primary coil times the ratio of secondary turns to
primary turns or
secondary voltage = primary voltage ·

4. Power consumed by a wire or other ohmic device:

(11.2.2)

6. Transformer voltages: A transformer’s secondary coil acts as
a source of AC power with a voltage equal to the AC voltage

331

secondary turns
.
primary turns
(11.2.3)

7. Transformer currents: The AC current in a transformer’s sec-

ondary coil is equal to the AC load current in its primary coil
times the ratio of primary turns to secondary turns or
secondary current = primary load current ·

primary turns
.
secondary turns
(11.2.4)

12

Electromagnetic Waves
lectric and magnetic fields are so intimately related that each can create the other even in
empty space. In fact, the two fields can form electromagnetic waves, in which they recreate
one another endlessly and head off across space at an enormous speed. These electromagnetic waves are all around us and are the basis for much of our communications technology, for
radiative heat transfer, and for our ability to see the universe in which we live.

E
 
ACTIVE LEARNING
EXPERIMENTS

A Disc in the Microwave Oven
exposed to the microwave electric fields in the oven, that
metal will carry large currents, heat up, tear, and spark.
To perform the experiment, you’ll need a CD or DVD
that you are comfortable destroying. Place a microwave-safe
ceramic mug near the center of the microwave oven. Lean
the CD or DVD against the mug so that you can see the
disc’s shiny face through the oven door. If the oven has a
rotating tray, you may want to remove that tray temporarily
for the experiment. You may also want to block the oven’s
light temporarily with black tape. Be sure that you replace
the tray and unblock the light when you’re done.
Close the oven door, and check that you can see the
shiny surface of the CD or DVD clearly. Now prepare to
turn the microwave oven on for no more than 4 s. You
should know what to expect: 2 s during which the oven
will build up its microwave power and 2 s during which
the disc’s metal layer will spark wildly.
When you’re prepared and everything is safely
arranged, turn the oven on for 4 s. You should see lots of
sparking in that metal layer. Even if you don’t, turn the
oven off after 4 s or the overheated plastic smell will
become a serious problem. Let the disc cool and the smell
dissipate. Discard the disc safely.

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

You can experiment with electromagnetic waves using a
microwave oven. As we’ll see in Section 12.2, microwaves
are a type of electromagnetic wave that falls between radio
waves and light. Because electromagnetic waves consist
of electric and magnetic fields, they can propel electric
currents through metal objects. Those currents can do
some interesting things.
In this experiment, you’ll put metal in a microwave
oven. There is always some risk associated with this
activity, so if you cannot fully accept that risk yourself,
skip this experiment and look at the photographs instead.
If you’re young enough to require adult supervision or
consent, obtain it or skip the experiment.
If you choose to conduct this experiment, make sure
that there is nothing flammable in or near the oven and
that the area around you is well ventilated. The plastic in
the disc will heat up and release a mildly unpleasant smell
that will dissipate. Do not leave the oven on for more than
4 s or that smell will become truly unpleasant.
The metal for this experiment is the ultrathin reflective film located inside a CD or DVD. Although that metal
layer’s electrical conductivity makes it reflective, it
wasn’t designed to carry large electric currents. When

332

Radio

Why did the microwaves heat the thin metal layer in
the disc? What happened to the temperature of the plastic
disc as the metal layer heated up? Which expands faster
with increasing temperature: the metal or the plastic?

333

Why did the metal layer tear? Once the metal layer had
fragmented into many sharp islands, why did sparks jump
between those islands?

Chapter Itinerary
In this chapter, we’ll discuss how electromagnetic waves are
formed and detected in two common appliances: (1) radio and
(2) microwave ovens. In Radio, we examine the ways in which
charge moving in an antenna can emit or respond to electromagnetic waves and how those waves can be controlled to send sound
information from a radio transmitter to a radio receiver. In Microwave

S EC TIO N 1 2 . 1

Radio
Antenna

Transmission tower

Guy wire

Collapsible antenna

Frequency selector
Volume controls
Transmitter
building
Transmission
line

Ovens, we see how microwaves affect water molecules and metals, and also how they are produced in the oven’s magnetron tube.
Although we can’t see the electromagnetic waves that these two
devices use, these waves clearly play important roles in our world.
For more about what we’ll study, turn to the Chapter Summary
and Important Laws and Equations at the end of the chapter.

Frequency indicator
Anchors

A fluctuating electric current can represent sound information,
and that’s what it does each time you speak into a microphone
or listen to music through earphones. Currents need wires,
however, so how can we send sound information to someone
who is moving? We need a way to represent sound that doesn’t
involve wires. We need radio.

This section describes how radio works. We’ll look at how
radio waves are transmitted and how they’re received. We’ll also
examine the common ways in which sound is represented by radio
waves so that it can travel through space to a receiver far away.
Questions to Think About: How might the movement of electric charge in one metal antenna affect electric charge in a
second antenna nearby? What about when the second antenna
is far away from the first antenna? What does it mean when a
radio station claims to transmit 50,000 W? How does your
radio select one channel from among all the possibilities?
Experiments to Do: Listen to a small AM radio and notice that
the volume of the sound depends on the radio’s orientation or
location. Radio waves are pushing electric charges back and
forth along the radio’s hidden internal antenna. You can sometimes find an orientation in which the radio is silent because
in that orientation the radio waves are unable to move charges
along the antenna. If you put the radio inside a metal box, it
will also become silent. Can you explain why?
You can try similar experiments with a cordless telephone—
actually a radio transmitter and receiver. See how far you can
go with the handset before you lose contact with the base unit.
Notice that the antenna’s size and orientation affect its range.
What happens to the reception if you stand behind a large
metal object?

A Prelude to Radio Waves
Before we can examine radio and radio waves, let’s take a moment to finish the introduction to electrodynamics that we began in Chapters 10 and 11. Although we’ve already
learned most of the fundamental relationships between electricity and magnetism, the
remaining one is about to become important. To refresh your memory, we have observed so
far that electric fields can be produced by electric charges, subatomic particles, and changing magnetic fields and that magnetic fields can be produced by subatomic particles and

334

CHAPT ER 12 Electromagnetic Waves

TABLE 12.1.1

Sources of Electric and Magnetic Fields

Sources of Electric Fields

Sources of Magnetic Fields

Electric charges and subatomic particles
Moving magnetic pole
Changing magnetic fields

Magnetic poles and subatomic particles
Moving electric charge
Changing electric fields

moving electric charges (Table 12.1.1). If isolated magnetic poles exist, they produce magnetic fields and, when moving, electric fields.
In 1865, Scottish physicist James Clerk Maxwell (1831–1879) discovered one additional source of magnetic fields: changing electric fields. That effect is subtle and scientists
overlooked it for most of the nineteenth century. It wasn’t until Maxwell was trying to
formulate a complete electromagnetic theory that he uncovered this additional connection
between electricity and magnetism. This final relationship completed the set shown in
Table 12.1.1. Taken together, these relationships allowed Maxwell to understand one of the
most remarkable phenomena in nature—electromagnetic waves!

THIRD CONNECTION BETWEEN ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM
Electric fields that change with time produce magnetic fields.

Since electric fields can create magnetic fields and magnetic fields contain energy, it’s
clear that electric fields must contain energy, too. The amount of energy in a uniform electric field is the square of the field strength times the volume of the field divided by 8π times
the Coulomb constant. We can write this relationship as a word equation:
energy =

electric field2 · volume
,
8π · Coulomb constant

(12.1.1)

in symbols:
U=

E2 · V
,
8π · k

and in everyday language:
When you charge a large capacitor, it stores a great deal of energy in the electric
field between its plates.
With these observations, we have finished the prelude and are ready to see how radio
works.

Check Your Understanding #1: A Real Flux Capacitor
When a capacitor has separated charge on its plates, there is a strong electric field between
those plates. Connecting the plates with a wire will discharge the capacitor, and its electric field
will suddenly vanish. As the electric field disappears, what other field is present between the
plates?
Answer: There is now a magnetic field between the plates.
Why: Since a changing electric field produces a magnetic field, the plates have a magnetic field
between them while their electric field is disappearing.

Radio

Check Your Figures #1: Lightning in the Fields
During a thunderstorm, the charged clouds produce an electric field of about 10,000 V/m near the
ground. How much energy is contained in 1.0 cubic meter of that electric field?
Answer: The electric field in 1.0 m3 is about 0.00045 J.
Why: Since 10,000 V/m is equivalent to 10,000 J/C · m, Eq. 12.1.1 gives us the energy of a 10,000 V/m
field occupying 1.0 m3 as:
energy =
=

(10,000 J/C · m) 2 · 1.0 m3
8π · 8.988 × 109N · m2/C2
0 .00045 J 2
= 0 .00045 J.
N·m

While that isn’t much energy per cubic meter, a single lightning strike may release the electric field
energy in almost a billion cubic meters. No wonder it produces such a bang!

Antennas and Tank Circuits
A radio transmitter communicates with a receiver via radio waves. These waves are produced by electric charge as it moves up and down the transmitter’s antenna and are detected
when they push electric charge up and down the receiver’s antenna. What exactly are radio
waves, and how does charge on the antenna produce them?
We’ve already seen that electric charge produces electric fields and that moving charge
produces magnetic fields. However, something new happens when charge accelerates.
Accelerating charge produces a mixture of changing electric and magnetic fields that can
reproduce one another endlessly and travel long distances through empty space. These
interwoven electric and magnetic fields are known generally as electromagnetic waves. In
the case of radio, the electromagnetic waves have low frequencies and long wavelengths,
and are known as radio waves.
Before we look at the structure of a radio wave and at how it travels through space,
let’s start with a much simpler situation. We’ll look at how two nearby metal antennas
affect one another. Figure 12.1.1 shows a radio transmitter and a radio receiver, side by
side. Because of their proximity, electric charge on the transmitter’s antenna is sure to
affect charge on the receiver’s antenna.
To communicate with the nearby receiver, the transmitter sends charge up and down its
antenna. This charge’s electric field surrounds the transmitting antenna and extends all the
way to the receiving antenna, where it pushes charge down and up. Unfortunately, the
resulting charge motion in the receiving antenna is weak and the receiver may have difficulty distinguishing it from random thermal motion or from motion caused by other electric fields in the environment. Therefore the transmitter adopts a clever strategy—it moves
charge up and down its antenna rhythmically at a particular frequency. Since the resulting
motion on the receiving antenna is rhythmic at that same frequency, it’s much easier for the
receiver to distinguish from unrelated motion.

Transmitting
antenna

Transmitter Tank

Receiving
antenna

Tank

Receiver

Fig. 12.1.1 Electric charge rushing on and
off the transmitting antenna causes a similar
motion of electric charge in the receiving
antenna.

335

336
Peak
electric ﬁeld

induced emf

(a)

CHAPT ER 12 Electromagnetic Waves

Capacitor

Inductor

Increasing
(b) Decreasing
Current
electric ﬁeld
magnetic ﬁeld

Induced electric

ﬁeld

(c)

Peak
magnetic ﬁeld

(d) Increasing
electric ﬁeld

Decreasing
magnetic ﬁeld

(e)

Peak
electric ﬁeld

Fig. 12.1.2 A tank circuit
is an electromagnetic
harmonic oscillator
consisting of a capacitor
and an inductor. This
sequence shows half a cycle
of its oscillation at five
equally spaced moments
in time. Energy sloshes
rhythmically back and forth
between the capacitor’s
electric field and the
inductor’s magnetic field.

Using this rhythmic motion has another advantage: it allows the transmitter and
receiver to use tank circuits, resonant electronic devices consisting only of capacitors and
inductors (Fig. 12.1.2). Charge can “slosh” back and forth through a tank circuit at a particular frequency, much as water can slosh back and forth in a water storage tank at a particular frequency (see Fig. 9.3.4). Just as you can get the water sloshing strongly by giving
it gentle pushes that are synchronized with its rhythmic motion, so the transmitter can get
charge sloshing strongly through its tank circuit by giving that charge gentle pushes that are
synchronized with its rhythmic motion. Both are examples of resonant energy transfer (see
Section 9.2). By helping the transmitter move larger amounts of charge up and down the
antenna, the tank circuit dramatically strengthens the transmission.
A second tank circuit attached to the receiving antenna helps the receiver detect this
transmission. Gentle, rhythmic pushes by fields from the transmitting antenna cause more
and more charge to move through the receiving antenna and its attached tank circuit. While
the motion of charge on this antenna alone may be difficult to detect, the much larger
charge sloshing in the tank circuit is unmistakable.
We can understand how a tank circuit works by looking at how charge moves between
its capacitor and its inductor. Let’s imagine that the tank circuit starts out with separated
charge on the plates of its capacitor (Fig. 12.1.2a). Since the inductor conducts electricity,
current begins to flow from the positively charged plate, through the inductor, to the negatively charged plate. The current through the inductor must rise slowly and, as it does, it
creates a magnetic field in the inductor (Fig. 12.1.2b).
Soon the capacitor’s separated charge is gone and all the tank circuit’s energy is stored
in the inductor’s magnetic field (Fig. 12.1.2c). However, the current keeps flowing, driven
forward by the inductor’s opposition to current changes. The inductor uses the energy in its
magnetic field to keep the current flowing, and separated charge reappears in the capacitor
(Fig. 12.1.2d). Eventually, the inductor’s magnetic field decreases to zero and everything is
back to its original state—almost. While all the tank circuit’s energy has returned to the
capacitor, the separated charge in that capacitor is now upside down (Fig. 12.1.2e).
This whole process now repeats in reverse. The current flows backward through the
inductor, magnetizing it upside down, and the tank circuit soon returns to its original state.
This cycle repeats over and over again, with charge sloshing from one side of the capacitor
to the other and back again.
A tank circuit is an electronic harmonic oscillator, equivalent to the mechanical harmonic oscillators we examined in Chapter 9. Like all harmonic oscillators, its period (the
time per cycle) doesn’t depend on the amplitude of its oscillation. Thus, no matter how
much charge is sloshing in the tank circuit, the time it takes that charge to flow over and
back is always the same.
The tank circuit’s period depends only on its capacitor and its inductor. The larger the
capacitor’s capacitance, the more separated charge it can hold with a given amount of
energy and the longer it takes that charge to move through the circuit as current. The larger
the inductor’s inductance, its opposition to current changes, the longer that current takes
to start and stop. A tank circuit with a large capacitor and a large inductor may have a
period of a thousandth of a second or more, while one with a small capacitor and a small
inductor may have a period of a billionth of a second or less.
Inductance is defined as the voltage drop across the inductor divided by the rate at
which current through the inductor changes with time. This division gives inductance the
units of voltage divided by current per time. The SI unit of inductance is the volt-second
per ampere, also called the henry (abbreviated H). While large electromagnets have inductances of hundreds of henries, a 1-μH (0.000001-H) inductor is more common in radio.
Its resonant behavior makes the tank circuit useful in radio. That’s because small,
rhythmic pushes on the current in a tank circuit can lead to enormous charge oscillations in
that circuit. In radio, these rhythmic pushes begin when the transmitter sends an alternating
current through a coil of wire. Fields from this coil push current back and forth through the
nearby transmitting tank circuit, causing enormous amounts of charge to slosh back and

Radio

forth in it and travel up and down the transmitting antenna. That charge’s electric field then
pushes rhythmically on charge in the receiving antenna, causing substantial amounts of
charge to travel down and up it and slosh back and forth in the receiving tank circuit. The
receiver can easily detect this sloshing charge.
Energy flows from the transmitter to the receiver via resonant energy transfer: from the
transmitter, to the transmitting tank circuit and antenna, to the receiving antenna and tank
circuit, and finally to the receiver. This sequence of transfers can work efficiently only if all
the parts have resonances at the same frequency. Tuning a radio receiver to a particular
station is largely a matter of adjusting its capacitor and inductor so that its tank circuit has
the right resonant frequency.
Check Your Understanding #2: No Tanks
Why doesn’t the radio transmitter simply push electric charge directly on and off the antenna,
without using a tank circuit?
Answer: The amount of charge that the transmitter can move directly on and off the antenna is too
small to create a strong radio wave.
Why: The tank circuit is useful because it allows the transmitter to move much more charge. Just as
a tuning fork is inefficient at emitting sound waves by itself, so a radio antenna is inefficient at emitting radio waves by itself. You can make the tuning fork much louder by coupling it to an object that
resonates at its frequency. Similarly, you can make the radio antenna emit a much stronger radio
wave by coupling it to a tank circuit that resonates at its frequency.

Radio Waves
When the two antennas are close together, charge in the transmitting antenna exerts electrostatic force directly on charge in the receiving antenna. However, when the antennas are
far apart, the interactions between them are more complicated. Charge in the transmitting
antenna must then emit a radio wave to push on charge in the receiving antenna. Like a
water wave, a radio wave is a disturbance that carries energy from one place to another. But
unlike a water wave, which must travel in a fluid, a radio wave can travel through otherwise
empty space, from one side of the universe to the other.
Like all electromagnetic waves, a radio wave consists only of a changing electric field
and a changing magnetic field. These fields re-create one another over and over again as the
wave travels through empty space at the speed of light—exactly 299,792,458 m/s (approximately 186,282 miles per second).
The radio wave is created when electric charge in the antenna accelerates. Whereas
stationary charge or a steady current produces constant electric or magnetic fields, accelerating charge produces fields that change with time. As charge flows up and down the
antenna, its electric field points in alternating directions vertically, and its magnetic field
points in alternating directions horizontally. These changing fields then re-create one
another again and again, and sail off through space as an electromagnetic wave. At each
point along its path, the wave’s electric field direction, magnetic field direction, and direction of travel are mutually perpendicular.
The wave emitted by a vertical transmitting antenna has a vertical polarization, that
is, its electric field points alternately up and down (Fig. 12.1.3a). We identify those “ups”
as crests, and the distance between adjacent crests is its wavelength. For radio waves, that
wavelength is usually 1 m (3.3 ft) or more. The wave’s magnetic field is perpendicular to
its electric field and points in alternating directions horizontally.
Had the transmitting antenna been tipped on its side, the wave’s electric field would have
pointed in alternating directions horizontally and the wave would have had a horizontal
polarization (Fig. 12.1.4b). The wave’s magnetic field would then point alternately up and
down. Whatever the polarization, the electric and magnetic fields move forward together as a
traveling wave, so the pattern of fields moves smoothly through space at the speed of light.

337

338

CHAPT ER 12 Electromagnetic Waves

Fig. 12.1.3 Electromagnetic waves traveling toward
the right at the speed
of light. The red arrows
represent electric fields at
points on the yellow path;
the green arrows represent
magnetic fields at those
same points. At each
point, the wave’s electric
field, magnetic field, and
direction of travel are
mutually perpendicular.
(a) In a vertically polarized
electromagnetic wave, the
electric field is directed
vertically and the magnetic
field is directed horizontally.
(b) In a horizontally
polarized electromagnetic
wave, the electric field
is directed horizontally
and the magnetic field is
directed vertically.

(a)

Electric ﬁeld

Velocity

Magnetic ﬁeld

Wavelength
(b)

Magnetic ﬁeld

Velocity

Electric ﬁeld

Wavelength

COMMON M ISCON CE P T I ON S : Electromagnetic Waves and Undulations
Misconception: Since the fields of an electromagnetic wave appear wavy (Fig. 12.1.3), the light
wave itself undulates; it actually undulates up and down or back and forth as it heads rightward!
Resolution: The arrows drawn to represent the fields in an electromagnetic wave are associated
with points along the straight path of the wave. Each wave in Fig. 12.1.3 is heading directly
rightward along the yellow path and the arrows indicate field values at points along that path.

If you stood in one place and could watch this wave pass, you’d notice its electric field
fluctuating up and down at the same frequency as the charge that created it. When the wave
passes a distant receiving antenna, it pushes charge up and down that antenna at this frequency. If the receiving tank circuit is resonant at this frequency, the amount of charge
sloshing in it should become large enough for the receiver to detect.
A radio station can optimize its transmission by using a resonant transmitting antenna. A
straight antenna is another electronic harmonic oscillator, with a period that depends only on
its length. When that length is half the wavelength of the radio wave it’s transmitting, charge
sloshes up and down the antenna in a natural resonance at the frequency of the radio wave.
Surprisingly, the antenna is actually a tank circuit (Fig. 12.1.4)—its tips act as the plates
of a capacitor and its middle acts as the inductor. Despite its linear shape, the antenna has the

Fig. 12.1.4 A straight
antenna is a linear tank
circuit, with ends that act
as capacitor plates and
a middle that acts as an
inductor. This sequence
shows half a cycle of
its oscillation at five
equally spaced moments
in time; compare a–e to
Fig. 12.1.2a–e. Charge
oscillates up and down the
antenna and the antenna’s
energy alternates between
its electric field and its
magnetic field.

(b)

Peak
electric ﬁeld

(c)

(d)

Peak
magnetic ﬁeld

antenna

(a)

(e)

Peak
electric ﬁeld

Radio

same resonant behavior as the coiled tank circuit shown in Fig. 12.1.2. When the transmitting tank circuit and antenna are resonant at the same frequency, there’s a resonant energy
transfer from one to the other. These resonant effects help to produce a powerful radio wave.
Because it’s half a wavelength long and its ends are oppositely charged, this antenna is
known as a halfwave dipole antenna. Many radio stations use such antennas. It’s possible,
however, to omit the bottom half of the dipole antenna by placing the top half above an
electrically conducting surface. The conducting surface is a mirror (Fig. 12.1.5) and its
reflection of the top half acts like the missing bottom half of the dipole antenna. Known as
a quarter-wave monopole antenna, this shorter antenna is often more convenient, particularly when the antenna projects upward from a metal surface or the ground.
The transmitting antenna sends the strongest portion of its radio wave out perpendicular to its length. That’s not unexpected because the motion of charge on the antenna is most
obvious when viewed from a line perpendicular to its length. Thus, a vertical antenna sends
most of its wave out horizontally, where people are likely to receive it. No wave emerges
from the end of an antenna.
Both electric and magnetic fields contain energy, so as the electromagnetic wave
travels through space, it carries energy away from the transmitter. When a radio station
advertises that it “transmits 50,000 W of music,” it’s claiming that its antenna emits 50,000 J
of energy per second or 50,000 W of power in its electromagnetic wave. The receiving
antenna must absorb enough of this power to detect the wave. However, the farther the wave
gets from the transmitting antenna, the more spread out and weaker it becomes. Trees and
mountains also absorb or reflect some of the wave and hinder reception.
For the best reception, a listener should be located where the radio wave is strong and
where there’s an unobstructed path from the transmitting antenna to the receiving antenna.
To be resonant, the receiving antenna should be a half-wave dipole or a quarter-wave
monopole, and it should be oriented along the radio wave’s polarization: vertical for a vertically polarized radio wave or horizontal for a horizontally polarized radio wave. Aligning
the receiving antenna with the wave’s polarization makes certain that the wave’s electric
field pushes charge along the antenna, not across it.
To ensure good reception regardless of receiving antenna orientation, many radio stations transmit a complicated circularly polarized wave that combines both vertical and
horizontal polarizations. To form this wave, they need several antennas. For wavelengths
under a few meters, these antennas can all be attached inexpensively to a single mast.
That’s why commercial FM and TV broadcasts, which use short-wavelength radio waves,
are usually transmitted with circular polarization. However, commercial AM broadcasts,
which use long-wavelength radio waves, are transmitted only with vertical polarization.
Because commercial FM radio waves usually include both polarizations, FM receiving
antennas can be vertical or horizontal. Portable FM receivers often use vertical telescoping
antennas, while home receivers frequently use horizontal wire antennas. All these antennas
are approximately half-wave dipole antennas or quarter-wave monopole antennas.
A quarter-wave monopole antenna for commercial AM radio would have to be about 100 m
(330 ft) long, so straight AM antennas (such as those on cars) are much shorter than optimal.
That’s why many AM antennas are designed to respond to the radio wave’s horizontal magnetic field rather than to its vertical electric field. These magnetic antennas are horizontal coils
of wire that experience induced currents when exposed to fluctuating magnetic fields.
Check Your Understanding #3: There’s No Place Like Home
Why do cordless telephones work only when they’re close to their base units?
Answer: When the cordless telephone is too far from its base unit, the electromagnetic waves become
so spread out that they have trouble communicating.
Why: The powers emitted by the base unit and the handset are small, so their waves are relatively
difficult to detect. As long as the handset and base unit are close, they are able to detect each other’s
waves. When the distance between them becomes too great, the waves become too spread out to
detect and the handset and base unit lose contact with one another.

339

(b) Tilted 45°

(a)
Real

Real

Mirror

Virtual
Virtual

Mirror

Fig. 12.1.5 (a) Side
view of a quarter-wave
monopole antenna above
a conducting surface or
mirror. The mirror reflects
a virtual image of the
antenna, so the system
acts like a half-wave dipole
antenna. (b) The same
monopole antenna and its
reflection viewed from a
45° angle above the mirror.

Fig. 12.1.6 When sound is transmitted using amplitude
modulation, air pressure is represented by the strength
of the radio wave. A compression is represented by
strengthening the radio wave and a rarefaction is
represented by weakening it.

Pressure

CHAPT ER 12 Electromagnetic Waves

Average pressure

Air pressure
Time

Charge

+

−
Electric charge on the antenna

Representing Sound: AM and FM Radio

Pressure

A radio transmitter does more than simply emit a radio wave. It uses that radio wave to
represent sound. Because sound waves are fluctuations in air density and radio waves are
fluctuations in electric and magnetic fields, a radio wave can’t literally “carry” a sound
wave. However, a radio wave can carry sound information and instruct the receiver how to
reproduce the sound.
To convey sound information, the radio station alters its radio wave to represent compressions and rarefactions of the air. The receiver then recreates those compressions and
rarefactions. There are two common techniques by which a radio wave can represent those
density fluctuations. One is called amplitude modulation and involves changing the overall
strength of the radio wave. The other is called frequency modulation and involves small
changes in the frequency of the radio wave.
In the amplitude modulation (AM) technique, air density is represented by the
strength of the transmitted wave (Fig. 12.1.6). To represent a compression of the air, the
transmitter is turned up so that more charge moves up and down the transmitting antenna.
To represent a rarefaction, the transmitter is turned down so that less charge moves up and
down the antenna. The frequency at which charge moves up and down the antenna remains
steady, so only the amplitude of the radio wave changes. The receiver measures the strength
of the radio wave and uses this measurement to re-create the sound. When it detects a
strong radio wave, it pushes its speaker toward the listener and compresses the air. When it
detects a weak radio wave, it pulls its speaker away from the listener and rarefies the air.
In the frequency modulation (FM) technique, air density is represented by the frequency of the transmitted wave (Fig. 12.1.7). To represent a compression of the air, the

Average pressure

Air pressure
Time
+

Fig. 12.1.7 When sound is transmitted by frequency
modulation, air pressure is represented by changing the
frequency of the radio transmitter slightly. A compression is
represented by increasing that frequency and a rarefaction
by decreasing it.

Charge

340

−
Electric charge on the antenna

Radio

transmitter’s frequency is increased slightly so that charge moves up and down the transmitting antenna a little more often than normal. To represent a rarefaction, the transmitter’s
frequency is decreased slightly so that the charge moves up and down a little less often than
normal. These changes in frequency are extremely small—so small that charge continues
to slosh strongly in all the resonant components and reception is unaffected. The receiver
measures the radio wave’s frequency and uses this measurement to re-create the sound.
When it detects an increased frequency, it compresses the air, and when it detects a
decreased frequency, it rarefies the air.
Although the AM and FM techniques for representing sound can be used with a radio
wave at any frequency, the most common commercial bands in the United States are the
AM band between 550 kHz and 1600 kHz (550,000 Hz and 1,600,000 Hz) and the FM
band between 88 MHz and 108 MHz (88,000,000 Hz and 108,000,000 Hz). Elsewhere in
the spectrum of radio frequencies are many other commercial, military, and public transmissions, including TV, shortwave, amateur radio, telephone, data, police, and aircraft
bands. These other transmissions use AM, FM, and a few other techniques to represent
sound and information with radio waves.
Check Your Understanding #4: Another Volume Control
When you are listening to the AM radio in a car and drive through a tunnel, the volume becomes very
low. Explain.
Answer: The tunnel blocks most of the radio wave. Since only a small fluctuating wave reaches your
radio, the radio produces only small fluctuations in air density with its speaker.
Why: An AM radio has trouble distinguishing between a distant transmission representing loud music
and a nearby transmission representing soft music. In both cases, the receiver detects only small
variations in the current moving up and down its antenna. That’s why you must turn up the volume
of an AM radio as you move farther from the transmitting antenna or as you enter a tunnel.

Bandwidth and Cable
A pure, single-frequency radio wave doesn’t carry any information. To represent sound,
video, or any other form of information, the radio wave must vary with time. Think of
smoke signals—a steady stream of smoke carries no information, but carefully timed puffs
of smoke can send a message.
Once a radio wave is varying with time to carry information, it no longer has a single
pure frequency. Regardless of which aspects of the radio wave are varying, that wave now
includes a range of frequencies. The more information the radio wave carries each second,
the broader that range of frequencies becomes.
When it’s representing sound, a radio wave has a range of radio frequencies that
stretches from somewhat below the official frequency of the radio wave, the carrier frequency, to somewhat above that frequency. The wider the audio frequency range of the
sound, the more sound information must be sent each second and the broader the range of
radio frequencies needed to represent that sound. The range of frequencies needed to transmit such a stream of information is known as the transmission’s bandwidth.
By international agreement, an AM radio station may use 10 kHz of bandwidth, 5 kHz
above and below its carrier frequency. To stay within that bandwidth, the sound being
represented can’t contain frequencies above 5 kHz. Although this restricted frequency
range is bad for music, it allows competing stations to function with carrier frequencies
only 10 kHz apart, so 106 different stations can operate between 550 kHz and 1600 kHz.
An FM radio station may use 200 kHz of bandwidth, 100 kHz on each side of its carrier frequency. This luxurious allocation permits FM radio to represent a very broad range
of audio frequencies, in stereo, which is why an FM radio station can do a much better job
of sending music to your radio than an AM station can. In recent years, FM stations have

341

342

CHAPT ER 12 Electromagnetic Waves

begun using their 200-kHz bandwidths to carry digital information representing several
programs of “high-definition” sound. (We’ll examine digital audio in Chapter 14.)
Because high-frequency radio waves travel in straight lines between antennas, it’s hard
to receive a commercial FM station from more than about 100 km (60 mi) away. Even
when the transmitting antenna sits on top of a tall tower, Earth’s curvature and surface
terrain severely limit the range of FM reception.
Low-frequency radio waves, such as those used by commercial AM stations, are
reflected by charged particles in Earth’s outer atmosphere, so portions of the radio wave
that would otherwise be lost to space bounce back toward the ground. This returning power
allows you to receive AM stations over a considerable distance, even when you have no
direct line of sight to the transmitter’s antenna. At sundown, these atmospheric layers
become so effective at reflecting AM radio that you can hear a transmission from thousands
of kilometers away as clearly as if it were a hometown station.
The spectrum of electromagnetic waves is a limited resource, and if it could only be
used once, it would quickly run out of bandwidth. Fortunately, distance and enclosures
make it possible to reuse the spectrum many times. Cell phones that are far from one
another can share the same carrier frequencies and bandwidth because their radio waves
weaken with distance and essentially don’t overlap. However, even nearby radio transmissions can use the same carrier frequencies by enclosing their electromagnetic waves
inside cables.
Cable radio, television, and data networks are similar to broadcast networks except
that they send electromagnetic waves through cables rather than through empty space. A
typical radio or television cable consists of an insulated metal wire inside a tube of metal
foil or woven metal mesh. This wire-inside-a-tube arrangement is called coaxial cable
because its two metal components share the same centerline or axis. In contrast, a typical
computer-data cable consists of a number of insulated metal wires that are twisted into
several pairs.
Electromagnetic waves can propagate easily through a coaxial or twisted-pair cable,
following its twists and turns from the transmitter that produces the waves to the receiver
that uses them. The fact that wires are assisting these waves in their travels makes them
more complicated than waves in empty space. However, they still involve electric and magnetic fields and still propagate forward at nearly the speed of light.
Because the electromagnetic waves inside a cable don’t interact with those outside it,
the transmitter and receiver can use whatever parts of the spectrum they choose, without
concerns about sharing. A typical coaxial cable can handle frequencies up to about 1000 MHz
and typical twisted-pair cable can reach 350 MHz, so either one can carry a great deal of
information each second.
However, coaxial cables must now compete with optical fiber cables that guide light
from one place to another. We’ll examine optical fibers in Section 14.2. Like radio waves,
light is an electromagnetic wave and can be amplitude or frequency modulated to represent
information. However, light’s frequency is extremely high; the frequencies of visible light
range from 4.5 × 1014 to 7.5 × 1014 Hz. If we were to allocate FM radio channels 200 kHz
apart throughout the visible spectrum, there would be about 1.5 billion channels available!

Check Your Understanding #5: Beaten by the Bandwidth
You’re playing piano for an AM radio station, and you strike the highest key on the piano. The pitch
of the resulting sound is 4186 Hz. Can the listeners hear that note from their radios?
Answer: Yes, they can hear it, at least in principle.
Why: The bandwidth of an AM radio station extends to 5000 Hz above and below its carrier frequency, so the station is officially permitted to represent sound frequencies as high as 5000 Hz.
However, in practice the station probably begins to filter out sounds well below that frequency to
avoid accidentally violating their license.

Microwave Ovens

343

Microwave Ovens

S EC TIO N 1 2 . 2

Power cord

Cooking
chamber

Waveguide

Glass
window with
metal screen

Motor

Door

Magnetron

Fan

Controls
High-voltage
power supply

Door release

In addition to carrying sounds from one place to another, electromagnetic waves can carry power. One interesting example of
such power transfer is a microwave oven. It uses relatively
high-frequency electromagnetic waves to transfer power
directly to the water molecules in food so that the food cooks
from the inside out. This section discusses both how those
waves are created and why they heat food.

Questions to Think About: Why do microwave ovens tend to
cook food unevenly if you don’t move the food during cooking? How can part of a frozen meal become boiling hot
while another part remains frozen? Why must you be careful
with metal objects placed inside the oven? Why do some
objects remain cool in the microwave oven, while other
objects become extremely hot? How does microwave popcorn work?
Experiments to Do: A microwave oven transfers power primarily
to the water in food. You can see this effect by placing completely water-free food ingredients such as salt, baking
powder, sugar, or salad oil on a microwave-safe ceramic dish
in a microwave oven. Cook the ingredients briefly. You will find
that the ingredients and dish remain relatively cool. Add just
a little water to the collection. What happens when you cook
them this time?
Now try cooking a very cold ice cube. The cube should
come directly from the freezer on an ice-cold plate, so that its
surface is solid and dry. What happens? If ice contains water
and water is what absorbs power in a microwave oven, why
doesn’t the ice absorb power and melt?

Microwaves and Food
When studying thermal radiation in Section 7.3, we discussed the wavelengths of electromagnetic waves. While examining radio, we concentrated on the frequencies of electromagnetic waves. However, we know from Eq. 9.2.1 that the wavelength and frequency of a
wave aren’t independent. A basic electromagnetic wave in empty space has both a wavelength and a frequency, and their product is the speed of light. That relationship can be
written as a word equation:
speed of light = wavelength · frequency

(12.2.1)

in symbols:
c = λ · ν,
and in everyday language:
The higher the frequency of an electromagnetic wave, the shorter its wavelength
becomes.
Like Fig. 7.3.2, Fig. 12.2.1 shows the approximate wavelengths of many types of electromagnetic waves, but it also shows their frequencies.
Radio broadcasts use the low-frequency, long-wavelength portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. Commercial AM radio broadcasts at frequencies of 550 to 1600 kHz
(wavelengths of 545 to 187 m) and commercial FM radio broadcasts at frequencies of 88
to 108 MHz (wavelengths of 3.4 to 2.8 m). As long as their wavelengths are 1 m (3.3 ft) or
longer, electromagnetic waves are called radio waves. Electromagnetic waves that have

CHAPT ER 12 Electromagnetic Waves

Frequency (hertz)

10

1 Although he was
orphaned as a child and
never completed grade
school, American Percy
Lebaron Spencer
(1894–1970) had a
brilliant career as a
scientist and microwave
engineer. In 1945, while
visiting a magnetron
testing laboratory, he
leaned over an operating
magnetron and the candy
bar in his shirt pocket
melted. Immediately
recognizing what had
happened, he soon had
popcorn popping about
the lab and even cooked
an egg until it exploded.
Cooking has never been
the same since.

3

1

10–3

10 –6
Wavelength (meters)

1021

Gamma rays

1018

X-rays

Infrared light
Visible light
Ultraviolet light

1015
Far infrared light

1012
Millimeter waves

109

VHF television
FM radio
VHF television
UHF television
Microwaves

106
Shortwave radio

Fig. 12.2.1 The
electromagnetic
spectrum. Microwaves
have wavelengths
between about 1 m and
1 mm, corresponding to
frequencies from 300 MHz
up to 300 GHz.

AM radio

344

10 –9

10–12

10–15

wavelengths of 1 mm or longer, but less than 1 m, are called microwaves. Microwave
ovens usually cook food with 0.122-m electromagnetic waves, so their name is appropriate.
To explain how a microwave oven heats food 1 , let’s begin by looking at water molecules. Water molecules are electrically polarized—that is, they have positively charged
ends and negatively charged ends. This polarization comes about because of quantum
physics and the tendency of oxygen atoms to pull electrons away from hydrogen atoms.
The water molecule is bent, with its two hydrogen atoms sticking up from its oxygen atom
like Mickey Mouse’s ears. When the oxygen atom pulls the electrons partly away from the
hydrogen atoms, its side of the molecule becomes negatively charged, while the hydrogen
atoms’ side becomes positively charged. Water is thus a polar molecule.
In ice, these polar water molecules are arranged in an orderly fashion with fixed positions and orientations. However, in liquid water, the molecules are more randomly oriented
(Fig. 12.2.2). Their arrangements are constrained only by their tendency to bind together,
positive end to negative end, to form a dense network of coupled molecules. This binding
between the positively charged hydrogen atom on one water molecule and the negatively
charged oxygen atom on another molecule is known as a hydrogen bond.
If you place liquid water in a strong electric field, its water molecules will tend to rotate
into alignment with the field. That’s because a misaligned molecule has extra electrostatic
potential energy and accelerates in the direction that reduces its potential energy as quickly as
possible. In this case, the water molecule will experience a torque and will undergo an angular acceleration that makes it rotate into alignment. As it rotates, the molecule will bump into
other molecules and convert some of its electrostatic potential energy into thermal energy.
A similar effect occurs at a crowded party when everyone is suddenly told to face the front
of the room. People brush against one another as they turn, and sliding friction converts some
of their energy into thermal energy. If the people are told to turn back and forth repeatedly, they
will become quite warm. The same holds true for water. If the electric field reverses its direction many times, the water molecules will turn back and forth and become hotter and hotter.
A microwave’s fluctuating electric field is well suited to heating water. A microwave
oven uses 2.45-GHz (2.45-gigahertz or 2,450,000,000-Hz) microwaves to twist the food’s
water molecules back and forth billions of times per second. As the water molecules turn,
they bump into one another and heat up. The water absorbs the microwaves and converts
their energy into thermal energy. This particular microwave frequency was chosen not
because of any resonant effect but because it was not in use for communications and because
it cooks food uniformly. If the frequency were higher, the microwaves would be absorbed
too strongly by food and wouldn’t penetrate deeply into large items. If the frequency were
lower, the microwaves would pass through food too easily and wouldn’t cook it efficiently.
This twisting effect explains why only foods or objects containing water or other polar
molecules cook well in a microwave oven. Microwave-safe ceramic plates, glass cups, and
plastic containers are water-free and usually remain cool. Even ice has trouble absorbing microwave power because its crystal structure constrains the water molecules so they can’t turn easily.

Microwave Ovens

+

+

(a)

+

+

–

+

–

+

+

–

–

+

+

–

No electric ﬁeld

–

+
–

+

+

+

–

+

–

+

+

+
+

+

+

+

(b)

+

+

+

+
+

+

+

–

+

–

–

+

–

–

+

Electric ﬁeld

–

+

+

Electric ﬁeld
+

+

–

+

+

–

–

+

+

–
+

+

+
+

+

–

–

+

(c)

–

+

+

+

+

+

–

+

–

–

–

Fig. 12.2.2 (a) The water
molecules in liquid water are
randomly oriented when there’s no
electric field. (b, c) But an electric
field tends to orient them with their
positive ends in the direction of the
field.

–

+
+

+

Although ice melts slowly in a microwave oven, the liquid water it produces heats
quickly. This peculiar heating behavior explains why it’s so easy to burn yourself on frozen
food heated in a microwave oven. The portions of the food that defrost first absorb most of
the microwave power and overheat, while the rest of the food remains frozen solid. You
never know whether your next bite will break your teeth or sear the roof of your mouth. To
address this problem, many microwave ovens have defrost cycles in which microwave
heating is interrupted periodically to let heat flow naturally through the food to melt the ice.
Once the frozen parts have melted, all the food can absorb microwaves.
Check Your Understanding #1: Microwave Popcorn
A popcorn kernel contains moist starch trapped inside a hard, dry hull. You can scorch this hull by
cooking the corn in hot oil but not when you cook it in a microwave oven. How can the microwave
oven pop the corn without risk of overheating the hull?
Answer: The microwave oven transfers heat to water molecules in the starch so that the hull never
becomes hotter than the material inside it.
Why: A corn kernel cooked in oil is heated by contact with the hot oil and the pot. You can easily overheat
the outer hull and burn it. However, microwaves transfer heat to the water molecules inside the kernel.
The hull can’t overheat because the hottest thing it touches is the starchy insides of the kernel. When
the pressure of steam inside the kernel becomes high enough, the hull breaks and the kernel “pops.”

345

346

CHAPT ER 12 Electromagnetic Waves

Check Your Figures #1: Shopping for Food
The red light used by many grocery store checkout stations to scan product codes is produced by
a helium–neon laser. This light is an electromagnetic wave with a wavelength of approximately
633 nm. What is its frequency?
Answer: The frequency is about 4.74 × 1014 Hz.
Why: Since the product of frequency and wavelength for an electromagnetic wave is equal to the
speed of light, its frequency is equal to the speed of light divided by its wavelength:
299,792,458 m/s
= 4.74 × 1014 Hz.
0.000000633 m

Metal in a Microwave Oven
Contrary to popular lore, metal objects and microwave ovens aren’t always incompatible. In fact, the walls of the oven’s cooking chamber are metal, yet they cause no
trouble when exposed to microwaves during cooking. Like most metal surfaces, the
walls reflect microwaves. They do this by acting as both receiving and transmitting
antennas. Electric fields in the microwaves cause mobile charges in the metal surfaces
to accelerate and absorb the original microwaves. As these charges accelerate, they
emit new microwaves. The emitted microwaves have the same frequencies as the original ones, but they travel in new directions. The original microwaves have been reflected
by the surface.
The cooking-chamber walls reflect the oven’s microwaves and keep them bouncing
around inside. Even the metal grid covering the window reflects microwaves. That’s
because charge has enough time during a microwave cycle to flow around each hole in the
Courtesy Lou Bloomfield
grid and compensate for the hole’s presence. As long as the wavelength of
Microwave guide
Magnetron
an electromagnetic wave is much larger than the holes in a metal grid, the
wave reflects perfectly from that grid. In fact, if there’s nothing inside the
oven to absorb the microwaves, they’ll bounce around inside it until they
return to their source, a vacuum tube called a magnetron (Fig. 12.2.3), and
eventually cause it to overheat.
While metal surfaces help confine the microwaves inside the oven,
Fan cooking your food and not you, extra metal inside the microwave can
cause trouble. If you wrap food in aluminum foil, the foil will reflect the
microwaves and the food won’t cook. However, food placed in a shallow
metal dish cooks reasonably well because microwaves enter the open top,
pass through the food, reflect, and pass through the food again.
Sometimes metal’s mobile charges do more than just reflect microwaves. If enough charge is pushed onto the sharp point of a metal twist-tie
or scrap of aluminum foil, some of it will jump right into the air as a spark.
Capacitor
Step-up transformer
This spark can start a fire, particularly when the twist-tie is attached to
something flammable, like a plastic or paper bag. As a rule of thumb,
Fig. 12.2.3 This oven’s
magnetron microwave
never put a sharp metal object in the microwave oven.
source is located in the
Some metal objects heat up in a microwave oven. When microwaves push charge
middle of the picture, just
back
and forth in a metal, the metal experiences an alternating current. If the metal has a
to the left of its cooling
substantial
electrical resistance, this alternating current will experience a voltage drop
fan. Microwaves travel
and heat up the metal. While thick oven walls and cookware have low resistances and
to the cooking chamber
through the rectangular
remain cool, thin metal strips quickly overheat. Metallic decorations on porcelain dinnermetal duct on top of the
ware are particularly susceptible to damage in a microwave oven, so warming up coffee
oven. The high-voltage
in Grandma’s gold-rimmed teacup is sure to be a disaster. When you put metal in a
transformer at the bottom
microwave oven, make sure that it is thick enough to conduct electricity well and that it
right provides power to the
has no sharp points.
magnetron.

Microwave Ovens

Resistive heating in conducting objects can actually be useful at times. Since microwave ovens cook food inside and outside at the same time, the food’s surface never gets
particularly hot, and the food doesn’t brown or become crisp. To improve their textures and
appearances, some foods come with special wrappers that conduct just enough current to
become very hot in a microwave oven. These wrappers provide the high surface temperatures needed to brown the foods.
Another peculiar feature of microwave ovens is that they don’t always cook evenly.
That’s because the amplitude of the microwave electric field isn’t uniform throughout
the oven. As the microwaves bounce around the cooking chamber, they pass through
the same spot from several different directions at once. When they do, they exhibit
interference effects (see Section 9.3). At one location, the individual electric fields may
point in the same direction and experience constructive interference so that food there
heats up quickly. At another location, however, those fields may point in opposite
directions and experience destructive interference so that food there doesn’t cook well
at all.
If nothing is moving in the microwave oven, the pattern of microwaves inside it doesn’t
move either. There are then regions in which the electric field has very large amplitudes and
regions in which the amplitudes are very small. The larger the amplitude of the electric
field, the faster it cooks food.
To heat food uniformly in such a microwave oven, you must move the food around as
it’s cooking. Many ovens have turntables inside that move the food automatically. Another
solution to this problem is to stir the microwaves around the oven with a rotating metal
paddle. The pattern of microwaves inside the chamber changes as the paddle turns, and the
food cooks more evenly. Still other microwave ovens use two separate microwave frequencies to cook the food. Because these two frequencies cook independently, it’s unlikely that
a portion of the food will be missed by both waves.

Check Your Understanding #2: Half and Half
You place a thick metal divider into your microwave oven so that it divides the cooking chamber
exactly in half. The oven sends its microwaves into the right half of the chamber. If you put food in
the left half of the chamber, will it cook?
Answer: No, it won’t cook.
Why: The metal divider will reflect the microwaves and keep them from entering the left half of the
oven.

Creating Microwaves with a Magnetron
Clearly, changing electric fields cook the food as microwaves bounce around the inside of
an oven. But how are these microwaves created? From the previous section on radio, you
might guess that the oven creates an alternating current at 2.45 GHz and that this current
causes charge to slosh in a tank circuit and move up and down an antenna. That’s pretty
much what actually happens inside a magnetron tube.
A magnetron is a special vacuum tube—a hollow chamber from which all the air
has been removed. Composed primarily of metal and ceramic parts, the magnetron
uses beams of electrons to make charge slosh in a number of microwave tank circuits.
These tank circuits have resonant frequencies of 2.45 GHz, the operating frequency of
the oven. With the help of a tiny antenna, the magnetron emits the microwaves that
cook the food.
The microwave tank circuits are arranged in a ring around the magnetron’s evacuated chamber. For one of these tank circuits to oscillate naturally at 2.45 GHz, its
capacitor must have an extremely small capacitance and its inductor must have an

347

348

CHAPT ER 12 Electromagnetic Waves

Inductor

Capacitor

(a)

Radio frequency tank circuit
(b)
Inductor

Capacitor

Microwave frequency tank circuit

Fig. 12.2.4 (a) At radio
frequencies, a tank circuit’s
inductor is a coil of wire
and its capacitor is a pair
of separated plates. (b) At
microwave frequencies,
a tank circuit’s inductor
is merely the curve of a
C-shaped strip and its
capacitor is the tips of that
strip.

extremely small inductance. These requirements can be met by a C-shaped
strip of metal (Fig. 12.2.4). Its curve is the inductor, and its tips are the
capacitor.
Electric charge sloshes back and forth on the C-shaped strip just as it does
in a conventional tank circuit (Fig. 12.1.2). Known as a resonant cavity, this
strip is another electronic harmonic oscillator and therefore has a period that
doesn’t depend on the amount of charge that’s sloshing.
The magnetron of a microwave oven typically contains eight of these resonant cavities, each carefully adjusted in size and shape so that its natural
resonance occurs exactly at 2.45 GHz. Because these cavities are arranged in
a ring and each one shares its tips with those of its neighboring cavities, they
tend to oscillate alternately (Fig. 12.2.5). At the start of an oscillatory cycle,
half the metal tips are positively charged and half are negatively charged (Fig.
12.2.5a). Currents begin to flow through the ring and produce magnetic fields
in the resonant cavities (Fig. 12.2.5b). These magnetic fields propel the
currents around the ring even after the charge separations have vanished.
Soon the charge separations reappear but with the positive and negative tips
interchanged (Fig. 12.2.5c).

Check Your Understanding #3: Large Economy Size
If a manufacturer made a magnetron that was slightly larger than normal in every dimension, how
would that magnetron behave?
Answer: It would operate at a frequency below 2.45 GHz.
Why: The frequency of the microwaves emitted by a magnetron is determined exclusively by the
natural resonances of its cavities. If those cavities are enlarged, both the inductances of their curves
and the capacitances of their tips will increase. Their resonant frequencies will decrease, and the
magnetron will emit lower-frequency microwaves.

Powering the Magnetron: The Lorentz Force
(a)

Electric ﬁelds

Magnetic ﬁelds
(b)

Currents
Resonant cavities
(c)

As currents oscillate back and forth around the cavities at 2.45 GHz, they fill the
magnetron with alternating electric and magnetic fields. However, as the energy
in these fields is extracted to cook the food or is lost to the imperfect conductivities of the cavities themselves, something must continuously replenish it. That
replacement power is supplied to the cavities by four streams of energetic
electrons.
At the center of the magnetron tube, surrounded only by empty space, is
an electrically heated cathode that tends to emit electrons (Fig. 12.2.6a). A highvoltage power supply pumps negative charge onto this cathode so that a strong
electric field points toward it from the positively charged cavity tips. If there were
no other fields present in the magnetron, negatively charged electrons would
emerge from the hot cathode and accelerate toward the positively charged tips as
four beams of electrons (Fig. 12.2.6b).
However, the magnetron also includes a large permanent magnet. Why else
would it be called a magnetron? This magnet creates a strong, steady magnetic
field that points upward along the axis of the magnetron, parallel to the cathode
itself (Fig. 12.2.6c). The purpose of this magnetic field is to alter the motions of
Fig. 12.2.5 A typical magnetron has eight C-shaped resonant cavities arranged in a ring.
(a) Separated charge on the tips of the cavities (b) flows as currents through the ring and
(c) becomes reversed. As the currents flow, magnetic fields appear in the eight cavities,
pointing alternately up and down.

Microwave Ovens

(a)

Heated
cathode

349

(b)

Electrons
Electric ﬁeld only
(c)

(d)

Magnetic ﬁeld only

Both ﬁelds

Fig. 12.2.6 (a) Electrons are emitted by the hot cathode in the center of a magnetron’s ring of
resonant cavities. (b) Electric fields alone would accelerate the electrons toward the positively charged
cavity tips. (c) A magnetic field alone (pointing upward) would make the electrons orbit the cathode
in counterclockwise loops. (d) Together, these fields create spokelike electron beams that circle the
cathode counterclockwise and always strike negatively charged tips of the cavities.

the electrons. An electron has an electric charge but not a magnetic pole, and a stationary
charge experiences a force from an electric field but not from a magnetic field. How then
can the magnetron’s magnetic field affect the motion of the electrons?
The key word in that last paragraph is stationary. Once a charge is moving through a
magnetic field, it does experience a force—the Lorentz force. Named after its discoverer,
Dutch physicist Hendrik Antoon Lorentz (1853–1928), the Lorentz force affects a charge
that is moving through a magnetic field. This force pushes the charge at right angles to both
the charge’s velocity and the magnetic field (Fig. 12.2.7). The strength of the Lorentz force
is proportional to the charge, to the velocity, to the magnetic field, and to the sine of the
angle between the velocity and the magnetic field. Last, the direction of the Lorentz force
on a positive charge follows a right-hand rule: when the extended index finger of your right
hand points along the charge’s velocity and your bent middle finger points along the magnetic field, the force on the charge points along your extended thumb. A negative charge
experiences a force in the opposite direction. This relationship can be written as a word
equation,
Lorentz force = charge · velocity · magnetic field · sine of angle,

Lorentz force

(12.2.2)

Magnetic
field

in symbols:
F = qvB · sin (angle),
and in everyday language:
When charged particles from the sun encounter Earth’s magnetic field,
they get pushed into spiral paths, producing the aurora borealis and the
aurora australis,
where the angle involved is between the velocity and the magnetic field, and the direction
of the Lorentz force follows the right-hand rule.

Moving
charge

Velocity

Fig. 12.2.7 A positive
charge moving through a
magnetic field experiences
a Lorentz force that’s
perpendicular to both its
velocity and the magnetic
field. A negatively charged
particle experiences
a Lorentz force in the
opposite direction.

350

CHAPT ER 12 Electromagnetic Waves

The Lorentz force dramatically changes the paths of electrons in the magnetron. If
there were no other fields inside the magnetron, electrons would experience only Lorentz
forces perpendicular to their velocities and would circle around the magnetic flux lines in
counterclockwise loops—a behavior known as cyclotron motion. The circling electrons
would remain near the cathode and would never go near the cavities.
In a real magnetron, however, the electric field of Fig. 12.2.6b and the magnetic field
of Fig. 12.2.6c are present simultaneously. Because both of these fields exert forces on
moving electrons, the paths the electrons follow are extremely complicated (Fig. 12.2.6d).
The outward-directed and circulating motions merge together into four electron beams that
arc outward and rotate counterclockwise, like the spokes of a spinning bicycle wheel. An
electron beam reaches each cavity, not at its positively charge tip, as it would without the
magnetic field, but at its negatively charged tip. The electron beams actually add to the
charge separations in the cavities!
The electron beams sweep around the cathode in perfect synchronization with the
oscillating charge on the cavities. The beams sweep from one tip to the next in the same
amount of time it takes for the charge separation on the tips to reverse. As a result,
the beams always arrive on the negatively charged tip. By adding to the charge separations,
the electron beams provide power to the oscillations in the cavities, keeping them going
and allowing them to transfer power to the food. The electron beams actually initiate the
oscillation in the cavities by adding energy to tiny random oscillations that are always
present in electric systems.
How does the oscillating charge inside the magnetron create microwaves inside
the oven’s cooking chamber? There are many ways to extract microwaves from the
ring of cavities. One extraction method is to insert a single-turn wire coil into one of
the magnetron’s cavities. As the magnetic field in that cavity changes, it induces a
2.45-GHz alternating current in the coil. One end of this coil is attached to the ring,
but the other end passes out of the magnetron through an insulated, air-tight hole in
the ring and connects to a quarter-wave monopole antenna. This 3-cm (1.2-in) antenna
emits microwaves into a metal pipe attached to the cooking chamber. These microwaves reflect their way through the pipe and into the cooking chamber, where they
cook the food.

Check Your Understanding #4: Lorentz Speaks
An ordinary audio speaker contains a wire coil immersed in a strong magnetic field. When an audio
system sends currents through the coil, the coil experiences a force proportional to that current.
What force is pushing on the coil?
Answer: The pushing force is the Lorentz force.
Why: The moving charges in the coil’s current experience the Lorentz force as they pass through the
magnetic field. This force is conveyed to the wire coil, which is attached to a movable surface. That
surface moves back and forth as the current fluctuates and produces sound. Speakers are clearly an
elegant and practical application of the Lorentz force in everyday life.

Check Your Figures #2: Lorentz Speaks with Precision
If the coil in an audio speaker experiences a Lorentz force of 1 N when it carries a current of 1 A,
what force will it experience when it carries a current of 2 A and all the charges in it are thus traveling twice as fast as before?
Answer: It will experience a force of 2 N.
Why: As indicated in Eq. 12.2.2, the Lorentz force is proportional to the velocity of a charge. Doubling the current in the coil doubles the velocities of its mobile charges, and they experience twice
the Lorentz force.

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations

Epilogue for Chapter 12
This chapter examined two common devices that are based on electromagnetic waves.
In Radio, we saw that electromagnetic waves can be created by accelerating electric
charge and that these waves can be detected by looking for their effects on other electric
charges. We also examined the techniques that are used to send sound information
through space by having them control either the amplitude or the frequency of electromagnetic waves.
In Microwave Ovens, we explored the ways in which electromagnetic waves can
interact directly with polar water molecules and can transfer energy to those molecules.
We saw how interactions between microwaves and a metal object can lead to reflection,
sparking, or heating. We also examined the technique used in ovens to create powerful
microwave radiation.

Explanation: A Disc in the Microwave Oven
The fluctuating electric field in the microwave oven propels large currents back and forth
through the disc’s metal layer. That layer is so thin that it has a large electric resistance and
it heats up as the current flows through it. The temperature of the plastic also rises because
of its intimate contact with the metal layer. Since the plastic has a larger coefficient of volume
expansion than the metal, the expanding plastic tears the metal layer and reduces it to
islands with sharp points and narrow bridges.
Once the metal layer has fragmented, the microwave-driven currents can put substantial electric charges on the sharp points. Those charges can jump between islands as sparks.
The currents passing through narrow conducting bridges can heat those bridges so hot that
their metal vaporizes and they form glowing, current-carrying plasma arcs.

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Radio Works: A radio transmitter creates a radio wave when electric charge accelerates
up and down its antenna. To get as much charge moving as possible, the transmitter attaches
a tank circuit to the antenna and slowly adds energy to that tank circuit until an enormous
amount of charge is flowing up and down the antenna. If the antenna is one-quarter wavelength long, it’s also resonant at the transmission frequency and boosts the amount of charge
sloshing up and down.
The radio receiver detects this radio wave when it causes charge to accelerate up and
down the receiving antenna. If both the receiving antenna and the receiver’s tank circuit are
resonant at the transmission frequency, large amounts of charge will slosh back and forth in
the receiver’s tank circuit and the receiver will detect the transmission.
This radio wave can represent sound using either the AM or FM technique. In the
AM technique, the strength of the wave is increased or decreased to represent compressions and rarefactions of the air, respectively. In the FM technique, the precise frequency of the transmission is increased or decreased to represent those compressions
or rarefactions.
How Microwave Ovens Work: A microwave oven uses microwaves to cook food. These microwaves bounce around the cooking chamber, where they transfer energy to water molecules in
the food. Because a water molecule is polar, having a positive end and a negative end, it
tends to align with an electric field. The microwave’s fluctuating electric field causes the
tightly packed water molecules to twist back and forth rapidly, and the ensuing collisions
heat the water and cook the food.

351

352

CHAPT ER 12 Electromagnetic Waves

The oven’s microwaves are produced by a magnetron, a vacuum tube containing resonant cavities and a heated cathode. By combining strong electric and magnetic fields, the
magnetron produces powerful beams of electrons that add energy to the charge oscillating in
the cavities. A loop of wire and a short antenna extract power from the resonant cavities and
emit the microwaves that then cook the food.
1. Energy in an electric field: The energy in an electric field is
equal to the square of that field times its volume, divided by 8π
times the Coulomb constant, or

energy =

electric field2 · volume
.
8π · Coulomb constant

(12.1.1)

2. Relationship between wavelength and frequency: The fre-

quency of an electromagnetic wave times its wavelength equals
the speed of light, or
speed of light = wavelength · frequency.

(12.2.1)

3. Lorentz force: When an electric charge moves through a mag-

netic field, it experiences a force equal to its charge times its
velocity times the magnetic field times the sine of the angle
between the velocity and the magnetic field, or
Lorentz force = charge · velocity · magnetic field
· sine of angle,
(12.2.2)
where that force is at right angles to both the velocity and the
magnetic field and follows a right-hand rule.

13

Light

lthough radio waves and microwaves are useful for communications and energy transfer,
there’s another portion of the electromagnetic spectrum that we find far more important—
light. Light consists of very-high-frequency, very-short-wavelength electromagnetic waves.
Light’s frequencies are so high that normal antennas can’t handle it. Instead, it’s absorbed and
emitted by the individual charged particles in atoms, molecules, and materials. Because of its
special relationship with the charged particles in matter, light is important to physics, chemistry,
and materials science. Moreover, it’s one of the principal ways by which we interact with the world
around us.

A
 

ACTIVE LEARNING
EXPERIMENTS

Splitting the Colors of Sunlight
which sunlight becomes separated into its constituent
colors.
You can observe this separation of colors by looking
at sunlight passing through a cut crystal glass or bowl, or
by reflecting sunlight from a CD or DVD. Hold the object
in direct sunlight and observe the light that it redirects
toward your eyes or projects onto a white sheet of paper

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

We see light because it stimulates cells in our eyes. This
stimulation is an example of light’s ability to influence
chemistry. And because our eyes are able to distinguish
among the different wavelengths of light, we perceive
colors. Sunlight normally appears uncolored because it
contains a rich mixture of wavelengths that our eyes
interpret as whiteness. However, there are situations in

353

354

CHAPT ER 13 Light

nearby. While some of the light you see will still be white,
you should see colors as well.
Turn the object slowly in your hand and observe how
the colors change. You will see gradual progressions from
one color to the next. What should that sequence of colors

be? How does this sequence relate to the colors of the rainbow? What is the relationship between this sequence and
the wavelengths of light? Can you get some sense for the
relative wavelength spacings of the classic rainbow colors:
red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, and violet?

Chapter Itinerary
In this chapter, we’ll examine three sources of light: (1) sunlight,
(2) discharge lamps, and (3) LEDs and lasers. In Sunlight, we
see how sunlight travels to our eyes and how its passage through
the atmosphere, raindrops, and soap bubbles can separate it
into its constituent colors. In Discharge Lamps, we explore the
ways in which atoms and molecules emit and absorb light, and
how different atoms and molecules can be used to produce
light of different colors. In LEDs and Lasers, we look at how

SECTION 13.1

Blue sky

Soap
bubbles

electronic devices can produce light and at how atoms, molecules, and solids can duplicate or amplify the light passing
through them to produce intense beams of highly ordered light.
In the process of studying these three light sources, we’ll also
learn about three different types of light: thermal light, atomic
resonance light, and coherent light. For additional preview
information, flip to the Chapter Summary and Important Laws
and Equations at the end of the chapter.

Sunlight

Red setting sun

Pool of water
Reflection of sky

For thousands of years, people have marked the passage of
time by the rising and setting of the sun over the horizon. The
sun first appears as a red disk in the east every morning, rises
white in the blue sky, and then sets once again as a red disk in
the west. The sunlight that we see takes about 8 minutes to
travel the 150,000,000 km (93,000,000 mi) from the sun to
our eyes and provides most of the energy and heat that make

life on Earth possible. Although the light in sunlight is really
just another electromagnetic wave, and could be considered
part of the previous chapter, it’s so important to everyday life
that it deserves special attention. Therefore we’ll begin by looking at how sunlight interacts with our world.
Questions to Think About: Why is the sky blue during the day?
Why is the sun red at sunrise and sunset? Why do you see
rainbows only when the sun is relatively low in the sky? Why do
we see colors when sunlight passes through cut crystal or
through a soap bubble?
Experiments to Do: Sunlight is actually composed of many different electromagnetic waves. These waves differ in frequency
and wavelength like the radio waves from your two favorite stations. You don’t need a machine to help you distinguish among
the various wavelengths of light; you can use your eyes. Take a
look at a soap bubble on a bright sunny day. You see the bubble
because it reflects light. In fact, the clear bubble appears
colored, even though the sunlight hitting it is white. That’s
because the bubble separates sunlight according to wavelength
and sends only certain wavelengths toward your eyes.

Sunlight and Electromagnetic Waves
Electromagnetic waves can have any wavelength, from thousands of kilometers to a fraction of the width of an atomic nucleus. The radio waves and microwaves that we examined
in Chapter 12 have wavelengths longer than 1 mm. In the present chapter, we turn our
attention to shorter-wavelength radiation. In particular, we’ll study electromagnetic waves
with wavelengths between 400 nm and 750 nm (recall that 1 nm, or 1 nanometer, is 10–9 m).
These are the electromagnetic waves that we perceive as visible light and the principal
components of sunlight.

Sunlight

355

Check Your Understanding #1: The Rosy Glow of Candlelight
Why does a burning candle emit reddish or yellowish light?
Answer: Charged particles in the hot flame accelerate back and forth and emit electromagnetic waves
that include the low-frequency end of the visible spectrum.
Why: The accelerating charged particles in hot objects emit light. The hotter the object, the faster
the charged particles move and accelerate and the higher the frequencies of light they emit. A
candle isn’t hot enough to emit the whitish light of the sun, so it emits mostly reddish or yellowish light.

2

Intensity

1.00

0.50

5800 K

Frequency (× 1014 Hz)
3
4

6

8 10

Infrared

Ultraviolet
Visible

The sun
0.00
2000
1600
1200
800
Wavelength (nanometers)

400

Fig. 13.1.2 Sunlight comes from
the sun’s photosphere, where the
temperature is 5800 K. This light
has a blackbody distribution of
wavelengths, with much of its intensity
concentrated in the visible portion of
the overall electromagnetic spectrum.

Ultraviolet

Blue
Indigo
Violet

Green

Orange
Yellow

Red

Infrared

Because the electromagnetic waves in sunlight have such short waveFrequency (× 1014 Hz)
14
15
4
5
6
7
8 9
lengths, their frequencies lie between 10 and 10 Hz (Fig. 13.1.1). As one of
these waves of sunlight passes by, its electric field fluctuates back and forth
almost 1,000,000,000,000,000 times each second. Since producing microwaves, which have much longer wavelengths and much lower frequencies,
700
600
500
400
already requires specialized components and tiny antennas, what can possibly
Wavelength (nanometers)
emit or absorb light waves? The answer is the individual charged particles in
Fig. 13.1.1 The visible
atoms, molecules, and materials. These tiny particles can move extremely rapportion of the spectrum of
14
15
idly, often vibrating about at frequencies of 10 Hz, 10 Hz, or even higher. As these sunlight. Each wavelength
charged particles accelerate back and forth, they emit light waves. Similarly, passing light of visible light has a
waves cause individual charged particles in atoms, molecules, and materials to accelerate particular frequency and is
associated with a particular
back and forth, thereby absorbing the light waves as well.
Sunlight originates at the outer surface of the sun, in a region called the photosphere. color. At the ends of
the visible spectrum are
There, atoms and other tiny charged systems (mostly atomic ions and electrons) jostle invisible infrared and
about at 5800 K. Since these charged particles accelerate as they bounce around, they emit ultraviolet lights.
electromagnetic waves.
Because the sun’s surface emits light through the random, thermal motions of its
charged particles, the distribution of wavelengths it emits is determined only by its
temperature. It emits a blackbody spectrum, as we discussed in Section 7.3. Because
the photosphere’s temperature is 5800 K, the jostling motions are extremely rapid
and most of the sunlight falls in the visible portion of the electromagnetic spectrum
(Fig. 13.1.2).
However, not all sunlight is visible. On the long-wavelength, low-frequency side of
visible light is infrared light. We can’t see infrared light with our eyes, but we feel it when
we stand in front of a hot object. In sunlight, infrared light is produced by charges that are
accelerating back and forth more slowly than average.
On the short-wavelength, high-frequency side of visible light is ultraviolet light.
We can’t see ultraviolet light either, but we’re aware of its presence because it induces
chemical damage in molecules. It causes sunburns and encourages skin to tan. In sunlight, ultraviolet light is produced by charges that are accelerating back and forth more
rapidly than average.

356

CHAPT ER 13 Light

Sunlight’s Passage to Earth
Sunlight travels from the sun to Earth at the speed of light—but what sets the speed of
light? Actually, as we learned in Section 4.2, it’s one of the fundamental constants of nature,
with a defined value of 299,792,458 m/s in empty space. Although we could argue that the
speed of light is set by the relationships between the electric and magnetic fields, that
observation simply passes the buck. If you were then to ask what sets the relationships
between the electric and magnetic fields, the answer would be the speed of light.
Rather than justifying why sunlight travels as fast as it does in empty space, let’s look
at what happens to it when it enters a region that’s not empty. After all, sunlight eventually
reaches Earth’s atmosphere and, when it does, several interesting things happen.
First, the sunlight slows down as its electric and magnetic fields begin to interact with
the electric charges and magnetic poles in the atmosphere. Light polarizes the molecules it
encounters—its electric field displaces positive charges from negative charges, and its
magnetic field displaces north poles from south poles. These polarization effects delay
light’s passage so that it travels more slowly. Since most transparent materials respond
much more strongly to light’s electric field than to its magnetic field, we’ll concentrate on
only electric effects.
The factor by which light slows down in a material is known as the material’s
index of refraction. Light travels particularly slowly through materials that are easy to
polarize, and some of them have indices of refraction of 2 or even 3. Because air near
sea level is only slightly polarizable, however, its index of refraction is just 1.0003.
Although this reduction in light’s speed is too small to notice directly, we do notice the
polarized air particles that cause it. These polarized air particles are what makes the
sky blue (Fig. 13.1.3).
The particles in air consist of individual atoms and molecules, small collections of
atoms and molecules, water droplets, and dust. As a wave of sunlight passes through one of
these particles, the particle becomes polarized. Its electric charges accelerate back and
forth as the sunlight’s electric field pushes them around, and they reemit a new electromagnetic wave of their own.
This new wave draws its energy from the original wave. In effect, the particle acts as a
tiny antenna, temporarily receiving part of the electromagnetic wave and immediately
retransmitting it in a new direction. This process, whereby a tiny particle redirects the path
of a passing light wave, is called Rayleigh scattering, after the English physicist Lord
Rayleigh (John William Strutt, 1842–1919), who first understood it in some detail.

Fig. 13.1.3 (a) During the day, the sky above Monument Valley appears blue because Earth
atmosphere scatters mostly blue sunlight toward us. (b) At night, the scattered sunlight is gone and
the atmosphere is a clear window through which to observe the stars.

© Kevin Moloney/Aurora Photos, Inc.

(b)

©Tetra Images/Aurora Photos, Inc.

(a)

Sunlight

Although most sunlight travels directly to our eyes, some of it undergoes Rayleigh
scattering and reaches us by more complicated paths. We see the direct light as coming
from the brilliant disk of the sun, but the scattered light gives the entire sky a fairly uniform
blue glow (Fig. 13.1.4). Why is this glow blue?
The sky’s blue color comes about because the tiny air particles that Rayleigh-scatter
sunlight are too small to make good antennas for that light. We observed in Section 12.1
that a dipole antenna works best when it is about half as long as the wavelength of its electromagnetic wave. The air particles make particularly bad antennas for long-wavelength
red light, so very little red sunlight undergoes Rayleigh scattering on its way through the
atmosphere. However, the air particles make less poor antennas for short-wavelength blue
light. Some of the violet, indigo, and blue sunlight does Rayleigh-scatter and reaches our
eyes from all directions. We see this Rayleigh-scattered light as the bluish glow of the sky.
Rayleigh scattering not only makes the sky blue; it also makes the sunrises and sunsets
red. As the sun rises or sets, its light must travel long distances through Earth’s atmosphere
to reach your eyes. Its path is so long that most of the violet, indigo, and blue light Rayleighscatters away miles to your east or west and all you see is the remaining red light. Sometimes the whole local sky appears reddish because there simply isn’t any bluish light left to
scatter toward you. Sunrises and sunsets are particularly colorful when extra dust or ash is
present in the atmosphere to enhance the Rayleigh scattering. Air pollution, forest fires, and
volcanic eruptions tend to create unusually red sunrises and sunsets.
In contrast, clouds and fog appear white because they’re composed of relatively large water
droplets. These droplets are larger than the wavelengths of visible light and scatter all of sunlight’s wavelengths equally well. Although this scattering is often so effective that you can’t see
the sun’s disk through a cloud, it doesn’t give the cloud any color. The cloud simply looks white.
Check Your Understanding #2: Seeing the Blues
The air in a dark, smoky room often looks bluish when illuminated by white light. What creates this
bluish appearance?
Answer: Rayleigh scattering from the microscopic smoke particles scatters more blue light than red
light and gives the air a bluish glow.
Why: When smoky air in a dark room is illuminated by a bright spotlight or another white light source,
the tiny particles in the air Rayleigh-scatter some of the light. When you look at the air against a dark
background, you can see this glow. Since Rayleigh scattering affects blue light most strongly, the air
appears bluish.

Rainbows
Sometimes water droplets do separate the colors of sunlight. When sunlight shines on clear
round raindrops as they fall during a storm, these raindrops can create a rainbow. To understand how clear spheres of water can bend sunlight’s path and separate it according to
wavelength, we must understand three important optical effects: refraction, reflection, and
dispersion. We encountered those same wave phenomena while studying water surface
waves in Section 9.3, but now they appear in a new context—light waves!
Let’s begin by looking at what happens when a wave of sunlight passes directly
through a raindrop. Because water is more polarizable than air, the wave slows down inside
the raindrop and its cycles bunch together (Fig. 13.1.5). This bunching effect reduces the
light’s wavelength inside the drop. Light’s frequency remains unchanged because the
cycles can’t disappear, but they move more slowly.
If a narrow wave of sunlight is aimed directly through the center of the raindrop, it will
follow a straight path and emerge essentially unaffected from the other side (Fig. 13.1.6a).
However, if that wave strikes the raindrop near the top, it will bend as it enters the water
(Fig. 13.1.6b). This occurs because the lower edge of the wave will reach the water first and

Sunlight

357

Rayleigh
scattering

Fig. 13.1.4 As sunlight
passes through the
atmosphere, some of its
violet, indigo, and blue
light undergoes Rayleigh
scattering from particles
in the air. We see this
redirected light as the
diffuse bluish sky. The
remaining light reaches our
eyes directly from the sun
and tends to be reddish,
particularly at sunrise and
sunset.

CHAPT ER 13 Light

Air

Wavelength in air

(a)
Sunlight
Air
Raindrop

Sunlight
Air
Air
Raindrop
Fig. 13.1.6 A side view
of two narrow waves of
sunlight entering and
leaving raindrops. The lines
drawn across each light
wave represent upward
electric field maxima and
are bunched together as
light slows down in water.

Air

Velocity

Wavelength in water

slow down, the upper edge will then overtake it and the wave will bend downward. The
wave will head more directly into the water.
As the wave in Fig. 13.1.6b leaves the raindrop, its upper edge emerges first and speeds
up while the lower edge lags behind. The wave bends downward even further and heads
less directly into the air and away from the water.
This bending of sunlight at the boundaries between materials is refraction. It occurs
whenever sunlight changes speeds as it passes through a boundary at an angle. If sunlight
slows down at a boundary (Fig. 13.1.7a), it bends toward the line perpendicular to the boundary and heads more directly into the new material. If sunlight speeds up at a boundary
(Fig. 13.1.7a), it bends away from the line perpendicular to the boundary and heads less
directly into the new material. The amount of the bend increases as the speed change increases.
However, part of the sunlight striking a boundary doesn’t pass through the boundary at
all. Instead, it reflects. In Section 9.3, we attributed wave reflection specifically to changes
in wave speed at a boundary. However, the more general cause of wave reflections is an
impedance mismatch, an abrupt change in how the wave moves through its environment.
In general, impedance measures a system’s opposition to the passage of a current or a
wave. For an electric current, impedance measures how much voltage is needed to propel a
given current. For an electromagnetic wave, impedance measures how much electric field
is needed to produce a given magnetic field. Impedance effects are common in nature (see
1 ) and also apply to mechanical waves and mechanical currents. When sound and water
waves encounter impedance mismatches, they partly reflect as echos.
Air

Re

(a)

Glass

ed

ct

fle
en
t

Perpendicular

ci
d

Glass

(b)

Air

ed

Fig. 13.1.7 When a light wave is incident
on a glass surface, part of it reflects and
the rest refracts. The incident wave and
reflected wave are at equal but opposite
angles from the line perpendicular
to the surface. The transmitted wave
refracts (bends) toward or away from the
perpendicular. (a) Light that slows down
when moving from air to glass refracts
toward the perpendicular. (b) Light that
speeds up when moving from glass to air
refracts away from the perpendicular.

Refl

ect

ed

Tr
a

1 When electromagnetic
waves travel through
cables and wires, they
reflect from impedance
mismatches. These
mismatches occur
whenever the relationship
between electric and
magnetic fields changes,
and should be avoided in
television and data
communication systems.
Using cables, wires, or
adapters with the wrong
impedances or leaving
open ports on cable
splitters will produce
reflections that may
interfere with reception.

tted

smi

n
Tra

In

(b)

Air

Raindrop

itt

Fig. 13.1.5 As an
electromagnetic wave
enters a material, its speed
decreases and the waves
bunch up together. Its
wavelength decreases.

ns
m

358

Perpendicular

t

den

Inci

© Hollandse Hoogte/Redux Pictures

Sunlight
Fig. 13.1.8 A
rainbow forms when
water droplets reflect
sunlight back toward
your eyes. Because the
different wavelengths
of light follow slightly
different paths, we see
the different colors
coming from slightly
different directions
and observe bands of
color.

The impedance of empty space is high because there an electric field has nothing to aid
it in producing a magnetic field. Inside most materials, however, the electric field has help.
The electric field polarizes the material, which then helps to create the magnetic field.
Because of this assistance, the impedance of most materials is much less than that of empty
space. Since air is almost empty space, the boundary between air and water is an impedance
mismatch for light.
Passing through an impedance mismatch upsets the balance between a light wave’s
electric and magnetic fields. To compensate for this imbalance, part of the incoming wave
reflects off the boundary. Thus some sunlight reflects each time it enters or leaves a water
droplet. The fraction of light that reflects depends on the severity of the impedance mismatch, but it is typically 4% between air and most transparent materials, including water
(for reflection from sand, see 2 ). In contrast, metals polarize so easily that their impedances are essentially zero and they reflect light almost perfectly.
There is one more important point about sunlight’s passage through water: red light
travels about 1% faster through water than violet light does. That’s because higher-frequency
violet light polarizes the water molecules a little more easily than lower-frequency red light
does and that increased polarization slows down the violet light. This frequency dependence of light’s speed in a material is dispersion. Dispersion affects refraction. The more
light slows as it enters a raindrop, the more it bends at the boundary. Since violet light
slows more than red light, violet light also bends more and the different colors of sunlight
follow somewhat different paths through the raindrop.
A rainbow is created when raindrops separate sunlight according to color (Fig. 13.1.8).
To see the rainbow, you stand with the sun at your back and look up at the sky. When sunlight hits the raindrops, they redirect some of that light back toward you. Since each raindrop redirects light only in a narrow range of angles, you can’t see light from every raindrop. Only the raindrops in a narrow arc of the sky redirect visible light toward you. This
arc appears brightly colored because raindrops at the inner edge of the arc send violet light
toward you while raindrops at the outer edge of the arc send red light toward you. In
between, you see all the colors of the rainbow.
Figure 13.1.9 shows how a raindrop redirects different colors of light in different
directions. Although there are many possible paths light can take through the raindrop, this
path is the one that produces rainbows. Sunlight enters near the top of the raindrop and
bends inward. Violet light bends more than red light, so the sunlight begins to separate
according to color. Some sunlight is also reflected from the raindrop but doesn’t contribute
to rainbows.
When the light inside the raindrop strikes the back surface, most of it leaves the drop and
is lost. A small fraction of the light reflects from that surface, however, and continues to travel

359

2 Sand appears white
because it redirects
sunlight in all directions.
One explanation for this
effect is that the sand
grains act as tiny antennas
that respond to and reemit
light’s electromagnetic
waves. A second explanation is that the sand grains
present the sunlight with
thousands of air-sand
boundaries from which to
reflect. However, both
explanations are descriptions of exactly the same
physics—the charged
particles in the sand grains
are electrically polarized
by the waves passing
through them. These
waves are randomly
redirected without being
absorbed, and they give
the sand its white
appearance.

Sun

ligh

t

light
Red
Violet light
Fig. 13.1.9 As sunlight
passes through spherical
raindrops, its colors
separate. Violet light bends
more at each air-water
boundary than does red
light, and the two emerge
from the raindrops heading
in different directions.
You see red light coming
toward you from the upper
raindrops and violet light
from the lower raindrops.

CHAPT ER 13 Light

through the raindrop. When this light reaches the raindrop’s front surface, most of it leaves
the drop. Violet light bends more strongly than red light as they reenter the air, so the different
colors of light leave the drop heading in different directions. Since violet light is redirected
more upward than red light, you see violet light coming toward you from the lower raindrops.
Red light is redirected more downward so you see it coming toward you from the upper raindrops. Thus the upper arc of the rainbow is red, while the lower arc is violet.
Check Your Understanding #3: The Look of Diamonds
A diamond pendant sparkles with color when you look at it in sunlight. From where do the colors
come?
Answer: A diamond exhibits dispersion, so different frequencies of sunlight follow somewhat different paths through the diamond’s polished facets. The different colors of sunlight emerge from the
diamond traveling in slightly different directions, so you can see them individually.
Why: One of the delightful aspects of a diamond is its strong dispersion. It bends violet light much
more than red light, so sunlight is separated into its different colors as it passes through the stone.
Cleverly cut facets help to isolate the individual colors.

Soap Bubbles
Soap bubbles also separate sunlight into its various colors (Fig. 13.1.10), but they use
another wave phenomenon—interference. We encountered interference of mechanical
waves in Section 9.3 when we studied wave beat at the seashore and interference of electromagnetic waves in Section 12.2 when we considered the unevenness of microwave
cooking. Now we’ll look at interference in another type of electromagnetic wave, light.
Light’s interference effects stem from the summing or superposition of its electromagnetic waves. When several light waves overlap at a particular location, their electric fields
sum together and so do their magnetic fields. If their individual fields all point in the same
direction, the waves experience constructive interference—they sum together in a mutually
assisting way and the light intensity at that location is enhanced (Fig. 13.1.11a). However,
when their individual fields point in opposing directions, the waves experience destructive
interference—they sum together in a canceling way and the light intensity at that location
is reduced (Fig. 13.1.11b).
Both forms of interference occur when sunlight reflects from the outer skin of a soap
bubble. As each wave of sunlight hits that thin film of soapy water, the film’s front surface
reflects about 4% of the wave and the film’s back surface reflects another 4% (Fig. 13.1.12).
Since both reflections travel in the same direction, the reflected light that you see reaches
your eyes via two different paths, one from each reflection. If these two waves arrive in
phase—that is, with their electric fields synchronized and assisting one another—you see
the particularly bright reflection of constructive interference. If the two waves arrive out of
Fig. 13.1.10 Light reflected by the front
and back surfaces of this soap film interferes
with itself and gives the film its colorful
appearance. Since the colors are determined
by film thickness and since the film’s
thickness increases in the downward direction,
the film displays horizontal bands of color.

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

360

Sunlight
Fig. 13.1.11 (a) When waves from two separate paths
arrive in phase at the receiver, constructive interference
produces a particularly large effect on the receiver.
(b) When waves arrive out of phase, destructive interference
produces a particularly weak effect on the receiver.

(a)
Transm
it

ter

Receiver
itter
Transm

Constructive interference
(b)
Transm
itte

r

Receiver
itte
Transm

r

Destructive interference

phase—with their electric fields canceling one another—you see the particularly dim
reflection of destructive interference.
Whether you see constructive or destructive interference depends on the wavelength of
the sunlight. The back-surface reflection has to travel twice through the soap film, so it’s
delayed relative to the front-surface reflection. If the delay is just long enough for the wave
to complete an integral number of cycles, then the two reflected waves are in phase with
one another as they head toward your eye and you see a bright reflection. If the delay allows
the back-surface reflection to complete an extra half cycle, then the two reflected waves are
out of phase with one another and you see a dim reflection.
Sunlight contains many different wavelengths of light, and these wavelengths behave
differently during the reflection process. You see a colored reflection, consisting mainly of
those wavelengths of light that experience constructive interference. Because the delay
experienced by the back-surface reflection depends on the thickness of the soap film, you
can actually determine the film’s thickness by studying its colors.

n
tio
ec

Bo

tto

m

re
fl

ec
re
fl
To
p

e
av
w
ht t
lig gh
d nli
Re su
in

tio

n

(a) Constructive intereference

Soap film

To
p

n
io
re
fle
ct

Bo
tto
m

e

av
w
ht t
lig igh
ue nl
Bl su
in
Soap film

re
fle
ct
io

n

(b) Destructive intereference

Fig. 13.1.12 Sunlight partially
reflects from both the top and bottom
surfaces of a soap film, but the
bottom-surface reflection is delayed
relative to the top-surface reflection.
Phase differences between those two
partial reflections lead to interference
effects when they both enter your eye.
For this soap film and viewing angle,
(a) a red light wave’s reflections enter
your eye in phase and experience
constructive interference, so you see
the red light. However, (b) a blue light
wave’s reflections enter your eye out
of phase and experience destructive
interference, so you see no blue light.

361

CHAPT ER 13 Light

Check Your Understanding #4: A Slick-Looking Oil Slick
A thin layer of oil or gasoline floating on water appears brightly colored in sunlight. From where do
these colors come?
Answer: They come from interferences between light reflected by the top and bottom surfaces of the
floating layer of oil.
Why: A thin film of almost anything on water will appear colored because of interference. Part of each
light wave striking the film reflects from the top surface, and part reflects from the bottom surface.
These two reflected waves interfere with one another in a wavelength-dependent manner and make the
layer appear brightly colored. Different colors correspond to different thicknesses of the thin films.

Sunlight and Polarizing Sunglasses

Horizontal
electric field

(a)

ave

Re

tw

den

Inci

Transmitted wave
(weak)

Glossy surface

Horizontal
magnetic field

(b)

t
den

Inci
e

wav

Fig. 13.1.13 When a light wave
heading toward you encounters a
glossy horizontal surface at a shallow
angle, the strength of its partial
reflection depends on its polarization.
(a) When the incident wave’s electric
field is horizontal, the reflection
is strong. (b) When the incident
wave’s magnetic field is horizontal,
the reflection is weak. This wave is
incident at precisely Brewster’s angle,
so there is zero reflection and all of
the wave enters the glossy surface.

Glossy surface

fle
ct
(str ed w
on ave
g)

All sunglasses absorb some of the sunlight passing through them, but the best ones absorb
horizontally polarized light much more strongly than vertically polarized light. These
polarizing sunglasses dramatically reduce glare by eliminating most of the light reflected
from horizontal surfaces.
When light strikes a transparent surface at right angles, about 4% of that light is
reflected, regardless of its polarization. When light strikes a horizontal surface at a shallow
angle, however, its polarization profoundly affects its reflection. A light wave that has a
horizontal electric field (essentially horizontally polarized light) reflects strongly from the
surface (Fig. 13.1.13a). In contrast, a light wave that has a horizontal magnetic field (essentially vertically polarized light) barely reflects at all (Fig. 13.1.13b).
When the wave’s electric field is horizontal, it pushes electric charges back and forth
along a horizontal surface. Charges shift relatively easily in that direction, so the surface
polarizes well and reflects the wave strongly. The shallower the angle between the surface
and the incident light wave, the larger the surface’s polarization and the greater the reflection. Horizontally polarized light thus reflects strongly from horizontal surfaces and its
reflection increases as its angle to the surface becomes shallower.
When the wave’s electric field is vertical or nearly vertical, it pushes electric charges
in and out of a horizontal surface. Since the charges can’t leave the surface, the surface

Re
fl
(we ecte
ak d w
a
or
zer ve
o)

362

Transmitted wave
(strong or 100%)

Discharge Lamps

363

(b)

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

(a)

Fig. 13.1.14 (a) The horizontal surface of water reflects light strongly at shallow angles, making it
difficult to see the coins on the bottom of this dish. (b) When you look through a filter that blocks
horizontally polarized light, the main component of glare from horizontal surfaces, you can see the
coins lying beneath the water’s surface.

polarizes ineffectually and reflects the wave weakly. The polarization and reflection become
even weaker as the angle becomes shallower until, at Brewster’s angle, the wave doesn’t
reflect at all. Vertically polarized light thus reflects weakly from horizontal surfaces and
that reflection drops to zero at Brewster’s angle. For angles shallower than Brewster’s
angle, however, the reflection becomes stronger as the angle becomes shallower.
Although direct sunlight is an even mixture of vertically and horizontally polarized
waves, the shallow-angle glare reflecting from the horizontal surfaces of water, pavement,
or painted car hoods is mostly horizontally polarized waves. Polarizing sunglasses are
designed to absorb horizontally polarized light, which is why they are so effective at reducing glare (Fig. 13.1.14).
Check Your Understanding #5: Looking into the Reflecting Pool
When you look into a pool of water, you see mostly a reflection of the sky. When you wear polarizing
sunglasses, however, you see into the water clearly. Explain.
Answer: Most of the light that reflects from the water is horizontally polarized. The sunglasses block
horizontally polarized light, so you see mostly light from within the pool of water.
Why: Sunlight reflecting from a horizontal surface is mostly horizontally polarized waves. By blocking
horizontally polarized light, polarizing sunglasses virtually eliminate this reflected light, and you see
mostly light from below the surface. If you turn the sunglasses sideways, they will block the wrong
polarization of light and you will see mostly the reflected light. Try it.

SECTION 13.2

Discharge Lamps

Heated
Mercury Phosphor
electrodes vapor
coating

White
reflector

Ballast

Fluorescent
lamp tubes

Energy efficiency is crucial to modern lighting. Incandescent
lamps provide pleasant, warm illumination, but most of the
power they consume is wasted as invisible infrared light. Fluorescent and other gas discharge lamps produce far more visible
light with the same amount of electric power and now dominate office, industrial, and street lighting. In this section we’ll
explore several types of discharge lamps—fluorescent, mercury
vapor, sodium vapor, and metal-halide lamps—that all share a
common theme: current passing through a gas.
Questions to Think About: Why are incandescent lightbulbs
being phased out? Why do different fluorescent lamps often

CHAPT ER 13 Light

have slightly different colors? Why is the light from a neon sign
red? Why shouldn’t you turn a fluorescent lamp on and off
frequently? Why are streetlights so dim when they first turn
on? Why are some highway lights orange?
Experiments to Do: Examine the discharge lamps around you,
particularly the white fluorescent tube lamps. Where do their
lights originate? In a fluorescent lamp, light comes from the
white phosphor coating on the tube’s inner surface. What
about in a neon lamp or a mercury vapor streetlight? Compare

the colors of various lamps, including several different fluorescent lamps. Are their lights identical?
Both fluorescent and neon lamps start almost immediately—
but watch how long it takes a streetlight to start. Fluorescent and neon lamps remain cool during operation, but the
mercury, sodium, and metal-halide lamps used in street
lighting get hot. Watch a streetlight warm up. Does its color
change? If the streetlight loses power even for a moment, it
must wait about 5 minutes before it can start again. Why
must it wait?

How We See Light and Color
Before examining discharge lamps, let’s look at how our eyes recognize color. It might
seem that they actually measure the wavelengths of light, but that’s not the case. Instead,
our retinas contain three groups of light-sensing cone cells that respond to three different
ranges of wavelengths. One group of cone cells responds to light near 600 nm and lets us
see red, another responds to light near 550 nm and lets us see green, and a third responds
to light near 450 nm and lets us see blue (Fig. 13.2.1). These cone cells are most abundant
at the center of our vision. Our retinas also contain rod cells, which are more light-sensitive
than cone cells, but rod cells can’t distinguish color. They are most abundant in our peripheral vision and provide us with night vision.
Having only three types of color-sensing cells doesn’t limit us to seeing just three
colors. We perceive other colors whenever two or more types of cone cells are stimulated
at once. Each type of cell reports the amount of light it detects, and our brains interpret the
overall response as a particular color.
Although light of a certain wavelength will stimulate all three types of cone cells
simultaneously, the cells don’t respond equally. If the wavelength is 680 nm, the red cone
cells will respond much more strongly than the green or blue cells. Because of this strong
red response, we see the light as red.
Other wavelengths of light stimulate the three types of cells somewhat more
evenly. Light with a wavelength of 580 nm is in between red and green light. Both the
red-sensitive and the green-sensitive cone cells respond about equally to this light, and
we see it as yellow.
We also see yellow when looking at an equal mixture of 640-nm light (red) and 525-nm
light (green). The 640-nm light stimulates the red-sensitive cone cells and the 525-nm light
stimulates the green-sensitive ones. Even though there is no 580-nm light entering our
eyes, we see the same yellow color as before.
In fact, mixtures of red, green, and blue light can make us see virtually any color. For
that reason, these three are called the primary colors of light or the primary additive

Cone cell sensitivity:

700

Red

Green

600
500
Wavelength (nanometers)

Blue

400

Ultraviolet

Violet

Indigo

Blue

Green

Yellow

Orange

Fig. 13.2.1 The
red-sensitive cells in
our retina detect light
near 600 nm, the
green-sensitive cells
near 550 nm, and the
blue-sensitive cells
near 450 nm. The
red-sensitive cells also
respond near 440 nm,
so that we see violet.

Infrared

Pure light colors:

Red

364

Discharge Lamps

colors (Fig. 13.2.2a). Color televisions and computer screens use tiny sources of red, green,
and blue light to produce their full-color images.
Although the idea of mixing primary colors also applies to paints, inks, and pigments,
the palette is different. The primary colors of pigment or the primary subtractive colors
are cyan, magenta, and yellow (Fig. 13.2.2b). When you apply one of these primary pigments to a white surface, it absorbs or subtracts one of the primary colors of light from the
surface’s reflection. Cyan subtracts the reflection of red, magenta subtracts the reflection
of green, and yellow subtracts the reflection of blue. Color printers, photographs, magazines, and books use tiny patches of cyan, magenta, and yellow pigments to produce their
full-color images.
Check Your Understanding #1: Mixed Up Light

365

(a) Additive colors (light)

Red

Green

Blue

(b) Subtractive colors (pigment)

If you look at a mixture of 70% red light and 30% green light, what color will you see?
Answer: You will see orange.

Cyan

Magenta

Why: Your red-, green-, and blue-sensitive cone cells have the same response to this light mixture as
they would have to pure 600-nm light. Such light appears orange, so you see orange when viewing
the mixture.
Yellow

More Light, Less Heat: Gas Discharges
When all three of our color-sensing cells respond about equally, we see white light. That’s
because our vision evolved under a single incandescent light source—the sun. Sunlight
stimulates the red-, green-, and blue-sensitive cells in our eyes about evenly, so any other
source of “white light” must do the same.
Most of the twentieth century’s white-light illumination came from incandescent lightbulbs, but that won’t be true for the twenty-first century. Although an incandescent lightbulb makes a good attempt at producing white light, it suffers from two serious drawbacks.
First, because its filament can’t reach the temperature of the sun’s surface (5800 K), its
blackbody spectrum contains too little blue light and appears redder than sunlight. Second,
because most of its electromagnetic radiation is invisible infrared light, it doesn’t use
energy efficiently to produce visible light. It produces only about 15 lumens per watt,
where the lumen is a standard measure of usable illumination. (For comparison, the discharge lamps that we’re about to discuss can easily exceed 100 lumens per watt.)
Fortunately, modern science has given us some alternative sources of light, sources
that don’t use heat and thermal radiation to produce their light. Among these sources are
gas discharge lamps, which emit light when electric currents pass through their gases.
Some discharge lamps are colored, and others do excellent jobs of producing white light.
Also, many of them are far more energy efficient at producing visible light than are incandescent lightbulbs.
To get an understanding of gas discharges and the lights they emit, let’s start with one
of the simplest examples, a neon sign tube. Although neon’s rich red glow isn’t suitable for
lighting and isn’t particularly energy efficient, it’s great for signs and also relatively easy to
understand.
A neon sign tube is a sealed glass tube that contains pure neon gas at a density less than
1% that of the atmosphere outside the tube. It has metal electrodes at each end so that electric current can enter the gas through one electrode and leave through the other. Of course,
gases are normally electrical insulators, and neon is no exception. To transform the tube’s
neon into a conductor, a large voltage difference is applied between its two electrodes. As
we saw in Section 10.2, a gas breaks down when exposed to large voltage gradients; its few
naturally occurring ions initiate a cascade of ionizing collisions that quickly fill the gas
with charged particles and render it conducting.

Fig. 13.2.2 (a) The
primary colors of light or
additive colors, red, green,
and blue, can be combined
to form any colors of light.
(b) The primary colors of
pigment or subtractive
colors, cyan, magenta,
and yellow, subtract
red, green, and blue,
respectively, from reflected
or transmitted light and
can be combined to form
any colors of pigment.

366

CHAPT ER 13 Light

Whereas ordinary air breaks down at a voltage gradient of about 30,000 V/cm,
low-density neon breaks down at a much lower voltage gradient. That’s because
in a low-density gas, charged particles can travel farther and accumulate more
kinetic energy before each collision. When about 10,000 V is applied between
the electrodes of a neon sign tube, the gas breaks down and begins to emit its
Neon ions
Electrons
familiar red glow.
Fig. 13.2.3 A neon
The lamp is then experiencing a discharge; that is, current is flowing through the neon
sign tube sends electrons
gas. This current consists mostly of electrons, flowing from the tube’s negatively charged
through low-pressure
neon gas. These electrons
electrode to its positively charged electrode (Fig. 13.2.3). Although these electrons collide
collide with neon atoms,
frequently with neon atoms, they have so little mass that they usually just bounce off the
transferring energy to
atoms without losing much energy. Like Ping-Pong balls rebounding from elephants, the
them and causing them
electrons do most of the bouncing and then continue on their way.
to emit primarily red
Every so often, however, an electron will collide with a neon atom and something
light. Positively charged
neon ions, created by
different will happen; the neon atom will rearrange internally and absorb part of the elecparticularly energetic
tron’s kinetic energy. The electron will rebound with less energy than it had before, and
collisions, keep the
the neon atom will go on to emit light, probably red light. To understand why that light
electrons from repelling
is probably red, however, we’ll have to look at quantum physics and the structure of the
one another to the walls of
neon atom.
the tube.
Negative
electrode

Neon gas

Positive
electrode

Check Your Understanding #2: Making Whiter Light
Some photographic lamps simulate sunlight by placing a blue filter in front of an incandescent bulb.
This filter absorbs some of the red light so that the lamp appears whiter. Does this filter increase or
decrease the lamp’s energy efficiency?
Answer: It decreases the lamp’s energy efficiency.
Why: Although the bluish filter changes the spectrum of wavelengths so that the amount of blue light
leaving the lamp increases relative to the red light, it does this by absorbing some of the red light.
The filter gets hot, and less electric power used by the bulb leaves as visible light.

Particles, Waves, and Quantum Physics
As quantum physics gradually revealed itself to the scientists of the early twentieth century,
they found the experience both exhilarating and disorienting. Prior to that era, the physical
world seemed to divide neatly into particles and waves: scientists viewed an electron only
as a particle and light only as a wave. However, one of the most basic observations of quantum physics, and the one most relevant to our present topic, is that everything has both
particle and wave characteristics. Put simply, everything begins and ends as a particle, but
travels as a wave.
For an electron, the quantum surprise is that it travels as a wave. For light, the quantum
surprise is that it is emitted and absorbed as a particle. Called the wave-particle duality,
this observation that everything in nature has both particle and wave characteristics has left
few areas of physics unaffected. But although quantum physics is now a basic and essential
part of nearly all modern physics research, its effects are subtle and often nonintuitive.
They are most apparent in the microscopic world and are visible to us only indirectly. No
wonder they seem so strange.
We’ll encounter quantum physics and its effects throughout the remainder of this
book. It figures prominently in the light emitted by atoms, the electronic properties of semiconductors, the operation of lasers, and the radioactive decays that release nuclear energy.
Our examination of atoms will acquaint us with the wave nature of electrons and show us
how the wave phenomena that we studied in Chapter 9 reappear in quantum physics. In
discharge lamps, LEDs, and lasers, we’ll explore the particle nature of light and see how
the collision effects we studied in Chapters 1–3 are influenced by quantum physics. In our
examination of radioactivity, we’ll uncover particle and wave effects that we would not

Discharge Lamps

367

even have anticipated without quantum physics. With each encounter, we’ll take another
small bite of the quantum apple—looking at how quantum effects manifest themselves in
our everyday world.
Check Your Understanding #3: Wavy Atoms
Do atoms ever exhibit wave properties?
Answer: They certainly do.
Why: Like everything else in nature, atoms have both particle and wave properties. Atoms travel as
waves and have recently been shown to exhibit many of the wave effects we studied in Chapter 9,
including refraction, reflection, and interference.

Electron Standing Waves in Atoms: Orbitals
According to the wave-particle duality, electrons have both particle and wave characteristics. Like all objects in our universe, electrons travel as waves when they move from place
to place, and it’s only when you go looking for them that you find them as particles at
particular locations (see 3 ). When they reside in atoms and you leave them alone, electrons are best understood as waves.
In a nonquantum world, an electron would exist only as a particle and would be able
to move at any speed along any path, even in an atom. However, ours is a quantum world
and the electron does not travel as a particle at all; it travels as a wave. The electron is
therefore constrained by the rules that govern waves, some of which we encountered in
Chapter 9. Like the confined mechanical waves on a violin string, drumhead, or basin of
water, the confined electron waves in an atom have limited possibilities.
We observed in Chapter 9 that the most basic mechanical waves on a limited object are
all standing waves—waves that effectively oscillate in place. This rule also applies to quantum waves in limited objects. An atom is a limited object, and the electrons in an atom are
best understood as standing waves in that atom. Each electron wave extends across the
atom and has such wave characteristics as wavelength and frequency.
Unlike a vibrating string or drumhead, however, the electron is a three-dimensional
wave and its oscillation is internal. Instead of vibrating back and forth, each point of the
wave cycles invisibly around a quantum phase. Since that quantum phase is rather mysterious, you can think of an electron standing wave as a fuzzy cloud in which each point
cycles endlessly through a series of colors: red, yellow, green, blue, red, yellow, and so on
(Fig. 13.2.4). All those points cycle at the same quantum frequency, but they’re not necessarily the same color at the same time. When the electron is in a three-dimensional standing
wave, the electron cloud’s spatial structure is constant as the wave oscillates internally and
the electron exhibits no motion at all.
This wave character has profound effects on the electronic structure of atoms.
Most significantly, it limits what electrons can do in those atoms. As we saw in Section
9.2, a violin string’s one-dimensional standing waves consist only of its fundamental
mode (Fig. 9.2.3) and its harmonic modes (Fig. 9.2.5), and a drumhead’s two-dimensional
standing waves consist only of its fundamental mode and overtones (Fig. 9.2.11). Similarly, an electron’s three-dimensional standing waves in an atom consist only of a
fundamental mode (Fig. 13.2.4a) and overtone modes (Figs. 13.2.4b–d). Although
there are a great many overtone modes available to the electron, their possibilities are
nonetheless limited.
The electron standing waves in atoms are known as orbitals—a nod to the orbits that
electrons would make around atomic nuclei if this were a nonquantum world. Electrons in
solids are less focused on specific atomic nuclei, so the standing waves in solids are instead
called levels—a recognition that each standing wave has an amount, or level, of energy
associated with it. We’ll see when we examine LEDs in Section 13.3 that each solid’s

3 In 1927, American
physicists Clinton Joseph
Davisson (1881–1958)
and Lester H. Germer
(1896–1972) showed that
electrons travel as waves
by observing interference
effects when electrons
were reflected from
different atomic layers in
a crystal of nickel metal.
When the various electron
waves arrived at a detector
in phase, the detector
found many electrons.
When the waves arrived
out of phase, the detector
found few electrons. Their
work was aided by a
fortuitous accident in
which air entered the
experiment’s glass
vacuum tube. While
carefully eliminating
oxygen from their nickel
sample after that leak,
they managed to perfect
its crystalline structure,
making it possible to
observe the interferences.

368

CHAPT ER 13 Light

(a) 1s orbital (fundamental mode)

Time

Atomic
nucleus

Electron
standing wave
(b) 2s orbital (overtone mode)

1 node surface (a hollow sphere)

(c) 2p orbital (overtone mode)

1 node surface (a plane)

(d) 3d orbital (overtone mode)

2 node surfaces (planes)

Fig. 13.2.4 In an atom, an electron normally exists in a three-dimensional quantum standing wave
or orbital. As time passes, that wave undergoes an internal oscillation, depicted here as the color
sequence red, yellow, green, blue, and so on. (a) The 1s orbital is the electron’s fundamental mode in
an atom. It has the lowest energy and slowest quantum frequency of all the atom’s electron modes.
(b) The 2s orbital is an overtone mode with somewhat more energy and a faster quantum frequency
than the 1s orbital. It has one node surface—a hollow sphere. (c) One of three possible 2p orbitals;
these are overtone modes that have energies and quantum frequencies similar to those of the 2s
orbital. Each 2p orbital has one node surface—a plane. (d) One of five possible 3d orbitals; these are
overtone modes with still greater energies and faster quantum frequencies. Each 3d orbital has two
node surfaces—both are planes.

limited level choices determine whether it’s a conductor, an insulator, or a semiconductor—
the basis for modern electronics. In the present section, we’ll see that an atom’s limited
orbital choices determine the colors of light it can emit or absorb and therefore the characteristics of most discharge lamps.

Check Your Understanding #4: Going Nowhere Fast
When an electron is in an atomic orbital, how often does it shift from one side of the atom to the
other?
Answer: An electron in an atomic orbital doesn’t move at all, so it never shifts from one side of the
atom to the other.
Why: An atomic orbital is an electron standing wave that is spread across the atom. Although that
wave is oscillating internally, it makes no spatial motion at all and therefore doesn’t shift from one
place to another. The electron wave simply oscillates in place.

Discharge Lamps

Assembling Atoms
Another remarkable observation of quantum physics is that every indistinguishable electron must have its own orbital or level, its own unique quantum wave. This law is called the
Pauli exclusion principle, after its discoverer, Wolfgang Pauli 4 . The principle applies to
a whole class of subatomic particles, the Fermi particles, that includes all the basic constituents of matter: electrons, protons, and neutrons. For reasons that lie deep in what is
known as quantum field theory, two indistinguishable Fermi particles can never be in the
same quantum wave.

THE PAULI EXCLUSION PRINCIPLE
No two indistinguishable Fermi particles ever occupy the same quantum wave.

However, a peculiar property of electrons allows two of them to share an orbital or
level. Electrons have two possible internal states, usually called spin-up and spin-down.
Because a spin-up electron is distinguishable from a spin-down electron, one spin-up electron and one spin-down electron can share a single orbital or level. However, two electrons
is the absolute maximum allowed by quantum physics and the Pauli exclusion principle.
Despite being a wave, an electron in an orbital has a specific total energy—the sum of
its kinetic and potential energies. That energy, which depends on the shape and structure of
the electron wave, also determines the wave’s oscillation frequency. According to quantum
physics, the electron’s total energy and the oscillation frequency of its wave are exactly
proportional to one another; a low-energy electron oscillates slowly, while a high-energy
electron oscillates quickly. Each orbital, each quantum standing wave in an atom, has a
specific frequency and energy. The electron’s fundamental mode (the 1s orbital, Fig. 13.2.4a)
has the lowest frequency and energy, while the overtone modes have progressively higher
frequencies and energies (Figs. 13.2.4b–d).
Although these orbitals are three-dimensional standing waves, they resemble the
two-dimensional standing waves of the drumhead shown in Fig. 9.2.9. Like the drumhead’s
vibrational modes, the orbitals are distinguished from one another by their patterns of
nodes—surfaces along which the electron wave has no amplitude. An electron’s fundamental mode has no nodes (Fig. 13.2.4a) and has the lowest quantum frequency. Each of the
overtone modes, however, has at least one node (Figs. 13.2.4b–d). In general, the more
nodes an orbital has, the greater its quantum frequency.
Physicists have come to view these standing waves as abstract placeholders, independent of the electrons that may or may not exhibit them at a given moment. The orbitals are
then analogous to seats in an stadium, each of which may or may not be occupied by electrons. Instead of saying that the electron exhibits a particular standing wave or orbital, we
often say that the orbital is occupied by an electron.
At sufficiently low temperature, electrons occupy those orbitals that have the least
energy and fill the atom’s orbitals from lowest energy on up. In accordance with the Pauli
exclusion principle, each orbital accommodates two electrons, one spin-up and one spindown, until all the atom’s electrons have been placed. The chemical nature of a particular
atom, and its location in the periodic table of the elements (Fig. 13.2.5), is determined by
how many electrons it has and how those electrons fill the available orbitals. Atoms are
electrically neutral, so the number of negatively charged electrons in an atom is the same
as the number of positively charged protons in its nucleus, its atomic number.
There are patterns to orbitals; orbitals may share the same number of nodes or be
rotated versions of one another. These patterns among orbitals give rise to the shells, that
is, groups of orbitals that have similar energies and tend to fill with electrons at about the
same time. Although the orbital patterns and shells are complicated by the fact that charged

369

4 Austrian physicist
Wolfgang Pauli (1900–
1958) rose to fame at 21
by writing an article on
relativity that impressed
even Einstein. He went on
to discover the exclusion
principle, a fundamental
part of quantum theory.
He was renowned for his
intensely critical attitude
toward new ideas,
considering them all
“rubbish” until convinced
otherwise. Pauli was also
quite interested in
psychology, corresponding with Carl Gustav Jung
and writing a number of
articles on the subject.

370

CHAPT ER 13 Light

Fig. 13.2.5 The periodic
table of the elements is
organized by the filling of
electron orbitals. Major
shells of orbitals fill with
electrons from left to right.
The number of electrons in
a neutral atom is equal to
its atomic number.

Filling 1s orbital
1

2

H

He

Atomic number

Filling s orbital
3

Filling p orbitals

4

5

Li Be
11

B

12

13

Na Mg
19

20

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

7

8

9

10

C N O F Ne
14

Al Si

Filling d orbitals
21

6

15

P

32

33

16

17

18

S Cl Ar
34

35

36

K Ca Sc Ti V Cr Mn Fe Co Ni Cu Zn Ga Ge As Se Br Kr
37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

51

52

Rb Sr Y Zr Nb Mo Tc Ru Rh Pd Ag Cd In Sn Sb Te
55

56

57

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

53

54

I Xe
85

86

Cs Ba La Hf Ta W Re Os Ir Pt Au Hg Tl Pb Bi Po At Rn
87

88

89

104

105

106

107

108

109

110

111

Fr Ra Ac Rf Db Sg Bh Hs Mt Ds Rg
58

59

60

61

62

63

64

Filling f orbitals
65

66

67

68

69

70

71

Ce Pr Nd Pm Sm Eu Gd Tb Dy Ho Er Tm Yb Lu
90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

98

99

100

101

102

103

Th Pa U Np Pu AmCm Bk Cf Es Fm Md No Lr
Alkali Metals: Highly reactive, tend to donate lone s electron so as to empty outer shell
Alkaline Earth Metals: Moderately reactive, tend to donate s electrons
Transition Metals: Common metals with similar properties, differ only in numbers of d electrons
Poor metals: Additional metals with differing properties
Metaloids: Intermediate between metals and nonmetals
Non-metals: Semiconductors and insulators
Halogens: Highly reactive, tend to steal one p electron so as to complete outer shell
Noble gases: Non-reactive gases with completed outer shells
Lanthanides: Moderately reactive metals, differ only in number of 4f electrons
Actinides: Moderately reactive metals, differ only in number of 5f electrons

electrons influence one another and distort one another’s standing waves, many atomic
properties are determined simply by which orbitals are occupied by an atom’s electrons.
The atomic orbitals are identified primarily by an integer and a letter, both of which
relate to their node patterns (Fig. 13.2.4). The integer (1, 2, 3,…) is one more than the
number of node surfaces in the orbital (0, 1, 2,…) and the letter (s, p, d, f, g, h,…) indicates
how many of those node surfaces pass through the atom’s center (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,…).
Although s orbitals appear one at a time, p orbitals appear in groups of three, d orbitals in
groups of five, f orbitals in groups of seven, and so on.
Check Your Understanding #5: Three’s a Crowd
Suppose that electrons had three different internal states: spin-up, spin-down, and spin-off. How
would that change affect the way electrons arrange themselves in atoms?
Answer: Each orbital could then accommodate up to three electrons, so atoms would have fewer
occupied orbitals.
Why: The Pauli exclusion principle prevents two indistinguishable electrons from occupying the same
quantum wave. With three distinguishable electron states, each orbital could accommodate up to
three electrons: a spin-up electron, a spin-down electron, and a spin-off electron. With more electrons settling into the low-energy orbitals, atoms would have fewer occupied orbitals and quite different behaviors.

Discharge Lamps

Neon’s Red Glow
A neon atom has 10 electrons, so it takes 5 orbitals to accommodate them. The first two
electrons go into the 1s orbital, the fundamental mode with zero nodes (Fig. 13.2.4a). Filling the 1s orbital completes the first major shell. The next two electrons go into the 2s
orbital, which has one node surface, a hollow sphere (Fig. 13.2.4b). Finally, neon’s last six
electrons go into the three 2p orbitals, each of which has one node surface, a plane passing
through the atom’s center (Fig. 13.2.4c). Since filling the 2s and 2p orbitals completes the
second major shell, the neon atom (Ne in Fig. 13.2.5) is chemically inert. That is why neon
exists as a gas of individual atoms!
An arrangement of occupied orbitals is called a state, and the state we have just
described is neon’s ground state, the state with the lowest possible total energy. The neon
atom has other states available, but they all involve additional energy. That’s where the
discharge enters the picture. When a charged particle collides with a ground-state neon
atom, there’s a chance that the collision will knock an electron out of its usual orbital into
one of the empty orbitals. The neon atom will then be in an excited state—it will have
extra energy.
Suppose, for example, that a collision has just shifted one of the neon atom’s electrons from a 2p orbital to a 3p orbital. The atom will quickly undergo a series of stateto-state transitions that eventually return it to its ground state. With each transition, the
atom will drop to a lower energy state and emit a photon, a particle, or quanta, of light.
The photon carries away the energy released in transitioning from the higher-energy
state to the lower-energy state. In all likelihood, one of those transitions will shift the
electron from its 3p orbital to the 3s orbital and produce a photon of red light, the red of
a neon sign!
As long as the electron remains in the 3p orbital—a particular standing wave—it can’t
emit an electromagnetic wave. That standing wave has a quantum oscillation; however, the
oscillation is internal to the electron and neither the electron wave nor its charge has any
overall motion. Since charge must accelerate to emit electromagnetic waves (see Section
12.1), without such overall motion there can be no emission of electromagnetic waves.
When the 3p electron begins its transition to the empty 3s orbital, however, its quantum wave starts to move. That wave is no longer one motionless standing wave but is,
instead, composed of two partial waves: part 3p orbital and part 3s orbital. Because those
two partial waves have different energies and different quantum frequencies, they experience time-dependent interference effects. The patterns of constructive and destructive
interference change so that the overall electron wave moves rhythmically back and forth
and the atom begins to emit an electromagnetic wave. By the time the transition is complete
and the electron is entirely in the 3s orbital, the atom has emitted a photon of red light. Like
an electron, light travels as a wave but behaves as a particle when you try to locate it. While
it’s being emitted or absorbed by an atom, light exhibits its particle nature.
We’ve seen that hot objects emit light, a process called incandescence, but here the
neon atom emits light without heat, a process called luminescence. That luminescence is
the result of a radiative transition, a transition between quantum states in which a photon of light is emitted or absorbed. In this case, the radiative transition emits a photon
that carries away the energy released when the excited neon atom’s 3p electron shifts
into the empty 3s orbital. The difference in energy between those two states determines
the photon energy, which in turn determines the frequency and color of the photon’s
light wave.
According to quantum physics, a photon’s frequency is proportional to its energy.
Specifically, the photon’s energy is equal to the frequency of its electromagnetic wave
times a fundamental constant of nature known as the Planck constant. This relationship
between energy and frequency can be written as a word equation:
energy = Planck constant · frequency,

(13.2.1)

371

372

CHAPT ER 13 Light

in symbols:
E = h · υ,
and in everyday language:
Ultraviolet light and X-rays can injure your skin and tissues because each
particle of high-frequency light carries a great deal of energy.
First used by German physicist Max Planck (1858–1947) in 1900 to explain the light spectrum of a hot object, the Planck constant has a measured value of 6.626 × 10–34 J ∙ s. Also,
although we have just encountered the Planck constant and Eq. 13.2.1 in the context of
light waves, it actually applies to all quantum waves. For example, the quantum frequency
of an electron is related to its energy by Eq. 13.2.1.
The value of the Planck constant is so tiny that even a photon of 1015-Hz ultraviolet
light has an energy of only 6.626 × 10–19 J. A typical beam of light thus contains so many
photons that you can’t see that they’re arriving as particles. However, the energy in a single
ultraviolet photon is substantial on a molecular scale. It can damage a molecule in your
skin, contributing to a sunburn and inducing your skin to tan as a defensive response.
X-rays have even higher frequencies, and their energetic photons can cause more severe
molecular damage.
A neon atom can only emit photons corresponding to energy differences between two
of its states, a constraint that severely limits its light spectrum. Neglecting nuclear issues
that we’ll discuss in Chapter 15, all neon atoms are identical and emit the same characteristic spectrum of light. The visible part of that spectrum is dominated by the warm red glow
of photons emitted when electrons shift from 3p to 3s orbitals, which is why a neon sign
glows red.
Since atoms of different elements have different numbers of electrons and different
states, each emits its own unique spectrum of light after being excited. Copper atoms emit a
blue-green spectrum, strontium atoms a deep red, and sodium a bright yellow-orange. Chemists, astronomers, and manufacturers rely on those emission spectra for information and
applications. As we will soon see, so do scientists and engineers working on illumination.
Check Your Understanding #6: Colorful Atoms
Many fireworks involve brilliantly colored lights. How do the atoms in burning chemicals produce
particular colors of light?
Answer: When fire adds energy to an atom and shifts it to an excited state, it emits photons in order
to return to its ground state. Each photon’s energy, frequency, and color are determined by energy
differences between the atom’s states.
Why: Each color in fireworks is produced by a particular type of atom. Some atoms, such as strontium
and lithium, emit mostly red light as they return to their ground states. Barium atoms emit green
light, copper atoms emit blue-green light, and sodium atoms emit yellow-orange light.

Check Your Figures #1: The Particles in a Radio Wave
How much energy is carried by a photon from a 1000-kHz AM radio station?
Answer: The photon carries 6.626 × 10–28 J.
Why: Since the Planck constant is 6.626 × 10–34 J · s and the frequency of the radio wave is 106 Hz
or 106 cycles/second, the energy per photon is given by Eq. 13.2.1 as
energy = (6.626 × 10−34 J · s) · (106 cycles/s) = 6.626 × 10−28 J.
This energy is so small that it’s virtually impossible to observe the particulate character of radio
waves.

Discharge Lamps

Fluorescent Lamps
If neon tubes appeal to you for illumination, you probably march to your own drummer.
Most people opt for a somewhat better simulation of sunlight in their discharge lamps. As
an energy-efficient source of artificial sunlight, though, it’s hard to beat fluorescent lamps.
At the heart of a fluorescent lamp is a narrow glass tube filled with argon, neon, and/or
krypton gases at about 0.3% of atmospheric density and pressure. The tube also contains a
few drops of liquid mercury metal, some of which evaporates to form mercury vapor. About
1 in every 1000 gas atoms inside the tube is a mercury atom, and it’s these mercury atoms
that are responsible for the light.
Like a neon sign tube, a fluorescent lamp uses a discharge in its gas to produce light.
Although fluorescent lamps occasionally use high voltages to initiate their discharges, most
operate their discharges at household voltages and must rely on alternative techniques to
render their gases conducting. These low-voltage lamps normally heat their electrodes so
that thermal energy ejects electrons from their surfaces into the gas. Regardless of how the
discharge is started, however, the result is current flowing through the gas and the emission
of light.
The fluorescent lamp has a problem, though. While its mercury atoms emit most of the
light in its discharge, that light is almost entirely ultraviolet. The final radiative transition
that returns each mercury atom to its ground state (6p → 6s) releases a large amount of
energy and produces a photon with a wavelength of 254 nm. This light can’t go through the
glass walls of the tube, and you couldn’t see it if it did. So the fluorescent lamp converts it
into visible light with the help of phosphor powder on the inside of the glass tube.
Phosphors are solids that luminesce—they emit light—when something transfers
energy to them. Their behavior is similar to that of an atom; an energy transfer shifts the
phosphor from its ground state to an excited state, and it then undergoes a series of transitions
that return it to its ground state. Some of those transitions are radiative ones and emit light.
In a fluorescent lamp, the phosphor is excited by ultraviolet light. This excitation or
energy transfer is actually a radiative transition, but one in which the photon is absorbed by
the phosphor; one of its electrons makes a transition from a lower-energy level to a higherenergy level. During this absorption, the light’s electric field pushes the electron’s wave
back and forth rhythmically until it shifts to the new level. The photon disappears, and the
phosphor receives its energy.
Once the phosphor is in an excited state, its electrons begin to make transitions back to
their ground-state levels. Most of those transitions radiate visible light, the light that you
see when you look at the lamp. However, some of the transitions radiate invisible infrared
light or cause useless vibrations in the phosphor itself. Despite this wasted energy, phosphors are relatively efficient at turning ultraviolet light into visible light, a process called
fluorescence.
The phosphors in a fluorescent lamp are carefully selected and blended to fluoresce
over a broad range of visible wavelengths. That blending is necessary because, like atoms,
each phosphor fluoresces with a characteristic spectrum of light that’s determined by the
energy differences between its levels. Several different phosphors are needed to produce
the rainbow spectrum of white light. While some advertising and novelty lamps use brightly
colored, unblended phosphors, fluorescent lighting tubes use phosphor mixtures that imitate white thermal radiation sources such as the sun or incandescent lightbulbs.
Because compact fluorescent lamps typically produce 60 to 100 lumens per watt,
about 4 to 6 times the luminous efficiency of incandescent lightbulbs, you can save a great
deal of energy by replacing incandescent lightbulbs with compact fluorescents. In fact,
incandescent lightbulbs are being phased out because of their poor energy inefficiency. To
ease the acceptance of compact fluorescent lamps by a reluctant public, scientists and engineers have had to improve the quality of their light.
Early fluorescent lamps used a phosphor blend known as “daylight,” which emitted far
too much blue light and made everything look cold and medicinal. Daylight lamps rarely

373

374

CHAPT ER 13 Light

found their way into homes. The first improvement came with the developments of the
“cool white” and “warm white” phosphor blends. Cool white resembled sunlight, and
warm white resembled light from an incandescent lightbulb. However, even these improved
lamps didn’t emit true white-light spectra—the blackbody spectra of the hot sun or the hot
filament of an incandescent lightbulb. Objects looked a little off-color when illuminated by
these lamps, so people were hesitant to use them in place of incandescent lightbulbs. Photographers and cinematographers wanting to capture true colors were particularly troubled
by fluorescent lighting of that era.
However, the latest generation of fluorescent lamps uses phosphor blends that produce
nearly perfect blackbody spectra. Many of those blends are even sold according to their
color temperatures (see Section 7.3). For example, a 5100 K compact fluorescent lamp
emits light that is almost indistinguishable from the thermal radiation emitted by a black
object heated to 5100 K. That 5100 K color temperature is approximately the color temperature of sunlight averaged over a day. (Sunlight’s color temperature is affected by the atmosphere and is highest at noon and lowest at dawn and dusk.) If you like the color of sunlight,
use 5100 K compact fluorescents.
People who prefer the warm look of incandescent lighting should choose compact
fluorescent lamps with a 2700 K color temperature. These lamps imitate the blackbody
spectrum of a 2700 K tungsten filament almost perfectly. Because this 2700 K blackbody
spectrum is richer in reds and oranges, it has a comforting, warm character to it. If you
can’t make up your mind between 5100 K sunlight and 2700 K incandescent light, you can
choose many color temperatures in between. Even photographers and cinematographers
are now using fluorescent lights, to the delight of actors and news anchors who used to
sweat under the intense heat of powerful, energy-inefficient incandescent lamps.
Check Your Understanding #7: Sorry, We Forgot the Coating
If there were no phosphor coating on the inside of a fluorescent tube, what would you see when the
lamp operated?
Answer: You would see only a dim (blue-white) glow from the lamp because most of the light produced by the mercury discharge is invisible ultraviolet light.
Why: Without its phosphor coating, a fluorescent tube produces very little visible light. The phosphor coating is needed to convert the discharge’s ultraviolet light into visible light. Even if you
could see ultraviolet light, you would see very little of it leaving the tube. The tube is made of glass,
which absorbs virtually all ultraviolet light with wavelengths shorter than 350 nm. Even in a normal
fluorescent tube, any ultraviolet not converted to visible light by the phosphors is absorbed by the
glass tube.

A Few Practical Issues
A fluorescent tube needs a substantial electric field inside it to keep its electrons moving
forward. Since this electric field is proportional to the voltage drop through the tube, longer
tubes need higher voltages. Power-line voltages (110 to 240 V) are appropriate for tubes up
to 3 m (10 ft) in length, but the longer and frequently colored fluorescent tubes used in
artwork or advertising require much higher voltages.
To keep electrons from pushing one another into its walls, a fluorescent tube must
also contain positively charged mercury ions. The discharge naturally produces these
ions during particularly energetic collisions. The result, a gaslike mixture of positively
charged ions and negatively charged electrons, is called a plasma. A plasma is distinct
from a gas because its charged particles exert forces on one another over considerable
distances. All operating discharge lamps contain plasmas, including the neon sign that
we discussed earlier.
Since a typical fluorescent lamp must heat its electrodes red-hot to form its plasma, it
runs current through filaments at each end of its tubes (Fig. 13.2.6). Once the discharge is

Discharge Lamps

375

Mercury
operating, impacts by electrons may keep the filaments hot enough to sustain
Phosphor
vapor
Glass
the plasma and allow the heating current to be switched off. However, some
Electrode
fluorescent fixtures can be dimmed, in which case electron heating alone won’t Electrode
and heater
sustain the plasma. Dimmable fluorescent fixtures must continue to pass heat- and heater
ing currents through their filament/electrodes.
Fig. 13.2.6 In a hotEach filament/electrode is coated with a material that helps it emit electrons into the electrode fluorescent
gas. Unfortunately, that coating is thin and easily damaged by a process called sputtering, tube, the electrodes are
in which positive mercury ions from the plasma collide with the coating and chip away its actually filaments and are
heated by running currents
atoms. Once enough of the coating has been removed, the lamp won’t be able to sustain a through them.
discharge and it will need to be replaced. Because sputtering is particularly severe during
start-up, most fluorescent lamps fail after 10,000 to 40,000 starts. Since it takes energy to
construct each fluorescent lamp, turning a lamp off for only a short period, a few minutes
or less, won’t actually save energy in the long run. When you’ll be returning to the room in
a couple of minutes, leave the fluorescent lights on. Otherwise, turn them off.
Fluorescent lamps operate most efficiently and are at their brightest when their internal
temperatures reach about 40 °C. Below that temperature, the vapor pressure of mercury is
too low and too much of the lamp’s tiny store of mercury is liquid rather than gas. That’s
why most fluorescent lamps are somewhat dim when you first turn them on and they
brighten as they warm up from room temperature to about 40 °C. It takes time for the mercury vapor to reach its optimum density. Although this warm-up period is objectionable to
some people, it’s a small price to pay for a vastly more energy-efficient lighting.
It would be great if fluorescent lamps could be based on a substance less toxic than
mercury. However, mercury is uniquely well-suited to those lamps: its vapor pressure near
room temperature is nearly ideal for an electric discharge, it converts electric energy into
ultraviolet light with great efficiency, and it isn’t damaged or consumed as the lamp operates. Much more important than eliminating mercury from fluorescent lamps is recycling
those lamps after they fail. It’s not hard to extract and reuse the mercury, and it should be
done routinely.

Check Your Understanding #8: Getting Red-y
Why do the ends of some fluorescent lamps glow red during starting?
Answer: To start many lamps, their electrodes must be heated red-hot. You can often see light emitted by these hot filaments/electrodes.
Why: In most fluorescent fixtures, the filaments are heated to high temperatures just before the discharge starts. Thermal energy then ejects electrons from the filament so that they can carry current
through the gas.

Mercury, Metal-Halide, and Sodium Lamps
Whereas a low-pressure mercury discharge emits mostly ultraviolet light, a high-pressure
mercury discharge emits more visible light than ultraviolet light. This change occurs
because ultraviolet light becomes trapped in densely packed mercury atoms and only visible light is able to escape from the discharge.
Known as radiation trapping, this effect occurs because mercury atoms absorb 254-nm
photons just as well as they emit them. The same radiative transition that causes a mercury
atom to emit a 254-nm photon (6p → 6s) can also run backward to absorb that photon
(6s → 6p). In a dense gas of mercury, whenever one mercury atom emits a 254-nm photon,
another mercury atom snaps that photon up. So while the discharge keeps pouring energy
into the mercury atoms, they can’t get rid of it as 254-nm photons. Instead, they emit most
of their energy through radiative transitions between other excited states. Since this light is
much less likely to be captured by other mercury atoms, it emerges from the lamp as bluish
visible light.

376

CHAPT ER 13 Light

When you first turn on a high-pressure mercury lamp, most of the mercury is liquid
and the pressure is low. The lamp starts like a small fluorescent tube without phosphor, so
you see very little visible light. However, the tube is designed to heat up during operation
so that the liquid mercury evaporates to form a dense gas. As the gas pressure rises, the
tube’s color changes. The 254-nm photons become trapped and photons emitted by many
other radiative transitions begin to dominate. The lamp emits brilliant, blue-white light.
To make a lamp that’s a little less bluish, some high-pressure mercury lamps contain
additional metal atoms. These atoms are introduced into the lamps as metal-iodide compounds, so they are often called metal-halide lamps. Sodium, thallium, indium, and scandium iodides all contribute their own emission spectra to the outgoing light and help to
strengthen the red end of its spectrum. They give metal-halide lamps a warmer color than
pure mercury lamps. Both high-pressure mercury and metal-halide lamps produce about 50
to 60 lumens per watt, making them almost as energy efficient as fluorescent lamps.
Pure sodium lamps resemble mercury lamps, except that they use sodium atoms.
Sodium is a solid at room temperature, so both low- and high-pressure sodium lamps must
heat up before they begin to operate properly. A low-pressure sodium lamp is extremely
energy efficient because its 590-nm light comes directly from a sodium atom’s strongest
radiative transition. That transition is from sodium’s lowest excited state to its ground state
(3p → 3s). Low-pressure sodium lamps produce almost 200 lumens per watt, which is why
highways were frequently illuminated by their yellow-orange glow.
However, this monochromatic illumination is unpleasant and permits no color vision
at all. Although it’s marginally acceptable on a highway, you wouldn’t want it near your
home. That’s why people buy high-pressure sodium lamps for home use (Fig. 13.2.7). For
a small decrease in energy efficiency, to about 150 lumens per watt, you get a big improvement in color.
Remarkably enough, the 590-nm emission itself smears out at high pressure to cover a
wide range of wavelengths, from yellow-green to orange-red. This spreading occurs
because of the many collisions suffered by the densely packed sodium atoms as they try to
emit 590-nm light. These collisions distort the atomic orbitals so that the photons emerge
with somewhat shifted energies. Overall, a high-pressure sodium lamp emits remarkably
little light exactly at 590 nm because the ground-state sodium atoms trap that light; they run
the (3p → 3s) transition backward and absorb the photons (3s → 3p). This trapping is so
effective that there is actually a hole in the lamp’s spectrum right at 590 nm.

(b)

(a)
Protective glass
envelope

Electrodes
Glass tube
containing
sodium and
inert gases

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Fig. 13.2.7 (a) The active
component of a highpressure sodium vapor
lamp is a small translucent
tube. (b) As the lamp
warms up, sodium metal in
the tube evaporates to form
a brilliant yellow discharge.
The dense vapor of sodium
atoms in the tube traps
the 590-nm light so that
the lamp emits a richer
spectrum of wavelengths
and a less monochromatic
glow than a low-pressure
sodium lamp.

LEDs and Lasers

377

High-pressure discharge lamps suffer from a problem not found in low-pressure lamps:
they’re difficult to start when hot. It’s much harder to initiate a discharge in a high-pressure
gas than in a low-pressure gas, so they all start at low pressure and then evolve to high
pressure. If the discharge in a high-pressure mercury, sodium vapor, or metal-halide lamp
is interrupted and loses its plasma, the lamp must cool down before it can be restarted.
Check Your Understanding #9: Slow Glowing
At dusk, a mercury streetlight turns on. It glows dimly at first and gradually increases in brightness.
What is happening during this warm-up period?
Answer: The small high-pressure discharge tube is heating up, vaporizing more mercury.
Why: When the streetlight first turns on, the pressure of mercury atoms inside it is low and it emits
very little visible light. As the discharge heats the tube, more mercury atoms evaporate until eventually all the mercury inside the tube is gaseous.

SECTION 13.3
Highly
reflective
mirror

Reflective
chamber

LEDs and Lasers

Laser
Partially
discharge
reflective
capacitor Flashlamp
mirror

fluorescent lamps, and its properties make it particularly useful
for many applications. In this section, we’ll examine the nature
of this new light and the ways in which lasers produce it.

Flashlamp

Laser beam
Q-switch
Laser
(electronic shutter) oscillator
rod

Dust
protector

Laser
amplifier
rod

Today’s electronic devices have so many LEDs (light-emitting
diodes) that our homes are ablaze with tiny colored lights at night.
LEDs are quickly replacing lightbulbs in flashlights, and LED illumination is on the rise. LEDs combine the light-producing quantum transitions of discharge lamps with the solid-state physics of
modern electronics. In this section, we’ll see how electrons
behave in solids and how those solids can be tailored to emit light.
We’ll also take a look at lasers. Since their invention in the
late 1950s, lasers have found countless uses, from cutting
metal and clearing human arteries to surveying land and playing
CDs and DVDs. However, lasers are more than just novel applications of old ideas. Instead, they bring together quantum and
optical physics to produce a new type of light. This light is
radically different from the light produced by incandescent and

Questions to Think About: Why is laser light usually brightly
colored? Why does laser light often appear as a narrow beam?
In movies, “lasers” are often shown to emit bright streaks of
light that can be dodged if one jumps quickly enough; is that
view realistic?
Experiments to Do: Although lasers are household objects, the
ones in CD or DVD players and laser printers are relatively inaccessible. If you don’t own a laser pointer, look at a store barcode
scanner. The scanning system contains a gas or solid-state laser
that emits a very narrow beam of bright red light. This system
also contains a rotating mirror or holographic disk that directs
the beam as a pattern of thin stripes onto anything that passes
through the scanner. A light sensor inside the window watches
for this moving beam of light to travel across a label. If you look
down at the laser light emerging from the scanner’s window or
observe the spot of a laser pointer on the wall, you’ll see both
the purity of its color and its strange speckled character; the
light appears to consist of tiny light and dark speckles. These
speckles are caused by interference effects, which are extremely
pronounced in the ordered laser light. This light also appears
unusually bright and, as when looking at the sun, you should
keep your gaze brief to avoid eye injury.

WARNING
Laser light is dangerous. Because laser light can be extremely bright and can focus so
tightly, it presents a serious eye hazard. A laser beam entering your eye will focus to a
tiny spot on your retina and may cause rapid and permanent injury. Although lasers up
to Class III are relatively eye-safe, they rely on your natural blink reflex to protect you.
You should never stare into any laser. Class IV lasers are not eye-safe, and their light
should never enter your eyes at all.

378

CHAPT ER 13 Light

Electrons in Solids

Levels in a solid
(more empty levels below)
Band
Gap
Energy

Fig. 13.3.1 A conceptual
representation of the
levels (electron quantum
standing waves) in a solid.
Each level is a box holding
at most one spin-up
electron (blue) and one
spin-down electron (red).
The horizontal axis is
position and the vertical
axis is the energy of an
electron in a level. Because
levels form out of atomic
orbitals, levels made from
similar orbitals have similar
energies and group into
bands. For this portion of
the solid to be electrically
neutral, 140 positive
charges in its nuclei must
be cancelled by electrons
in these levels, so 140
electrons settle into them.

An LED is a solid-state device—that is, it’s a solid object that luminesces. Like light from
a neon sign, light from an LED is produced when an electron shifts from a higher-energy
quantum state to a lower-energy quantum state by way of a radiative transition. In the neon
sign, those quantum states involve orbitals, the electron standing waves of an atom. In an
LED, however, those quantum states involve levels, the electron standing waves of a solid.
To understand how an LED emits light, we must start by understanding levels.
Solids are limited objects, and the basic quantum waves for electrons in limited objects
are always standing waves. The electron standing waves in atoms are called orbitals because
the positively charge nucleus wraps the negatively charged waves around itself in a manner
suggesting orbits. The electron standing waves in solids are less focused on specific atomic
nuclei and are called levels instead. Although the nuclei are present, of course, each electron is attracted to all the nuclei at once and that changes the nature of the standing waves.
As we did with orbitals, we’ll view levels as abstract placeholders, independent of the
electrons that may or may not exhibit them at a given moment. The levels in a solid are then
analogous to seats in a theater, each of which may or may not be occupied right now.
Instead of saying that the electron is experiencing a particular standing wave or level, we
say that the level is occupied by an electron. In this reversed perspective, the level plays the
more important role.
Like an electron in an orbital, an electron in a level has a specific total energy—the sum
of its kinetic and potential energies. That energy, which depends on the shape and structure
of the electron wave, also determines the wave’s quantum frequency (see Eq. 13.2.1).
A solid contains an enormous number of electrons, and there are always plenty of
levels around to accommodate those electrons. But which levels do they occupy?
At sufficiently low temperature, electrons occupy those levels that have the least
energy. For thermodynamic reasons, the electrons settle into the lowest-energy levels available, two electrons per level (recall the Pauli exclusion principle). By the time all the electrons have been accommodated, they fill the levels up to a certain maximum energy. Halfway between the highest filled level and lowest unfilled level is the Fermi level, a
hypothetical level that defines the top of this Fermi sea of electrons. The energy an electron
would have in that hypothetical level is called the Fermi energy.
Our theater analogy can again provide insight into this level-filling process. It is analogous to what happens at a popular show: the seats fill from the orchestra level on up—
everyone wants to sit in the lowest (and closest) seat. When the show starts, people have
filled all the seats up to a certain highest seat. Halfway between that last filled seat and the
next unfilled seat is the hypothetical Fermi seat.
If we represent the levels graphically by boxes and arrange them vertically according
to energy (Fig. 13.3.1), then the levels (boxes) below the Fermi level contain two electrons

Fermi level

Band
Gap
Band
140 positive charges
(more filled levels below)
Position

LEDs and Lasers

379

each, while those above the Fermi level are empty. Although thermal energy complicates
this picture somewhat by shifting electrons about near the Fermi level, we can ignore that
detail near room temperature or below.
Since levels are standing waves, they don’t have sharply defined locations in space.
However, we can safely imagine that each level places its electrons near a particular location in the solid, as shown in Fig. 13.3.1. Although this picture is somewhat oversimplified,
it’s accurate enough to illustrate much of the physics of charge motion in materials.
Of course, electrons aren’t the only charged particles in a solid. The atoms also have
positively charged nuclei. But those nuclei are essentially immobile and rarely participate
in the flow of electricity.
Check Your Understanding #1: Taking It to a Higher Level
If you add one extra electron to an otherwise neutral metal ball, into which level will that electron go?
Answer: The electron will go into the lowest-energy empty level, the one just above the Fermi level.
Why: Since each electron goes into the lowest-energy level that’s available, this new electron will fill
the level just above the Fermi level. Actually, if the neutral metal ball has an odd number of electrons, then the Fermi level contains only one electron. In that case, the new electron will fill the other
opening in the Fermi level.

Metals, Insulators, and Semiconductors
The levels in a solid occur in groups called bands. Each band corresponds to standing
waves with a particular type of structure. Since the levels in a band involve similar waves,
they also involve similar energies. Between these bands of levels there are sometimes band
gaps, ranges of energy in which no levels exist. The solid does not and cannot contain
electrons with energies that lie within a band gap.
Bands and band gaps are what distinguish metals, insulators, and semiconductors.
When the Fermi level is located in a band gap, it can prevent the electrons in a solid from
responding to outside forces. To see how that happens, let’s examine first a metal and then
an insulator.
In a metal, the Fermi level lies in the middle of a band (Fig. 13.3.2). Because the
band’s empty levels are just above its filled levels, very little energy is needed to shift electrons from the filled levels to empty levels. This feature allows the metal to conduct electricity. When you subject the metal to a voltage difference, giving its left side a higher
voltage than its right side, the resulting electric field points toward the right. That field
pushes the metal’s negatively charged electrons toward the left and they being to move left.
They move by shifting from filled levels to empty levels (Fig. 13.3.2), obtaining the energy
needed to reach those empty levels from the work done on them by the electrostatic forces.
Overall, electrons enter the metal from its right and leave from its left, so the metal conducts electricity!
Levels in a metal
Band

Energy

Gap

Fermi level

Band
Gap
Band
140 positive charges
Position

Fig. 13.3.2 In a metal,
electrical neutrality is
reached while electrons are
still filling a band of levels
and the Fermi level lies in
that partially filled band.
Electrons near the Fermi
level can shift easily to
nearby empty levels. When
a voltage gradient produces
an electric field in the
metal, electrons in the
partially filled band move
opposite the field and the
metal conducts electric
current.

CHAPT ER 13 Light

Fig. 13.3.4 When light
strikes an insulator, its
photons may carry enough
energy to shift electrons
from the insulator’s
valence band to the
conduction band. If so,
electrons can then use the
two partially filled bands to
move through the material
in response to an electric
field. The illuminated
insulator becomes an
electrical conductor,
photoconductor.

Levels in an insulator
Conduction band
Band
Gap
Energy

Fig. 13.3.3 In an
insulator, electrical
neutrality is reached just
as electrons finish filling
a band of levels and the
Fermi level lies between
that filled conduction band
and the empty valence
band well above it in
energy. Electrons in the
conduction band don’t
have enough energy to
shift into empty levels in
the valence band. When a
voltage gradient produces
an electric field in the
insulator, electrons in the
full valence band can’t
move and the insulator
doesn’t conduct electric
current.

Fermi level
Valence band

Band
Gap
Band
160 positive charges
Position

In our theater analogy, a metal is a theater in which only about half the ground-floor
seats are filled. If you ask people in the theater to begin shifting left, those near the top of
the occupied seats can shift about easily. Each finds an empty seat nearby on the left and
moves over. New people are then able to enter the theater from the right while others leave
the theater from the left. This metal theater is conducting people.
Unlike the situation in a metal, in an insulator the Fermi level lies in the middle of a
band gap, between the top of one band and the bottom of another band (Fig. 13.3.3). With no
easily accessible empty levels available, a great deal of energy is required to shift electrons
from the filled levels to empty levels. When you subject the insulator to a voltage difference,
higher voltage on the left, the resulting electric field points toward the right and pushes the
insulator’s electrons toward the left. Those electrons, however, have no empty levels nearby
and are thus unable to move. To shift into one of the empty levels in the upper band, an electron in the lower band would need more energy than it can get from the electrostatic forces.
Since no net charge flows through the insulator, it doesn’t conduct electricity!
In our theater analogy, an insulator is a theater in which all the ground-floor seats are full
and the balcony seats are empty. When you ask people in this theater to begin shifting left,
they can’t do it. All the ground-floor seats to the left are filled, and people can’t reach the
balcony to make use of its empty seats. This insulator theater is unable to conduct people.
In a metal, the band of levels containing the Fermi level is only partially filled, and
electrons can easily shift from filled to unfilled levels. In an insulator, the band below the
Fermi level—the valence band—is full and the band above the Fermi level—the conduction band—is empty, making such shifts extremely difficult.
Even in an insulator, however, an electron can shift from a valence level (a level in the
valence band) to a conduction level (a level in the conduction band) if something provides
the necessary energy. One such energy source is light. When an insulator is exposed to the
right type of light, that light can shift electrons from the material’s valence band to its conduction band (Fig. 13.3.4).
Levels in a photoconductor
Conduction band
Band
Gap
Energy

380

Fermi level
Valence band

Photon

Band
Gap
Band
160 positive charges
Position

Photon

LEDs and Lasers

Once electrons appear in the normally empty conduction band and empty levels appear
in the normally full valence band, electrons can respond to electric fields. They can shift from
filled levels to nearby empty levels and thus travel through the material. Electrons can then
enter the material from one side and leave from the other, so the material conducts electricity.
Because light has made this insulator a conductor, we call the material a photoconductor.
Turning again to our analogy, light’s role in the insulator theater is performed by a
playful gorilla that walks about the ground floor, tossing patrons into the balcony. With
some of the ground-floor seats suddenly empty and some of the balcony seats suddenly
occupied by dazed theatergoers, the crowd can now respond to your request to move left.
The gorilla has made the insulator theater a conductor of people—what you might call a
“gorillaconductor.”
Not all light causes photoconductivity in an insulator. As we saw in Section 13.2, light is
emitted and absorbed as particles called photons. Each photon’s energy is proportional to its
frequency; the higher the frequency of light, the more energy each of its photons contains. To
shift an electron across the large band gap in a typical insulator, high-energy, high-frequency
light is needed; the insulator must be exposed to violet or even ultraviolet light.
Nature also provides materials with smaller band gaps that can be crossed with the
help of low-energy, low-frequency red or even infrared light. These materials are called
semiconductors because their properties lie somewhere between those of conductors and
insulators. Semiconductors have small band gaps, making it relatively easy for light, heat,
or other types of energy to shift electrons between valence and conduction levels. In our
analogy, a semiconductor theater is an insulator theater with a low balcony, so that even a
baby gorilla can toss people into it.
For more than half a century, scientists and engineers have worked with semiconductors to produce an astonishing array of electronic devices. By carefully tailoring the shapes
and chemical compositions of semiconducting materials such as silicon, germanium, and
gallium arsenide, they have created virtuoso instruments for electron waves in solids that
are every bit as remarkable as the instruments for musical waves found in great orchestras.
Of all these electronic instruments, the simplest is the semiconductor diode.
Check Your Understanding #2: Stop and Go Shopping
In many grocery checkout counters, a conveyor belt carries food to the register but stops when the
food reaches the end and blocks a beam of light. How might a photoconductor be used to sense this
blockage?
Answer: The beam of light shines on the photoconductor, allowing it to carry current and turn on the
conveyer belt’s motor. When food blocks the light beam, the photoconductor becomes an electrical
insulator and the belt stops moving.
Why: Photoconductors are commonly used in light sensors. Light allows the photoconductor to carry
current, and that current can be used to operate machinery, trigger a burglar alarm, or turn lights on
or off. In the present case, it turns on the conveyor belt’s motor.

Diodes
A diode is a one-way device for current; it allows current to flow through it in one direction
but not in the other. Although diodes have taken many forms over the years, the diodes in
virtually all modern electronic devices are built from semiconductors.
A basic semiconductor diode is made by joining together two different semiconductors. These two semiconductors have been modified so that they don’t have perfectly filled
valence levels and perfectly empty conduction levels. Instead, they’re doped with atomic
impurities that either create a few empty valence levels (p-type semiconductor,
Fig. 13.3.5a) or place a few electrons in the conduction levels (n-type semiconductor,
Fig. 13.3.5b). These empty valence levels or conduction-level electrons allow p-type and
n-type semiconductors to conduct electricity.

381

CHAPT ER 13 Light

(a) P-type semiconductor
Conduction band

(b) N-type semiconductor

Band
Gap
Energy

Fig. 13.3.5 (a) A p-type
semiconductor has slight
shortage of positive
charges in its nuclei and
becomes electrically
neutral before its valence
band fills completely with
electrons. (b) An n-type
semiconductor has a slight
excess of positive charges
in its nuclei and becomes
electrically neutral after
partly filling its conduction
band with electrons.
(c) When the p- and n-type
semiconductors touch,
conduction-level electrons
migrate from the n-type
semiconductor to the
p-type semiconductor,
creating a thin, electrically
polarized depletion region
at the p-n junction.

Valence band

Band
Gap
Band
75 positive charges

85 positive charges
Position

(c) P-N junction
Conduction band

Depletion region

Band
Gap
Energy

382

Valence band

Negative
net charge

Positive
net charge

Band
Gap
Band
75 positive charges

85 positive charges
Position

When a piece of p-type semiconductor touches a piece of n-type semiconductor, however, something remarkable happens—a p-n junction forms at the place where the two
meet (Fig. 13.3.5c). To reduce their potential energies, higher-energy conduction-level
electrons from the n-type semiconductor migrate across the p-n junction to fill empty lowerenergy valence levels in the p-type semiconductor. It’s an example of static electricity (see
Section 10.1); when two dissimilar materials touch, the material that is hungrier for electrons (the p-type semiconductor) steals some electrons from its partner (the n-type semiconductor).
As the electron migration proceeds, the n-type semiconductor acquires a positive net
charge because it now has fewer electrons than positive charges. The p-type semiconductor acquires a negative net charge because it now has more electrons than positive
charges. Electrostatic forces from this separated charge oppose the further migration of
electrons across the junction and gradually bring that migration to a halt. Everything is
then in equilibrium.
Near the p-n junction, there is now a depletion region, an area in which electron
migration has emptied all the conduction levels and filled all the valence levels. With no
conduction-level electrons or empty valence levels left, the depletion region can’t conduct
electricity and charge can’t move across the p-n junction. The depletion region is an insulator, and the two pieces of semiconductor have become a diode.
In our theater analogy, the p-n junction is analogous to a theater with two halves. In the
left or “p-type” half, the balcony is empty and even the ground floor has some empty seats.
In the right or “n-type” half, the ground floor is filled and there are even a few people in the
balcony. Since these two halves touch, people in the right balcony notice the empty seats in
the left ground floor, and a few of them near the center of the theater clamber down from
the right balcony to the left ground floor to take advantage of the better seats. Near the
center of the theater, the ground floor is now filled and the balcony is empty, forming a
depletion region in which no one can move left or right. The central part of the theater can’t
conduct people!

LEDs and Lasers

383

Let’s now look at what happens when we attach wires to each semiconductor half and
use a battery to impose a voltage difference between those two halves. In Fig. 13.3.6a, the
voltage of the p-type side (left) is higher than the voltage of the n-type side (right), so the
resulting electric field points toward the right and pushes electrons toward the left. Electrons migrate toward the p-n junction in the n-type side’s conduction levels and away from
the p-n junction in the p-type side’s valence levels. At the same time, some electrons enter
the n-type side from its wire and some electrons exit the p-type side to its wire. The depletion region becomes thinner and, when the voltage difference is large enough, vanishes
altogether. Once that happens, electrons begin to cross the p-n junction and the entire
device and it conducts electric current.
In the theater analogy, we’re adding people on the right to the n-type balcony and
removing them on the left from the p-type ground floor. The new people in the n-type balcony can move about the empty seats and migrate toward the center of the theater. Similarly, the empty seats in the p-type ground floor allow people to shift about so that empty
seats become available near the center of the theater. At that point, people in the n-type
balcony can cross over to the p-type balcony and then jump down to the ground floor. There
is a net leftward flow of people through the theater; the theater is conducting people from
right to left.
What happens if we reverse the battery? In Fig. 13.3.6b, the voltage of the n-type side
(right) is higher than the voltage of the p-type side (left), so the resulting electric field points
toward the left and pushes electrons toward the right. In this case, the depletion region
becomes thicker as the electrons fill in the empty valence levels in the p-type side and leave
the conduction levels in the n-type side. The widening depletion region prevents charge from
moving and no current flows across the p-n junction. The device remains an insulator.
In the theater analogy, we’re removing people on the right from the n-type balcony and
adding them on the left to the p-type ground floor. Soon the n-type balcony is virtually
empty and the p-type ground floor is essentially full. The entire theater is now a depletion
region and behaves like the insulator theater. No one can move and the theater can’t conduct people.
(a) Forward biased p-n junction
P-type (anode)

N-type (cathode)

Band

Energy

Gap

Conduction band
Valence band

Band
Gap
Band
75 positive charges

85 positive charges
Position

(b) Reverse biased p-n junction
Depletion region
Band

Energy

Gap

Conduction band

Negative
net charge

Positive
net charge

Valence band

Band
Gap
Band
75 positive charges

85 positive charges
Position

Fig. 13.3.6 (a) When
a p-n junction’s p-type
anode has a higher voltage
than its n-type cathode,
the resulting electric field
causes electrons to migrate
toward the junction in the
cathode and away from the
junction in the anode. The
depletion region shrinks or
vanishes, electrons cross
the junction, and current
flows through the device.
(b) When a p-n junction’s
p-type anode has a lower
voltage than its n-type
cathode, the resulting
electric field causes
electrons to migrate away
from the junction in the
cathode and toward from
the junction in the anode.
The depletion region grows,
no electrons cross the
junction, and no current
flows through the device.

384

CHAPT ER 13 Light

Since it allows current to flow in one direction but not the other, the p-n junction is a
diode. For historical reasons, the diode’s p-type side is called the anode and its n-type side
is called the cathode. Current, which is the flow of positive charge, can pass through a
diode only from its anode to its cathode. Since current naturally flows from higher voltage
to lower voltage, a diode carries current only when it is forward biased, that is, when its
anode has a higher voltage than its cathode. When it is reverse biased, when its anode has
a lower voltage than its cathode, no current flows through the diode.
Check Your Understanding #3: It’s a One-Way Street
What will happen if you include a p-n junction (a diode) in the AC circuit that connects the power
company to your table lamp?
Answer: Current will flow through the circuit only half the time, and your lamp will be dim.
Why: If you include a diode in an AC circuit, it will prevent current from flowing in one direction.
Current will flow through the circuit only during the half of each power-line cycle when the diode’s
cathode is negatively charged and its anode positively charged. Since the lamp will receive only about
half of its normal power, its filament won’t reach normal operating temperature. The lamp will glow
dimly but the bulb will last an extraordinarily long time. Diodes are often used in this manner to
create dim light levels in lamps or appliances.

Light-Emitting Diodes
Even when a diode is forward biased, its depletion region doesn’t vanish until the voltage
of its anode is significantly higher than the voltage of its cathode. For the ordinary silicon
diodes commonly used in AC adapters and computer power supplies, a voltage drops of
0.6 V is required before they’ll conduct current. Since the current passing through the diode
is then experiencing a voltage drop, the diode is consuming electric power. Because the
diodes used in adapters and power supplies serve only as switches to control the direction
of current flow, the electric power consumed by these diodes is simply converted into thermal power. But some specialized diodes are designed to convert much of the electric power
they consume into optical power—they emit light!
When a diode is forward biased and current flows from its anode to its cathode,
conduction-level electrons in the n-type cathode travel across the p-n junction to become
conduction-level electrons in the p-type anode. In effect, the anode is then in an excited
state; it has conduction-level electrons and empty valence levels (Fig. 13.3.6a).
What happens next depends on the characteristics of the diode. In a normal silicon
diode, those conduction-level electrons shift to empty valence levels without producing
significant light. Silicon’s band structure has characteristics that discourage light emission,
so most of these electron transitions produce internal vibrations and heat the diode instead
of producing light.
In specialized diodes made from more exotic semiconductors, conduction-level electrons injected from the n-type cathode into the p-type anode frequently undergo radiative
transitions to empty valence levels and thereby emit light (Fig. 13.3.7). Composed primarily from combinations of gallium, indium, aluminum, arsenic, phosphorus, and nitrogen,
they are known as light-emitting diodes, or LEDs. LEDs now come in just about any color
of the rainbow, including infrared, red, orange, yellow, green, blue, violet, and ultraviolet
(Fig. 13.3.8). Although white LEDs are also common, they’re actually violet or ultraviolet
LEDs with built-in phosphors that fluoresce white.
An LED’s color is directly related to the energy released when an electron in its p-type
anode shifts from a conduction level to a valence level. The most convenient unit in which
to measure that energy is the electron volt (abbreviated eV), the energy released when 1
elementary unit of electric charge experiences a 1-V decrease in voltage (1 eV is equal to
1.6021 × 10–19 J). In a typical red LED, an electron releases 1.9 eV as it shifts from a conduction level to a valence level and can produce a photon with an energy of 1.9 eV. Since

LEDs and Lasers
Light-emitting diode or LED
P-type (anode)

Photon

N-type (cathode)

Band

Energy

Gap

Conduction band
Valence band

Band
Gap
Band
75 positive charges

85 positive charges
Position

Fig. 13.3.7 When current flows through the p-n junction of light-emitting diode, conduction-level
electrons from the n-type cathode are injected into conduction levels of the p-type anode. In the
anode, those conduction-level electrons can shift to empty valence levels and release energy. About
half the time, a radiative transition converts that energy into a photon of light.

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

energy and frequency are related by Eq. 13.2.1 and frequency and wavelength are related by
Eq. 9.2.1, that 1.9-eV photon has a frequency of 4.6 × 1014 Hz and a wavelength of 650 nm.
To operate and produce these 1.9-eV photons, the red LED must be forward biased
with a voltage drop of at least 1.9 V. The current-carrying diode uses that voltage drop to
inject electrons into the anode’s conduction band, where they have energies 1.9 eV above
the valence band. Many of those electrons subsequently release their excess energies as
1.9-eV photons of light.
The shorter the wavelength of the light an LED emits, the more energy each electron
must release as it shifts from a conduction level to a valence level and the larger the
semiconductor’s band gap must be. A violet LED that emits 400-nm light requires a band
gap of about 3.1 eV to produce its 3.1-eV photons. That LED also needs a forward-bias
voltage in excess of 3.1 V. The larger voltage drops required by LEDs near the violet end
of the spectrum explain why those LEDs need higher-voltage power sources or more
batteries.
Unfortunately, at most about half of the electrons sent across an LED’s p-n junction
succeed in lighting the room. Although a substantial fraction of those electrons emit photons, most of the photons are reabsorbed by the semiconductor before they leave the LED;
the same radiative transitions that emit this light (conduction level → valence level) can
also absorb it (valence level → conduction level). Despite those difficulties, modern LEDs
can produce visible light with energy efficiencies comparable to those of fluorescent lamps.
LED efficiencies continue to rise along with their operating lifetimes, and they are gradually becoming a primary form of illumination.

Fig. 13.3.8 These LEDs are
connected in series so that the same
current flows sequentially through
each of them. However, their different
band gaps cause them to emit
different colors of light.

385

386

CHAPT ER 13 Light

Check Your Understanding #4: Lighten Up
When you increase the current flowing through an incandescent lightbulb, it brightens and its color
shifts toward the blue end of the spectrum. If you increase the current flowing through an LED, what
happens to its brightness and color?
Answer: The diode becomes brighter, but its color doesn’t change significantly.
Why: The diode’s brightness depends on how many electrons cross its p-n junction each second, and
increasing that number increases the brightness. However, the color of light the diode emits depends
mostly on its band gap and therefore doesn’t change much when you increase the current in the
diode.

Lasers and Laser Light

(a)

Incoherent radiation
from excited atoms
(b)

Coherent radiation
from excited atoms
Fig. 13.3.9 (a) Photons
of incoherent light are
created independently and
have somewhat different
wavelengths and directions
of travel. (b) Photons of
coherent light are produced
by stimulated emission and
are identical in every way.

To understand lasers, you must understand how laser light differs from the normal light emitted by hot objects or by individual atoms in an electrical discharge. Each particle of normal
light, each photon, is emitted willy-nilly without any relationship to the other light particles
being emitted nearby. Because of this light’s independent and unpredictable character, it’s
called spontaneous light and its creation is called spontaneous emission of radiation.
Theoretical work by Albert Einstein and others in the 1920s and 1930s predicted the
existence of a second type of light, stimulated light, that can be created when an excited
atom or atomlike system duplicates a passing photon. Although this stimulated emission
of radiation can occur only when the excited atom is capable of emitting the duplicate
photon spontaneously, the copy that it produces is so perfect that the two photons are absolutely indistinguishable. Together, these two photons form a single electromagnetic wave.
To get a slightly better picture of how such stimulation occurs, think about an isolated
atom in an excited state. That atom will eventually return to its ground state, but it must
emit one or more photons for this to happen. That atom waits around in the excited state
until it begins a spontaneous radiative transition. During the transition, one of the atom’s
electrons accelerates back and forth, and the atom emits a photon.
If a similar photon passes through the atom as it’s waiting in the excited state, that
photon’s electric field can stimulate the radiative transition process through sympathetic
vibration. The field pushes and pulls on the atom’s electrons and makes them accelerate
back and forth. Although this effect is small, it may be enough to trigger the emission of
light. If the atom does emit light, the photon it produces will be a perfect copy of the stimulating photon.
When this stimulated emission process was first discovered, people immediately recognized that it made light amplification possible. If enough excited systems could be
assembled together, a single passing photon could be duplicated exactly over and over
again. Instead of a single particle of light, you would soon have thousands, or millions, or
even trillions of identical light particles.
Implementing this idea had to wait until the late 1950s, however, when the technical
details of how to actually achieve light amplification were worked out. In 1960, the first
laser oscillators were constructed. These were devices that emitted intense beams of light
in which each particle of light was identical to every other particle of light. A single particle
of light had been duplicated by the stimulation process into countless copies.
When individual excited atoms or atomlike systems emit light through spontaneous
emission, the particles of light head off separately as many independent electromagnetic
waves (Fig. 13.3.9a). Light consisting of many independent electromagnetic waves is
called incoherent light.
However, when that same collection of excited atoms or atomlike systems emit light
by stimulated emission, all of the light particles are absolutely identical and form a single
electromagnetic wave (Fig. 13.3.9b). Unlike electrons, which are Fermi particles, many
identical photons can have the same quantum wave because photons are Bose particles and

LEDs and Lasers

Bose particles don’t obey the Pauli exclusion principle. Light consisting of many identical
photons and a single electromagnetic wave is called coherent light. Because of its singlewave nature, coherent light exhibits remarkable interference effects. These effects are easily seen in the coherent light emitted by lasers.
Check Your Understanding #5: A Light Dusting of Photons
If you were to measure the electric field in the light from a flashlight, you would find that it fluctuates
about randomly. Why is the light’s electric field so disorderly?
Answer: The flashlight produces incoherent light, with many independent light waves contributing
their individual electric fields to the overall electric field. When you were to measure that overall field,
you find it very disorderly.
Why: Because the photons of incoherent light are independent, their individual electric fields don’t
fluctuate together. At any place and time, the individual electric fields will add in a complicated,
random fashion. As time passes, this overall field will fluctuate randomly. In contrast, coherent light,
in which each photon is the same as all the others, has a much more orderly electric field because
all of the photons contribute equally.

Laser medium

Dim light

Producing coherent light requires amplification. You must start with only one particle of light
and duplicate it many times. The basic tool for this duplication of light is a laser amplifier
(Fig. 13.3.10). When weak light enters an appropriate collection of excited atoms or atomlike
systems—the laser medium—that light is amplified and becomes brighter. The new light has
exactly the same characteristics as the original light, but it contains more photons.
When we think of lasers, however, we rarely imagine a device that duplicates photons
from somewhere else. We usually picture one that creates light entirely on its own. To do
that, the laser must produce the initial particle of light that it then duplicates to produce
others. A laser oscillator is a device that uses the laser medium itself to provide the seed
photon, which it then duplicates many times (Fig. 13.3.11). If a laser medium is enclosed
in a pair of carefully designed mirrors, it’s possible for the stimulation process to become
self-initiating and self-sustaining. However, the mirrors must be curved properly and must
have the correct reflectivities. One mirror must normally be extremely reflective, while the
other must transmit a small fraction of the light that strikes its surface.
When the laser medium is placed between the two mirrors, there is a chance that a
photon, emitted spontaneously by one of the excited systems, will bounce off a mirror and
return toward the laser medium. As that returning photon passes through the laser medium,
it’s amplified. Because the photon was emitted by one of the excited systems, it has the
right wavelength to be amplified by other excited systems. (For a discussion of a photon’s
properties, see 5 .)
By the time the original photon leaves the laser medium, it has already been duplicated
many times. This group of identical photons then bounces off the second mirror and returns
for another pass through the laser medium. It continues to bounce back and forth between
the mirrors until the number of identical photons in the collection is astronomical.
Eventually there are so many identical photons that the laser medium is no longer able
to amplify them. The laser medium has only so much stored energy and only so many
excited systems in it. If the laser medium continues to receive additional energy, it may
continue to amplify the light somewhat. If it doesn’t receive more energy, light amplification will eventually cease.
To let the light out of this laser oscillator, one of its mirrors is normally semitransparent—
that is, some of the photons that strike the surface of the mirror travel through it rather than
reflecting. (The one-way glass used for surveillance is actually a semitransparent mirror.)
This transmission creates a beam of outgoing light, a laser beam. The laser beam continues
to emerge from the mirror as long as the amplification process can support it.

Bright light

Fig. 13.3.10 A laser
amplifier uses excited
atoms or atomlike systems
to increase the number of
light particles leaving the
laser medium. Incoming
light is duplicated by
stimulated emission.

Laser medium

Mirror

Light Amplifiers and Oscillation

387

Semitransparent
mirror

Fig. 13.3.11 A laser
oscillator is a laser
amplifier enclosed in
mirrors. Oscillation occurs
when the laser medium
spontaneously emits one
photon in just the right
direction. This photon
bounces back and forth
between the two mirrors
and is duplicated many
times. Some of the light is
extracted from this laser by
making one of the mirrors
semitransparent.

5 Although it might seem
that a photon should have
an exact wavelength and
frequency, and travel in
only one direction, that’s
not the case. Photons
travel as electromagnetic
waves and spread in more
than a single direction.
Also, because each photon
has a beginning and an
end, its wave contains
more than a single
wavelength or a single
frequency. Thus, while
lasers can produce some
of the most perfect
electromagnetic waves
imaginable, those waves
still spread outward
slightly and still have a
range of wavelengths and
frequencies.

388

CHAPT ER 13 Light

Because this laser beam consists of duplicates of one original photon, it is coherent
light. For technical reasons, many lasers duplicate more than one original photon simultaneously, so their laser beams are a little less coherent than they might be. However, with
suitable fine-tuning, one original photon can usually be made to dominate the laser beam.
When you focus a flashlight’s beam with a lens, its independent photons won’t end up
exactly together at the focus of the lens. That’s because the photons leave the flashlight
heading in somewhat different directions and because their broad range of wavelengths
leads to dispersion problems in the lens. However, since virtually all the photons in a laser
beam are identical—they travel along the same path, and their wavelengths are the same—
they can all focus together to an extremely small spot. That’s why a laser printer employs
a laser; a laser beam can illuminate a very small spot on the photoconductor drum that is
used in the xerographic process (Section 10.2) to produce a printed image.
COMMON M ISCON CE P T I ON S : Laser Beams
Misconception: A laser beam is a narrow glowing cylinder that travels through space at the speed
of an arrow.
Resolution: A laser beam is light, and it travels through space at the speed of light. To be visible
from the side, a laser beam must scatter off something in its path, such as dust, mist, or air
molecules. In empty space, a laser beam is invisible except when it directly illuminates your eyes.

Check Your Understanding #6: More of a Good Thing
If you take the laser beam from a particular laser oscillator and send it through a similar laser amplifier, what will happen to the laser beam?
Answer: It will become even brighter.
Why: A laser oscillator normally emits as intense a beam of light as it can, based on the amount of
stored energy in the laser medium. This beam of light can be amplified further by sending it through
a separate laser amplifier. Most high-powered lasers use a laser oscillator and one or more laser
amplifiers to create particularly bright beams of light.

How a Laser Medium Works

Excited state
Upper laser state

Laser
transition

Excitation

Lower laser state
Ground state
Fig. 13.3.12 An ideal
laser system passes
through four different
states during the laser’s
operation.

Obtaining the excited systems needed to amplify light is a critical issue for lasers. Ideally,
a laser involves four different states of an atom or atomlike system: the ground state, an
excited state, the upper laser state, and the lower laser state. The reason for having four
separate states should become clear in a moment.
Let’s consider an atom that acts as an ideal laser amplifier (Fig. 13.3.12). The atom
starts in its ground state. A collision or the absorption of a photon shifts it to the excited
state, giving it the energy it needs to amplify light. The atom then shifts to the upper laser
state, either by emitting a photon or as the result of a collision. This preliminary shift is
important because it prevents the excited atom from returning directly to the ground state
and avoiding the amplification process. Once it has shifted to the upper laser state, the atom
is stuck there and will wait around long enough to amplify light.
The atom is poised to duplicate a passing photon. But not any old photon will do; it
must match the photons that the atom is capable of emitting. For example, a neon atom
with an excited 3p electron (Section 13.2) can duplicate a red photon but not a blue
photon. This color selectivity of a laser amplifier is why most laser beams have a single,
pure color.
When a suitable photon passes through the atom, that photon stimulates the emission
of a duplicate photon and the atom undergoes a radiative transition to the lower laser
state. So far, so good. However, if the atom remains in the lower laser state, it might

LEDs and Lasers

absorb a photon of the laser light and return to the upper laser state. To prevent this sort
of radiation trapping, the atom must quickly shift to the ground state, either by emitting
a photon or as the result of another collision. The atom is then ready to begin the cycle
all over again.
This four-state cycle, or something close to it, is found in nearly all lasers. The
cycle helps the laser develop a population inversion between its upper and lower laser
states, a situation in which there are more atoms in the upper laser state prepared to emit
the laser light than there are atoms in the lower laser state prepared to absorb that light.
Developing a population inversion is critical to laser amplification because, without it,
the laser medium is more absorbing than amplifying and there can’t be a buildup of light
intensity.
In each laser, something provides the energy needed to shift atoms or atomlike systems
in the laser medium from their ground states to their excited states in order to develop a population inversion. This transfer of energy into the laser medium to prepare it for amplifying
light is called pumping. How a particular laser medium is pumped depends on the laser.
The most common pumping mechanisms are electronic and optical. In electronic
pumping, currents of charged particles use their kinetic or electrostatic energies to excite
the medium’s atoms or atomlike systems from their ground states to their excited states. In
optical pumping, intense light is shone on the laser medium, causing a similar excitation.
The most important examples of optical pumping are ion-doped solid-state lasers.
These lasers are based on atomic ions embedded in transparent solids. Common ions are
titanium (Ti), neodymium (Nd), and erbium (Er), and they are often embedded in sapphire,
yttrium aluminum garnet (YAG), or glass. Ti:sapphire, Nd:YAG, and Er:glass lasers are
important in modern research, technology, and optical communications systems. When
these laser media are exposed to extremely bright light, their ions become excited and they
can act as laser oscillators or amplifiers (Figs. 13.3.13 and 13.3.14).
A laser diode is quite similar to an LED, except that a laser diode uses its radiative
transitions to amplify light. Since that amplification can occur only when light emission
exceeds light absorption, the laser diode must produce a population inversion between an
upper laser state and a lower laser state.
The laser diode achieves such an inversion by concentrating current into a very narrow
p-n junction made from heavily doped semiconductors. The intense current injects an enormous density of electrons into the anode’s conduction band, where they quickly settle into
the lowest-energy conduction levels—the upper laser state. The heavy doping empties most
of the anode’s highest-energy valence levels—the lower laser state. With many electrons in
the upper laser state and few in the lower laser state, the diode has a population inversion
and can amplify light.
Flashlamp

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Cooling water

Neodymium:YAG rod

Gold mirrors

Fig. 13.3.14 This flashlamp-pumped laser
amplifier contains a purple neodymium:YAG
rod. The rod is in the bottom half of the
opened, gold-lined amplifier box and is
protected by a glass tube. Light from a long
flashlamp in the top half of the box excites
the neodymium ions so that they can amplify
infrared light passing horizontally through
the rod.

Dim
light

Flash lamp
–
+

389
Bright
light

Solid state or
liquid medium
Fig. 13.3.13 In an
optically pumped laser,
intense light from a
flashlamp, an arc lamp,
or even another laser
transfers energy to the
laser medium. Atoms or
atomlike systems inside
the medium store this
energy and use it to
amplify light.

CHAPT ER 13 Light

Fig. 13.3.15 This tiny semiconductor chip
is a diode laser that emits an intense beam of
coherent light when a current flows through it.
© GIPhotoStock Z/Alamy

390

Most laser diodes act as laser oscillators (Fig. 13.3.15), amplifying their own spontaneously emitted light until it forms an intense coherent beam. The ends of the anode itself
are usually reflective enough to act as mirrors and form a complete laser oscillator. However, to concentrate the laser light in one direction and to control its beam characteristics,
many laser diodes have complicated structures and coatings.

Check Your Understanding #7: Not So Fast, 007
A secret agent in a movie uses a tiny hand-held laser to burn a hole through a thick metal plate. From
the point of view of power, why is such a laser essentially impossible to make?
Answer: The light in such a laser beam would carry an enormous amount of power. Something must
transfer that power to the laser medium, an impossible task in a tiny hand-held unit.
Why: The power in a laser beam comes from the laser medium. The laser medium must have gotten
it from somewhere else. Since batteries aren’t up to delivering thousands of watts of electric power,
it’s unlikely that powerful hand-held lasers will ever be developed. Even if a suitable power source
were available, these lasers would tend to overheat. The conversion of power to light is not perfectly
efficient, and most of the energy ends up as thermal energy in the laser’s components. Lasers require
cooling to remove this wasted energy.

Epilogue for Chapter 13
In this chapter, we explored the creation and movement of light. In Sunlight, we looked at
how light is scattered during its passage through the atmosphere and at how it bends and
reflects when it moves from one material to another. We also examined the interference
effects that occur when a light wave follows more than one path to a particular destination
and learned how polarizing sunglasses can diminish glare.
In Discharge Lamps, we examined electrical discharges in gases. We saw that atoms
excited by collisions with charged particles can subsequently emit light through radiative
transitions. We studied the primary colors of light to see how the phosphors on the inside
surface of a fluorescent tube are able to produce a reasonable facsimile of white sunlight.
In LEDs and Lasers, we looked at how electrons can emit light after crossing a junction between two different types of semiconductor, and we looked at the difference between
common incoherent light and the unusual coherent light emitted by a laser. We saw that
lasers use stimulated emission to duplicate photons so that a small number of initial photons can be amplified into an enormous number.

Explanation: Splitting the Colors of Sunlight
Light bends as it passes through the cut facets of the crystal glass or bowl. Because of dispersion, the angle of each bend depends slightly on the wavelength of the light involved, so
the different colors of sunlight follow slightly different paths through the crystal. When the

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations

391

light emerges from the crystal, its various wavelengths head in somewhat different directions; you see colors. Color sequences progress from long wavelength to short wavelength,
or vice versa. You see red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, and violet, or the reverse—
the colors of the rainbow.

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Sunlight Works: Sunlight originates at the 5800 K outer surface of the sun when
electrically charged particles there accelerate back and forth rapidly and emit electromagnetic waves. This sunlight travels at the speed of light through empty space until it
reaches Earth’s atmosphere. There it slows slightly and some of it Rayleigh-scatters.
Short-wavelength light is Rayleigh-scattered more strongly than long-wavelength light,
so the sky appears blue.
As the sunlight passes through various objects, it slows down and its colors separate. When sunlight passes through falling raindrops, its different wavelengths follow
different paths and create rainbows. As sunlight reflects from thin films such as soap
bubbles, its waves are divided and may follow several different paths to the same destination. These light waves then interfere with one another so that some waves appear
strong and bright while others are weak and dim. Interference depends on the wavelengths of light, so thin films appear brightly colored.
How Discharge Lamps Work: Discharge lamps produce light by passing electric currents
through gases. Those gases are turned into electrical-conducting plasmas by filling
them with charged particles, either by exposing them to strong voltage gradients or by
injecting electrons into them from heated electrodes. Once a plasma is formed, current
can pass through it and collisions within that current-carrying plasma cause the gas
particles to emit light.
A fluorescent lamp emits visible light when the phosphor coating on the inside of its
tube is exposed to 254-nm ultraviolet light produced inside the tube by a low-pressure
mercury vapor discharge. This ultraviolet light excites the phosphor coating and causes
it to emit visible light. In contrast, mercury, metal-halide, and sodium lamps use discharges to produce visible light directly and don’t employ phosphors. By operating at
high pressures, those discharge lamps produce relatively broad light spectra and provide
energy-efficient illumination.
How LEDs and Lasers Work: In an LED, light is emitted when conduction-level electrons
from the diode’s cathode cross the p-n junction into the anode and undergo radiative
transitions to empty valence levels. The color of light produced by the LED is determined primarily by the anode’s band gap.
Lasers amplify light through the process of stimulated emission. In this process,
energy is transferred to atoms or atomlike systems contained in a laser medium. These
excited systems might emit light spontaneously, and they can be stimulated into emitting duplicates of a passing photon. When a photon with just the right wavelength
passes through an excited system, that system is likely to give up its stored energy by
emitting an exact copy of the initial photon. In a laser oscillator, two mirrors cause light
to bounce back and forth through the laser medium. An initial photon is duplicated
endlessly to produce coherent light. One of the mirrors is semitransparent so that part
of the light emerges from the laser as a laser beam.
1. Pauli exclusion principle: No two indistinguishable Fermi

particles ever occupy the same quantum wave.
2. Relationship between energy and frequency: The energy in

a photon of light is equal to the Planck constant times the

frequency of the light wave, or
energy = Planck constant · frequency.

(13.2.1)

14

Optics and Electronics
any of the devices around us perform useful tasks by manipulating light, charge, or both.
The techniques of optics deal with light and allow cameras to record images of the objects
in front of them, our eyes to observe those objects directly, and eyeglasses and magnifying
glasses to help us see details we’d miss with our eyes alone. The techniques of electronics deal
with charge and permit an audio player’s memory to store sound information, its computer to
retrieve that information, and its amplifier and headphones to re-create the sound at the push of
a button.
Optical tools such as lenses and prisms have been around for hundreds of years, and electronic
devices such as resistors, capacitors, and inductors also have a long history. Advances of modern
technology, however, have accelerated developments in both fields. The invention of lasers has sped
the growth of the optics industry and the invention of transistors has revolutionized the world of
electronics. Rapid progress in both fields, optics and electronics, has brought them closer together
and has given birth to the combined field of optoelectronics. There is even hope that one day computers will be as much optical devices as they are electronic.

M
 

ACTIVE LEARNING
EXPERIMENTS

Magnifying Glass Camera
its image onto a light-sensitive surface. For the moment,
we’ll use it to cast the image of a window onto a wall.
Take a magnifying glass to a room with a bright
window and turn off the lights. Hold the magnifying glass
near the wall opposite the window and move the glass

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

There are many household devices that manipulate light,
and one of the most familiar is a magnifying glass. A magnifying glass bends light rays toward one another as they
pass through it. In this chapter, we’ll see how a simple
converging lens of this sort can magnify an object or cast

392

Cameras

toward or away from the wall until you see a windowshaped pattern of light appear on the wall. Once that
pattern is visible, carefully adjust the magnifying glass’s
orientation and distance from the wall to obtain the sharpest image of the window. You’ll probably also see images
of objects outside that window, but you’ll have to move
the magnifying glass to sharpen those images. Which
way must you move the glass, and why can’t all the
images be sharp at the same time?

393

You can project images of other brightly illuminated objects on a sheet of white paper. What features
of the lens determine the sizes of those images? What
determines their orientations? Block part of the lens,
and notice how it affects the images. Try to form
images of objects at different distances from you. Do
they all form images simultaneously, or do you have to
adjust the lens somehow to bring each image into sharp
focus?

Chapter Itinerary
This process of bringing light together to form a small spot or an
image of a distant object is a common theme in optics. Representing information as charge and then storing, manipulating,
and using that information is typical of electronics. In this
chapter, we’ll examine a number of systems that are based on
these sorts of manipulation of light and charge: (1) cameras,
(2) optical recording and communication, and (3) audio players.
In Cameras, we see how lenses bend light to form images and
how those images are used to create photographs. In Optical

SECTION 14.1

Recording and Communication, we explore the roles of lasers in
optics while investigating several novel optical effects. In Audio
Players, we see how a small assortment of basic electronic components is brought together to build a computer and an audio
amplifier, and how those two devices have been merged together
into a single unit so that you can listen to thousands of songs as
you lounge on the beach. For additional preview information,
turn to the Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations at the end of the chapter.

Cameras

Self-timer
button

Flash

LCD panel

Viewing prism

does a longer lens seem to bring the objects nearer to you?
What does a camera’s aperture do? Why do nearsighted and
farsighted people wear different eyeglasses?

Flash button
Electronic input
dial

Grip/battery
housing

Shutter button

Control dial

Back cover
latch

Lens-release button

Auxiliary light
emitter

Zoom ring

Objective lens

Variable aperture

Manual focusing ring

In the two centuries since their invention, cameras have become
extremely easy to use. What started as a hobby for a few dedicated enthusiasts has evolved into an everyday activity. Despite
all the technological improvements, however, photography still
employs many of the same principles it did in the 1800s.
Cameras still use lenses to project images onto light-sensitive
surfaces, and photographers still have to worry about getting
the exposure right, focusing properly, and avoiding the blur of
rapid motion. In this section, we’ll explore some of the principles
that make cameras work.
Questions to Think About: Why are expensive camera lenses
so complicated, with so many separate pieces of glass? Why

Experiments to Do: The basic activity of a camera—projecting
an image of the scene in front of you onto its image sensor—
requires nothing more than a simple magnifying glass. In fact,
you can use almost any simple lens that’s bowed outward in
the middle, including the eyeglasses of a farsighted person
with no astigmatism or drugstore reading glasses. Stand in a
darkened room across from a single bright lamp. Hold a sheet
of white paper so that it faces the lamp and move the lens
back and forth in front of the paper. Make sure that the lens
itself is also facing the lamp.
You should find a distance at which the lens casts a clear
image of the lamp onto the sheet of paper. You’ll find that the
lamp appears upside down and backwards and that the image
becomes fuzzy if you move the lens toward or away from the
paper. You’ll also find that, when the lamp’s image is sharp, the
images of things in front of or behind the lamp are fuzzy, and
vice versa. Which way must you move the lens to bring more
distant or less distant objects into focus?
Cut a hole in a piece of cardboard and use it to cover all
but the center portion of the lens. The image of the lamp will
now be substantially darker, but it will also be sharper over a
wider range of distances from lens to paper. If the hole is narrow enough, virtually everything is in focus at once. Evidently,
the diameter of the lens and its ability to focus on several
things at once are closely related. Why?

394

CHAPT ER 14 Optics and Electronics

Lenses and Real Images

Object
(b)

Object

Lens

Real
image

Fig. 14.1.1 (a) Without
a lens, light from a candle
uniformly illuminates an
image sensor. (b) When a
lens is introduced between
the candle and the sensor,
it brings light from each
point on the candle back
together on the sensor’s
surface, forming an upside
down and backward real
image of the candle. The
distance between the lens
and the sensor must be
chosen correctly or the
image will be blurry.

When you take a picture of the scene in front of you, the lens of your camera bends light
from that scene into a real image on a light-sensitive surface. A real image is a pattern of
light, projected in space or on a surface, that exactly reproduces the pattern of light in the
original scene. Since the real image that’s projected looks just like the scene you’re photographing, recording the light in that image is equivalent to recording the appearance of the
scene itself.
That light-sensitive surface was at one time always photographic film, but now digital
cameras have almost completely replaced film with electronic image sensors. Fortunately,
the two light-sensing surfaces are essentially interchangeable, so we can refer to them both
as image sensors: one is electronic, and one is photochemical.
Real images don’t occur without help. When light from a candle falls directly on an
image sensor, it produces only diffuse illumination (Fig. 14.1.1a). Similarly, you can’t tell
by looking at a sheet of paper what a candle looks like because the light that leaves the
candle travels in all directions and is as likely to hit the top of the paper as it is to hit the
bottom (Fig. 14.1.1b).
That’s why a camera needs a lens, a transparent object that uses refraction to form
images. The light passing through a lens bends twice, once as it enters the glass or
plastic and again as it leaves. In a camera lens, this bending process brings much of the
light from one point on the candle back together at one point on the sensor. As you can
see in Fig. 14.1.2, the real image that forms is upside down and backward. This inversion
of the real image relative to the object always happens when a single lens creates a
real image.
The curved shape of the camera lens allows it to form a real image. Light passing
through the upper half of the lens is bent downward, while light passing through the lower
half is bent upward. Because the camera lens bends light rays toward one another, it’s a
converging lens. You can see how it forms an image in Fig. 14.1.2b by following some of
the rays of light leaving one point on the candle.
The upper ray from the candle flame travels horizontally toward the top of the lens. As
it enters the lens and slows down, this ray of light bends downward. It bends downward
again as it leaves the lens and travels downward toward the bottom of the image sensor.
The lower ray from the candle flame travels downward toward the bottom of the lens
and bends upward as it enters the lens. It bends upward again as it leaves the lens and travels horizontally toward the bottom of the image sensor.
These two rays of light reach the image sensor at the same point. They are joined there
by many other rays from the same part of the candle flame so that a bright spot forms on
the sensor. Overall, each part of the candle illuminates a particular spot on the image sensor, so the lens creates a complete image of the candle on the sensor.

(a)

(b)

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

(a)

Fig. 14.1.2 (a) When candlelight falls directly on a sheet of paper, it produces no image. (b) A lens
inserted between the candle and paper forms an inverted real image of the flame on the paper.

Object

Lens

395
Blurry

Focus

However, the lens can bring the light back together to form a sharp image on the sensor
only if the lens and sensor are separated by just the right distance (Fig. 14.1.3). If the sensor
is too close to the lens, then the light doesn’t have room to come together. If the sensor is
too far from the lens, then the light begins to come apart again before reaching the sensor.
In either case, the image on the sensor is blurry. The candle’s real image is only in focus at
one distance from the lens.
If the candle moves toward or away from the camera lens, the distance between the
lens and the image sensor must also change (Fig. 14.1.4). When the candle is far away, all
its light rays that pass through the lens arrive traveling almost parallel to one another and
the inward bend caused by the lens makes those rays converge together quickly. The rays
come into focus relatively near the lens, and that’s where the sensor must be (Fig. 14.1.4a).
The candle’s image on the sensor is much smaller than the candle itself because the light
rays have only a short distance over which to move up or down after leaving the lens.
When the candle is nearby, its light rays that pass through the lens are diverging rapidly and the inward bend caused by the lens is just barely enough to make those rays converge at all. As a result, the rays come into focus relatively far from the lens (Fig. 14.1.4b).
The candle’s image on the sensor is quite large because the light rays have considerable
distance over which to move up or down after leaving the lens.
Because distant and nearby objects form real images at different distances from the
camera lens, they can’t both be in focus on the same image sensor. When you take a picture
of a person standing in front of a mountain, only one of them can be in sharp focus. However, if you’re willing to compromise a little bit on sharpness, a lens can sometimes form
acceptable images of both objects.

Blurry

Cameras

Sensor

Fig. 14.1.3 The real
image is in focus only
when the image sensor is
just the right distance from
the lens. If the sensor is
too near or too far from the
lens, the image is blurry.

(a)

Object

Lens Real
image
(b)

Object

Lens

Check Your Understanding #1: Seeing the Lights
If you hold a magnifying glass at the proper distance above a sheet of white paper, you will see an
image of the overhead room lights on the paper. Explain.
Answer: It is a real image of the room lights, created by the converging magnifying glass.
Why: A magnifying glass is a converging lens and can form a real image. It brings light spreading
outward from the room lights together onto the sheet of paper as a real image.

Focusing and Lens Diameter
A disposable camera is little more than a box with a lens. The lens projects a real image of
the scene in front of it onto the camera’s image sensor. Light in the real image exposes the
image sensor, which records the image permanently. While it may also have a shutter that
starts and stops the exposure, a flash to provide extra light, and a mechanism that prepares
for the next photograph, there’s little else to this simple camera.
However, there are limitations to the disposable camera design. One of the most severe
limitations is that you can’t focus it—the camera has a fixed distance between the lens and image
sensor. Nonetheless, it manages to form relatively sharp real images on the sensor, even when
there are objects at various distances from the camera. These simple cameras work because they
use narrow (small-diameter) lenses. A narrow lens gathers less light than a wide lens, but it
doesn’t require focusing, adjusting the distance between the lens and the image sensor.
Because a wide (large-diameter) lens brings rays together from many different directions, you must focus it (Fig. 14.1.5a); if the image sensor is even slightly too near or too
far from the lens, the recorded image will be blurry. In contrast, a narrow lens forms a
reasonably clear image even without focusing. Any rays from one part of the scene that
succeed in passing through the narrow lens must already be fairly close together. Their
initial closeness means that these converging rays illuminate only a small part of the image
sensor even when the sensor isn’t exactly the right distance from the lens (Fig. 14.1.5b).

Real
image

Fig. 14.1.4 (a) The light
from a distant candle is
traveling in almost the
same direction, and the
lens focuses it easily. The
real image forms close to
the lens. (b) The light from
a nearby candle diverges,
and the lens has more
difficulty bending it back
together. The real image
forms far from the lens.
If the candle is too close
to the lens, no real image
forms at all.

Blurry

(a)

(b)

Blurry

Large
lens
Blurry
Usable focus
Focus
Usable focus

Object

Blurry

CHAPT ER 14 Optics and Electronics

Focus

396

Small
lens
Object
Fig. 14.1.5 (a) A large
lens collects lots of light
but its focus is critical.
The image is blurry except
at the actual focus. (b) A
small lens collects less
light but its image is
relatively sharp anywhere
near the focus.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

(a)

(b)

Since the image sensor can’t record every minute detail anyway, the image that forms on it
doesn’t have to be in absolutely perfect focus. As a result, a camera with a narrow lens and
no focus adjustment manages to take pretty good pictures.
Unfortunately, these simple cameras collect very little light and need extremely lightsensitive image sensors. These high-speed sensors can’t record photographs that are as
sharp as low-speed sensors can. Furthermore, the pictures produced by simple cameras
lack fine details; although everything is almost in focus, most things are a bit fuzzy if you
look carefully or make enlargements.
More sophisticated cameras use wider lenses that gather more light and expose the image
sensors much more rapidly. They also automatically adjust the distance between the lens and
the sensor. They identify the object you are photographing and position the camera lens so that
it projects a sharp image on the sensor. As the camera focuses, you can usually see components
in the lens moving backward or forward to arrive at the correct distance from the sensor.
Even a camera with a wide lens can take advantage of the narrow lens trick for focusing.
Its lens contains an internal diaphragm that reduces its aperture, or effective diameter. The
diaphragm is a ring of metal strips with a central opening. These strips can swing in or out, changing the diameter of the diaphragm’s opening and with it the aperture of the lens (Fig. 14.1.6).
When its lens aperture is narrow, the sophisticated camera imitates a simple camera—
nearly everything is essentially in focus simultaneously. In such a situation, the camera has
a large depth of focus. Actually, the sophisticated camera can bring the most important
object into perfect focus, so it produces pictures that are superior to those from simple
cameras. However, narrowing the aperture of the lens also reduces the amount of light
reaching the image sensor. The scene in front of the camera must either be very bright or
the exposure must be relatively long. You don’t get something for nothing.
Although widening the aperture of a large lens makes full use of its light-gathering
capacity, focusing then becomes crucial. Even a small error in the lens-to-sensor distance
produces a blurry picture, so the depth of focus is very small. This trade-off between light
gathering and depth of focus is a continual struggle for photographers. However, photographers sometimes take advantage of the small depth of focus in wide lenses to blur the
background or foreground of a photograph deliberately. A camera’s portrait setting adopts
this strategy to produce sharp images of people against blurred backgrounds.
At other times, photographers choose long exposures at narrow apertures to bring an
entire scene into sharp focus. A camera’s landscape setting takes this route, so everything in
the photograph shows full detail. To capture fast motion while retaining a large depth of
focus, photographers use a flash to brighten the scene and shorten the exposure. Unfortunately, a camera flash is ineffective at brightening a distant scene, and it can produce unpleasant reflections from windows and eyes. A camera’s sports setting emphasizes brief exposures
to avoid speed blur, even though that may require a wide aperture and small depth of focus.
Check Your Understanding #2: Portrait Photos
While taking a photograph of your friend, with the diaphragm of your large camera lens wide open,
you notice that the background is blurry. Explain.
Answer: Light from the more distant background focuses closer to the lens than light from your
friend. Since the camera is focusing on your friend, the background appears out of focus.
Why: When the aperture of your camera lens is wide open, focusing becomes critical. Objects in front
of or behind your friend are out of focus on the image sensor and appear blurry.

Fig. 14.1.6 The aperture
of this lens can be reduced
by closing its internal
diaphragm, dimming its
image but increasing its
depth of focus.

Focal Lengths and f-Numbers
Lenses are characterized by two quantities: focal length and f-number. The focal length of
a lens is the distance between the lens and the real image it forms of a very distant object.
For example, if a real image of the moon forms 100 mm (4 in) behind a particular lens, then

Cameras
(a)
that lens has a focal length of 100 mm. The focal lengths of camera lenses
range from less than 10 mm (0.4 in) in many cell phones and compact cameras
to about 2 m (7 ft) in cameras used for nature photography.
When light from a scene passes through a short-focal-length lens, it
comes to a focus near that lens and produces a relatively small image on the
image sensor. Because a long-focal-length lens permits the light passing Object
through it to spread out more before coming to a focus, it produces a larger
real image on the sensor.
(b)
The “normal” lens for a particular camera has a focal length that allows
all the objects in your central field of vision to fit onto the image sensor (see
Table 14.1.1). When you hold the finished photograph about 30 cm (1 ft)
from your eyes, the objects in the picture appear about the same size they did
when the photograph was taken. The focal length of a camera’s normal lens
Object
is about 1.5 times the horizontal width of its image sensor.
A wide-angle lens has a shorter focal length than the normal lens
(Fig. 14.1.7a). The image it projects onto the image sensor is smaller but brighter, and
most of the objects in your entire field of vision appear in the photograph. A telephoto lens
has a longer focal length than the normal lens (Fig. 14.1.7b). The image it projects onto
the sensor is larger but dimmer, with only objects at the center of the scene appearing in
the photograph.
In addition to indicating where the image of a distant object forms, the focal length of
the camera lens relates the object distance to the image distance. The object distance is the
distance between the lens and the object you’re photographing. The image distance is the
distance between the lens and the real image it forms (Fig. 14.1.8). The relationship is
called the lens equation and can be written in a word equation:

1
1
1
=
+
,
focal length
object distance
image distance

397

Real image
bright & small
Wide-angle
lens

Telephoto
lens

Real image
dim & large

Fig. 14.1.7 (a) A wideangle lens has a short focal
length and forms a small,
bright real image near the
lens. (b) A telephoto lens
has a long focal length
and forms a large, dim real
image far from the lens.

(14.1.1)
Object distance Image distance

in symbols:
1
1
1
= + ,
o
f
i
and in everyday language:
The farther away an object is, the closer to the lens its image forms.

Object

THE LENS EQUATION
One divided by the focal length of a lens is equal to the sum of one divided by the
object distance and one divided by the image distance.

TABLE 14.1.1 Several Cameras, the Widths of the Image Sensor
They Use, and Their Normal Lenses
Type of Camera

Sensor Width

Normal Lens

Typical digital camera

8 mm

12 mm

35-mm camera

36 mm

50 mm

2¼-inch medium-format camera

2¼ inches

80 mm

5-inch portrait camera

5 inches

180 mm

Lens

Real
image

Fig. 14.1.8 The
relationship between the
object distance, the image
distance, and the focal
length of the lens is given
by the lens equation.

398

CHAPT ER 14 Optics and Electronics

According to the lens equation, the image distance for a distant object is equal to the
focal length of the lens. That agrees with our earlier discussion of focal length. However,
when the object is nearby, the image distance becomes larger than the focal length. That’s
why a camera lens moves away from the image sensor as you focus closer. When the object
distance becomes less than the focal length, the image distance becomes negative and no
real image forms at all. That’s why you can’t focus on an object that’s too close to the lens.
A lens’s f-number characterizes the brightness of the real image that it forms on the
image sensor, with smaller f-numbers indicating brighter images. The f-number is calculated by dividing the lens’s focal length by its diameter, or
f-number =

focal length
.
diameter

Since long focal length lenses naturally produce larger and dimmer images on the image
sensor, the f-number takes into account both the light-gathering capacity of the lens and its
focal length. Increasing a lens’s diameter increases its light-gathering capacity and
decreases its f-number. Increasing a lens’s focal length decreases the brightness of its real
image and increases the f-number. Doing both at once, increasing the lens diameter and
focal length equally, leaves the brightness and f-number unchanged.
Most sophisticated cameras use large-diameter lenses so that their f-numbers are generally less than 4. Since it’s difficult to fabricate a lens that’s larger in diameter than its focal
length, the smallest practical f-number is about 1. Also, because long-focal-length lenses
need large apertures to keep their f-numbers small, some telephoto lenses are huge.
The diaphragm inside a lens allows you to decrease the lens’s aperture and thus
increase its f-number. A factor of 2 increase in f-number corresponds to a factor of
2 decrease in the lens’s effective diameter and a factor of 4 decrease in the lens’s lightgathering area. Thus when you double the f-number of the lens, you must compensate by
quadrupling the exposure time. Although closing the aperture increases the lens’s depth of
focus, it requires a longer exposure.
Check Your Understanding #3: Bright and Sharp Photographs
On bright, sunny days, your automatic camera takes photographs with large depths of focus, while
on dark, overcast days its pictures have much smaller depths of focus. What causes this difference?
Answer: On a bright day, your camera needs only a small aperture to gather enough light for an exposure, so the depth of focus is large. On a dark day, it uses the largest aperture available to gather light
and has a small depth of focus.
Why: Light gathering and depth of focus go hand in hand. If you must open the aperture of your
camera’s lens to gather enough light for an exposure, focusing will become critical and your photographs will have small depths of focus.

Check Your Figures #1: The Image of an Apple
If the distance from an apple to a converging lens is twice the focal length of that lens, where will
the real image of the apple form?
Answer: The image will form at a distance twice the focal length behind the lens.
Why: Since the object distance is twice the focal length, we can use Eq. 14.1.1 to find the image
distance:
1
1
1
=
−
image distance
focal length
object distance
1
1
=
−
focal length
2 · focal length
1
=
.
2 · focal length
The image distance is twice the focal length of the lens.

Cameras

Check Your Understanding #4: Not Such a Good Picture
If you use a large magnifying glass to form a real image of an overhead fluorescent light fixture, you
will find that the corners of the light fixture are blurry and have rainbow colors in them. Why is the
image quality so poor?
Answer: The magnifying glass has only one glass element and suffers from chromatic aberration (and
many other image imperfections).
Why: A single converging lens can’t form a high-quality image on a flat surface because it has
chromatic aberration, spherical aberration, coma, and astigmatism. If the lens is small, these failings
are often invisible. In a large magnifying glass, however, they are all readily apparent and you can’t
form a sharp image of the entire light fixture.

The Viewfinder and Virtual Images
SLR (single lens reflex) cameras permit you to change their lenses so that you can choose
a lens that’s optimized for the task at hand. When you peer through the viewfinder of an
SLR camera (Fig. 14.1.10), you’re looking at the same real image that will be projected

Sensor
Image 3

Lens group 3

Image 2

Lens group 2

Main
zoom
motion

Image 1

Object

A high-quality camera lens isn’t a single piece of glass or plastic. Instead, it’s
composed of many separate elements that function together as a single lens. This
complexity improves the quality of the real image. To begin with, dispersion in a
single-element lens causes different colors of light to bend differently and focus
at different distances behind that lens. Known as chromatic aberration, this problem can be fixed by using several lens elements made of different types of glass
or plastic with different amounts of dispersion. These elements compensate for
one another so that the overall lens, known as an achromat, has very little dispersion and almost no color-focusing problems.
After correcting for color and other technical image problems, a sophisticated camera lens may contain more than 10 individual elements. For the purposes of the
lens equation, this complicated lens has an effective center from which to calculate object
and image distances. However, having so many separate elements creates reflection
problems; each time light passes from air to glass or vice versa, some of it reflects. To
avoid fogging the photographs with this bouncing stray light, the individual elements are
antireflection coated with thin layers of transparent materials. The best coatings use
interference effects to cancel out the reflected light waves and give the lens only a weak
violet reflection.
Many modern cameras are equipped with zoom lenses. A zoom lens is a complicated
lens that can change the size of the real image it projects onto the image sensor. By carefully moving its lens elements relative to one another, the zoom lens can adjust its effective
focal length.
A common type of zoom lens contains three separate groups of lens elements and
produces a sequence of three images (Fig. 14.1.9). The first lens group forms a first image
of the scene in front of the camera. The second lens group forms a second image of that first
image. The third lens group projects a third, real image of the second image onto the image
sensor. Zooming the lens—that is, changing its focal length—involves altering the spacings between the lens groups to vary the second lens group’s object and image distances
and thus the relative sizes of the first and second images.
As the zoom lens changes from short focal length to long focal length, the image it
projects on the sensor becomes larger. This effect allows you to compose the picture so that
the scene fills the photograph completely. A lens that can change its focal length while
retaining the same f-number and still keep the real image in focus on the sensor is a truly
remarkable achievement.

Main
focus
motion

Lens group 1

Improving the Quality of a Camera Lens

399

Fig. 14.1.9 A common
type of zoom lens uses
three lens groups to project
a variable-size real image
on the image sensor.
Zooming is done mostly
by moving the second lens
group to change its image
and object distances.
The first lens group is
responsible for focusing,
and the third lens group
projects the real image on
the sensor.

400

CHAPT ER 14 Optics and Electronics

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Fig. 14.1.10 The mirror in the center
of this reflex camera directs light from
the lens (removed for this photograph)
onto the focusing screen above it. During
the exposure, the mirror swings upward
to permit light from the lens to strike the
image sensor at the back of the camera.

Focal
length

No real
image

Object
Lens
(b)

Object
Lens
Virtual
image
Fig. 14.1.11 (a) Light
from an object very near a
converging lens diverges
after passing through the
lens and no real image
forms. (b) Your eye sees a
virtual image that is large
and far away.

onto the image sensor during the exposure. The light you see travels through the camera’s
main lens, reflects off a mirror, and projects onto a translucent screen inside the top of the
camera. You’re simply inspecting this screen and the real image through a magnifying lens
in the eyepiece. During the exposure, the mirror flips out of the way and the real image
projects briefly onto the image sensor.
Since the screen and real image are only an inch or two from your eye, you can’t focus
on them without the help of the eyepiece lens. The eyepiece lens is converging, but in this
case it doesn’t form a real image. Instead, it forms a virtual image, an image located at a
negative image distance—that is, on the wrong side of the lens!
The screen displaying the scene that you’re photographing is so close to the eyepiece
lens that the object distance is less than that lens’s focal length. According to the lens equation, the image distance should be negative, and it is; the image is located on the screen side
of the eyepiece lens (Fig. 14.1.11). You can’t put your fingers in the light and project this
image on your skin because the image is virtual rather than real.
You can, however, see this image through the eyepiece. It’s located farther away than
the screen itself, so your eye can comfortably focus on it. Also, the image is magnified—
the eyepiece lens is acting as a magnifying glass (Fig. 14.1.12). This lens provides magnification because, when you look at the screen through it, the screen image covers a wider
portion of your field of vision. This magnification increases as the eyepiece lens’s focal
length decreases. That’s because a shorter-focal-length eyepiece lens must be quite close to
the screen, where it can bend light rays coming from a smaller region so that they fill your
field of vision. The eyepiece lens in a typical camera has been chosen so that the screen fills
a comfortable portion of your visual field, allowing you to examine the virtual image in
great detail and adjust the lens and camera settings until you have just the right picture in
your view. Then all you have to do is take the photograph.
Cameras with fixed lenses often have two separate viewfinder systems. A typical digital camera has an electronic viewfinder, which displays the real image being projected onto
its image sensor. Many digital and most film cameras also have optical viewfinders.

Fig. 14.1.12 This magnifying glass creates an enlarged
virtual image located far behind the printed text. You
can’t touch the image or put your fingers in its light, but
you can see it clearly with your eyes.

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

(a)

Cameras

Although optical viewfinders vary in style and sophistication, the best combine real and
virtual images. In a real-image optical viewfinder, a system of lenses, mirrors, and/or
prisms produces an erect real image of the scene and you then examine that real image
through an eyepiece magnifying glass. The lenses projecting the real image zoom along
with the camera’s main lens so that what you see through the viewfinder is similar to what
the camera’s image sensor will record.

Check Your Understanding #5: Real and Virtual Images
As you move a magnifying glass slowly toward the photograph in front of you, you see an inverted
image that grows larger and nearer to your eye. This image eventually becomes blurry, and then a new
upright and enlarged image appears on the photograph’s side of the lens. What’s happening?
Answer: The lens is initially creating a real image near your eye. This real image moves past you as
the lens approaches the photograph. Finally, the lens is close enough to create an enlarged virtual
image of the photograph.
Why: A magnifying glass forms either a real or virtual image, depending on object distance and the
lens’s focal length. If the lens and photograph are separated by more than the focal length, the image
is real and you see it near your eye. You can touch this inverted image or project it on a piece of
paper. If the lens and picture are separated by less than the focal length, the upright image is virtual
and you see it on the far side of the lens.

Image Sensors
Once the lens has projected its real image onto the image sensor, it’s the image sensor’s job
to record that pattern of light. Interestingly enough, both film and electronic image sensors
use semiconductors, and both detect light when its photons shift electrons from valence
levels to conduction levels. However, how those two image sensors act on the electron
transitions is quite different.
Photographic film detects light photochemically. Embedded in the film are tiny crystals of silver salts. Composed primarily of silver and halogen atoms, these semiconductor
crystals are extremely sensitive to light. When a silver halide crystal absorbs a photon of
visible light, it can undergo a radiative transition that shifts an electron from a valence level
to a conduction level and eventually frees one silver atom from a silver halide molecule.
After several nearby silver atoms have been freed by light, they can form a tiny particle of
silver metal. When the film is developed, this silver particle transforms the entire silver
halide crystal into metallic silver. The microscopically rough structure of that silver makes
it appear black rather than shiny.
In black-and-white photography, the silver particles themselves form a negative image
on the developed film. Wherever the film was struck by light, it acquires a dense, black
pattern of silver particles. Wherever light was absent, the film becomes clear once the unexposed silver salts are washed away. Although the image on the developed film itself is
negative—light is dark and dark is light—the process of preparing photographic prints
reverses light and dark a second time so that the image on the prints is positive.
In color photography, the silver halide crystals are exposed to light through color
filters and sensitizers, so that the film separately records its exposure to the three primary colors of light (see Section 13.2). During development, the silver itself is washed
away, but a negative color image remains in the film. For example, wherever blue light
struck the film, it acquires a yellow tint and therefore absorbs blue light. Again, the
photographic printing process reverses the colors a second time so that the prints have
positive images.
Electronic image sensors are based on photodiodes, diodes that are optimized to
detect light. They combine the light-sensing behavior of photoconductors (see Fig. 13.3.4)
with the current-controlling behavior of diodes (see Fig. 13.3.6). A vast array of these

401

402

CHAPT ER 14 Optics and Electronics

photodiodes record the pattern of light in the real image, and the camera subsequently
reads that pattern by measuring the accumulated charges on each of its photodiodes. To
obtain color information, the image sensor’s photodiodes are covered with a pattern of
red, green, and blue filters so that each photodiode measures the intensity of only one
primary color of light.
Check Your Understanding #6: Foggy Photos
Airport screening devices often use X-rays to search for hidden items. These high-energy photons can
damage film. How?
Answer: X-rays cause radiative transitions in the silver salt crystals.
Why: X-rays can penetrate through normally opaque objects and reach the film. If a silver salt crystal
in the film absorbs an X-ray, it will respond as though it was exposed to visible light. Although most
modern screening devices use such weak X-ray sources that the effects are minimal, repeated
screenings of high-speed film will gradually ruin it.

Cornea

Iris Lens

Retina

Not all cameras involve modern technology. Most people are born with
two of them—their eyes. Like the cameras we have discussed, each eye
consists primarily of a converging lens and an image sensor (Fig.
14.1.13). In this case, the lens is a combination of the front surface of
the eyeball, its cornea, and the internal lens just beneath the cornea. The
image sensor is the retina, a vast pattern of light-sensitive cells and nerves at the back
of the eyeball.
When you look at the scene in front of you, the cornea and lens of your eye project a
real image of that scene onto your retina and your retina reports the resulting pattern of
light to your brain. As usual, the real image is inverted and reversed left to right, but your
brain compensates for that effect.
Since your eyeball can’t alter the distance between the lens and the
image sensor, it focuses the real image by adjusting the focal length of the
lens. When you look at nearer objects, the lens in your eye becomes more
highly curved and its focal length decreases. The light rays from that nearer
object thus converge more sharply and form a real image on your retina.
When you view a more distant object, the lens becomes less curved and its
focal length increases.
Image
Like a sophisticated camera, your eye has an iris within its lens system.
When you view a bright scene, that iris shrinks to limit the amount of light
striking your retina. As a side effect, your depth of focus increases and everything appears sharper. It’s easier to focus when you read or work in a welllighted environment.
However, not all eyes are perfect, and many need help forming sharp real
images on their retina. Although modern laser surgical techniques can reshape
Image corneas to improve image sharpness, the classic approach to better vision is to
wear eyeglasses or contact lenses. An eye’s lens system already consists of two
components, the cornea and the lens, so adding a third component, eyeglasses, is no big deal.
A person who is farsighted can’t see nearby objects sharply because her lens system
has too long a focal length (Fig. 14.1.14a). Although it can project real images of distant
objects on her retina, nearby objects focus too far away from the front of her eye and the
light strikes her retina before it forms a real image.
To compensate for farsightedness, she wears eyeglasses with converging lenses
(Fig. 14.1.14b). These lenses begin the task of bending light rays together even before they
Image

Object
Fig. 14.1.13 An eye is
a camera, with its cornea
and lens forming a real
image on the retina. The
eye focuses by changing
the curvature of its lens.
The iris changes the eye’s
f-number.
(a)

Farsighted eye

Nearby
object
(b)

Nearby
object

Converging
lens

Fig. 14.1.14 (a) A
farsighted eye bends light
too weakly to focus on a
nearby object. The real
image forms beyond the
retina. (b) A converging
lens shifts the real image
forward so that it focuses
on the retina.

Eyes and Eyeglasses

Optical Recording and Communication

enter her eyes. Her own lens system completes the bending, and the real images
form closer to the front of her eyes. She is thus able to see nearby objects clearly.
In contrast, a person who is nearsighted is unable to focus on distant
objects because his lens system has too short a focal length (Fig. 14.1.15a).
The real images of those distant objects form too close to the front of his
eye, and the light has already begun to spread apart by the time it reaches
his retina.
To compensate for nearsightedness, he wears eyeglasses with diverging
lenses (Fig. 14.1.15b). A diverging lens is one that bends light rays apart and
therefore has a negative focal length. Typically thinner at its middle than at its
edge, a diverging lens bends the nearly parallel rays of light from a distant
object so that they diverge more rapidly. Those rays then appear to come from
a much nearer object, actually a nearby virtual image, and his eyes are able to
focus them properly on his retina.

(a)

Nearsighted eye

Distant
object

Image

(b)

Distant
object

Check Your Understanding #7: Keeping Up Your Image
The eyeglasses of a farsighted person can project a real image of a distant scene on a white wall.
However, the eyeglasses of a nearsighted person produce no real image. Why not?
Answer: Nearsighted eyeglasses use diverging lenses, which bend light rays apart and don’t focus
them together into a real image.
Why: To form a real image of a distant scene, you need to bring light rays together with a converging
lens. Diverging lenses spread light rays apart and can’t form real images on their own.

SECTION 14.2

403

Diverging
lens

Image

Fig. 14.1.15 (a) A
nearsighted eye bends
light too strongly to focus
on a distant object. The
real image forms before
the retina. (b) A diverging
lens shifts the real image
backward so that it focuses
on the retina.

Optical Recording and Communication
this section, we’ll look at how optical devices use light to
manipulate information.

Cover

Previous track
Next
Stop
Play/pause
Compact
disc

Line output

LCD display

Volume

Cover latch

Headphone jack
Tone control

Using light to convey information is as old as signal fires and
as natural as sight itself. Over the years, advances in light
sources, optical materials, and electronics have radically
increased the possibilities for optical information systems.
Optics and information go so well together that they’re partly
responsible for the current information revolution. The introduction of compact disc players in the early 1980s transformed the music industry virtually overnight, and optical
fibers are knitting our world together at an astonishing pace. In

Questions to Think About: Where is a CD’s or DVD’s information
stored? How do CD or DVD players ignore fingerprints, dust, and
other surface contamination during playback? Why is a laser
involved in recording and playing back a CD or DVD? Why can a
Blu-ray disc hold more information than a DVD and a DVD more
than a CD? Why are CDs and DVDs so free of noise? How can a
glass fiber direct light in a curving path? How can light travel
through kilometers of glass fiber without becoming dim?
Experiments to Do: Hold a prerecorded CD, DVD, or Blu-ray
by its edges, and look at its unlabeled surface. Beneath the
clear plastic face is a smooth, shiny layer that reflects a rainbow of colors. Tiny pits in this layer cause this coloration.
These pits form a spiral track around the center of the disc,
and adjacent arcs of this track are so closely spaced that light
waves reflecting from them interfere, as from a soap film. The
reflective layer is so thin that you can see through it if you hold
it in front of a bright light. Can you see the reflections of dust
particles on the unlabeled surface? How deep below the plastic surface is the shiny layer?

Representing Sound and Light: Analog and Digital
A CD doesn’t store sound any more than a DVD or Blu-ray stores flickering light. Instead,
these discs store representations of sound and light that it can use to recreate them on demand.

404

CHAPT ER 14 Optics and Electronics

Embedded in each disc is enough information to reproduce a concert or a movie, and to do so
almost perfectly. Between the microphones or camera that originally collected that information and the headphones or home theater that finally reconstructs the sound or light are a
number of fascinating processes, some optical and some electronic. In this section, we concentrate on the optical processes. In Section 14.3, we’ll look at the electronic ones.
In Section 12.1, we saw that a radio wave can be used to represent sound. Sound waves
are fluctuations in air’s density, and the AM technique represents those density changes by
changes in the amplitude of a radio wave. The FM technique is similar, but it represents
those density changes by small changes in the frequency of a radio wave. Both techniques
are analog representations of the sound, meaning that a continuously variable physical
quantity (a radio wave’s amplitude or frequency) represents another continuously variable
physical quantity (air’s density). Like any analog representation, the radio transmitter is
drawing an analogy between two continuously variable physical quantities—amplitude or
frequency is serving as an analog for air density. The radio receiver draws the reverse analogy and thereby recreates the sound itself.
Although parts of the CD player use analog representations for sound, the optical
recording and playback part uses a different representation—digital. In digital representations, a continuously variable physical quantity is first represented by a series of numbers
and then each of those numbers is represented by a set of physical quantities—a set of
digits—each of which can have only a limited number of discrete values. Those discrete
values are known as symbols, and symbols can be just about anything, as long as you can
tell them apart. As we’ll see in a moment, the numerals 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 are such
symbols, and the set of numerals 392 is a digital representation of the number three hundred
ninety-two.
Suppose that you’re recording your band and want a digital representation of its sound.
The first step is to represent that sound’s density fluctuations as a series of numbers. With
the help of a microphone and some other equipment, you measure the air density many
times per second and obtain the series of numbers. Let’s assume that one of those numbers
is one hundred twenty-four, meaning that the air density during that measurement was 124
units above the normal density.
The second step is to represent each number by a set of digits. We’ll allow each digit
to hold 1 of 10 possible symbols. Those symbol choices could be , ‚ , , , , , , ,
and , but let’s use a more familiar collection, the numerals 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9.
Note that the symbol 5 isn’t actually a number; it’s just a shape consisting of two straight
lines and partial circle.
With a single digit and our set of 10 symbols, we can represent the numbers zero
through nine. With 2 digits and those same 10 symbols, we can represent the numbers zero
through ninety-nine. With three digits, we can represent zero through nine hundred ninetynine. Since we’re trying to represent the number one hundred twenty-four, we clearly need
at least three digits. When we place the symbols 1, 2, and 4 in those three digits, as 124, we
are representing the number one hundred twenty-four.
The convention that we are following when letting 124 represent one hundred twentyfour is known as decimal. In decimal, we break numbers into ones, tens, hundreds, thousands, and so on—the powers of 10—and use 1 digit and a set of 10 symbols to represent
how much of each power of 10 is present in the number we’re representing. The decimal
representation of one hundred twenty-four is 124, meaning that it contains 1 hundred (102),
2 tens (101), and 4 ones (100). When these pieces are added together, they sum to one hundred
twenty-four.
What if, instead of 10 symbols, our collection had only 2 symbols: 0, 1? We could still
represent large numbers, but we would need many more digits than before. We would have
to break numbers into ones, twos, fours, eights, sixteens, and so on. Instead of using the
powers of 10 (as in decimal), we would be using the powers of 2. This system for representing numbers using the powers of 2 is called binary.

Optical Recording and Communication

In binary, one hundred twenty-four is written as 1111100, meaning that it contains 1
sixty-four (26), 1 thirty-two (25), 1 sixteen (24), 1 eight (23), 1 four (22), 0 twos (21), and 0
ones (20). When these pieces are added together, they again sum to one hundred twentyfour. This apparently complicated way to represent even a fairly small number is actually
quite useful. The number has been broken into pieces that have only two possible values;
there is either a thirty-two in the number being represented or there isn’t.
Binary representations require only two different symbols, and those symbols can be any
distinguishable objects. We’ve been using (1 and 0), but we could use (heads and tails), (smoke
and no-smoke), (dot and dash), (shiny and dull), (charged and uncharged), and so on. Inside an
optical disc, for example, there is a surface covered with shiny and dull spots, and those spots
are a binary representation of numbers. Similarly, in a computer, there are capacitors that are
charged or uncharged, and those capacitors are a binary representation of numbers.
There are good reasons for using digital representation to record your band’s sound
and for using binary. Analog representations are inherently noisy because every accidental
change in the physical quantity doing the representing is interpreted as a change in the
physical quantity being represented. That’s why a phonograph record, which uses height
fluctuations in a groove to represent the density fluctuations of sound, can’t re-create that
sound perfectly. Whenever dust settles into the groove on the record and introduces its own
height fluctuations, the phonograph reproduces inaccurate sound, full of pops and snaps.
In contrast, digital representations are noise free. Dust and other imperfections have no
effect on digital representations as long as the symbols can still be distinguished for one
another. For example, even without brushing the cracker crumbs off your book, laptop, or
tablet, you can still read 5049 or 101001 with perfect accuracy, unless you’re a total slob.
Even when some of the symbols are so badly obscured that they cannot be read, extra symbols can be incorporated into the digital representation to correct for such reading errors.
The reason that binary is so useful in both optical and electronic devices is that working with 2 symbols is much easier than working with 10 of them. The symbols used in these
devices aren’t shapes on a sheet of paper or computer screen, they’re things like the shininess of a surface or the charge on a capacitor. It’s easy to distinguish a dull spot (0) from a
shiny spot (1) inside an optical disc, but it’s much harder to distinguish between dull (0),
not quite dull (1), slightly shiny (2), . . . , very shiny (8), and extremely shiny (9) spots.
Although there are modern technologies that use more than two symbols, notably digital
television transmission, binary is much more common.
Check Your Understanding #1: New Math
What number does binary 10000001 represent?
Answer: One hundred twenty-nine.
Why: Binary 10000001 contains only 1 one hundred twenty-eight (27) and 1 one (20). All the other
powers of 2 are not present. Since 128 + 1 is 129, that is the number represented by this binary
value.

Digital Recording
In the conventional CD format, density measurements are made 44,100 times each second
for two independent audio channels and these measurements are recorded on the disc in
binary form, using 16 bits for each measurement (Fig. 14.2.1). Since the air density can go
down as well as up, these bits represent the positive and negative integers from –32,768 to
32,767, which in turn represent how much the air density is above or below the average
density. Density measurements with 16 bits of precision are sufficient to reproduce both
loud and soft music with almost perfect fidelity.
Like CDs, DVDs record information digitally. But DVDs are a newer technology and
therefore more sophisticated. Audio DVDs can choose from several measurement rates, bits per

405

Fig. 14.2.1 Sound can be
represented as a series of numbers.
Each number corresponds to the air
density at a particular moment in
time.

0000000001111010
0000000010000101
0000000010001111
0000000010011000
0000000010100000
0000000010100111
0000000010101101
0000000010110010
0000000010110110
0000000010111001
0000000010111011
0000000010111100
0000000010111100
0000000010111011
0000000010111000
0000000010110011
0000000010101110
0000000010101000
0000000010100000
0000000010010111
0000000010001100
0000000010000010

CHAPT ER 14 Optics and Electronics

122
133
143
152
160
167
173
178
182
185
187
188
188
187
184
179
174
168
160
151
140
130

406

Binary
representation
(base 2)

Digital
representation

Time
Air density

measurement, and numbers of channels. A typical DVD might have five audio channels: leftfront, center-front, right-front, left-rear, and right-rear. The three front channels might have
96,000 density measurements per second at 24 bits per measurement, and the two rear channels
might have 48,000 measurements per second at 20 bits per measurement. All these samples,
bits, and channels involve far more information than is stored on a CD, and a DVD compresses
that information before storing it. In contrast, a conventional CD’s information is uncompressed
although some more modern formats (e.g., mp3) do employ compression techniques.
In either case, air density measurements aren’t simply recorded one after another on a
disc’s surface. Instead, these numbers are extensively reorganized before they’re stored.
This reorganization allows the player to reproduce the sound perfectly even if the disc can’t
be read completely. As we’ll see shortly, reading these discs is a technological tour de force
and susceptible to various failures. To be sure that the sound (and video) can be reproduced
completely and without interruption, the numbers are recorded in an encoded manner. They
appear redundantly so that, even if one copy of a number is illegible, there is still enough
legible information along the same arc of the disc’s spiral track to completely re-create that
missing number. This duplication of information reduces the playing time of both CDs and
DVDs, but it is essential for reliability.
Its encoding scheme leaves a CD or DVD almost completely immune to all but the
most severe playback problems. In principle, you can damage or obscure a 2-mm-wide
swath of the disc, from its center to its edge, and the player will still be able to reproduce
the sound (and video) perfectly. However, damage along an arc of the spiral track is far
more threatening to the data. If the player can’t read a long stretch of a single arc, it won’t
be able to recover the information. That’s why you should always clean a CD or DVD from
its center outward to its edge.
Check Your Understanding #2: Cordless Clarity Away from Home
Cell phones transmit your voice in digital form. In general terms, how does this digital transmission
work?
Answer: Your cell phone’s microphone converts the sound of your voice into a fluctuating current.
This current is measured periodically and represented as a sequence of numbers. These numbers are
then represented by radio waves and transmitted through space. The numbers eventually work their
way to a receiving cell phone, where the radio waves are converted back into numbers and the numbers
are converted back into a fluctuating current. Finally, the current is amplified and sent through a
speaker to create sound.
Why: Many modern communication devices use a digital representation of sound. In radio-wave
communication, digital representations are particularly useful because they are immune to the noise
that plagues analog radio transmissions and also permit more efficient use of the radio bandwidth.

Optical Recording and Communication
Label
Lacquer
Aluminum

(a)

(b)

407

1.6-μ m
spacing

1.2 mm

CD
Polycarbonate
plastic
0.83- μ m
minimum

Laser beam
(Air)

Laser
beam

Laser
beam

0.6 mm

0.6 mm

(c)

Laser
beam

Laser
beam

Polycarbonate
plastic
Gold or silicon
UV cure plastic
Aluminum
Glue
Aluminum
UV cure plastic
Gold or silicon
Polycarbonate
plastic

(d)

0.74-μ m
spacing

DVD

Fig. 14.2.2 (a,b) A CD contains a thin layer of aluminum on one side of a clear plastic disc. The
aluminum layer has tiny pits that are detected by a 780-nm laser beam. (c,d) A DVD contains up to four
aluminum, gold, or silicon layers sandwiched between two clear plastic discs. The gold or silicon layers
are semireflective. Pits in those layers are detected by a 650-nm laser beam. The beam can focus either
on the semireflective layer or, by passing through that layer, on the aluminum layer beyond it.

0.40- μ m
minimum

1.6- μ m

(b) spacing
CD

The Structure of CDs, DVDs, and Blu-rays
Standard CDs, DVDs, and Blu-rays are 120 mm (4.72 in.) in diameter and 1.2 mm (0.05
in.) thick. One side of a CD is clear and smooth but the other side contains a sandwich of
layers: a thin film of aluminum, a protective lacquer, and a printed label (Fig. 14.2.2a). In
contrast, a DVD is laminated from two 0.6-mm-thick clear plastic discs, with one, two, or
four reflective layers of aluminum, gold, or silicon stacked up in between them (Fig.
14.2.2c). The more layers in the DVD, the more information it holds. A Blu-ray disc (BRD)
also has 1 to 4 reflective layers, but they are so near the BRD’s surface that a hard protective
coating is applied to prevent scratches.
The reflective layers are the recording surfaces. These layers are so thin that they actually transmit a small amount of light. In the gold or silicon DVD layers, this semitransparency is essential because it allows the optical system that reads information to send light
through the semitransparent layer to the aluminum layer beyond it. The aluminum layers
also transmit some light. Although aluminum’s electrons accelerate in response to the
light’s electric field and normally reflect that light completely, there aren’t enough electrons in these 50- to 100-nm-thick layers to do the job and some light gets through.
The reflective layers aren’t perfectly smooth. Instead, each has a narrow spiral track
formed in its surface (Figs. 14.2.2b,d). This track is a series of microscopic pits, as short as
0.83 𝜇m long on a CD, 0.40 𝜇m long on a DVD, and 0.15 𝜇m long on a Blu-ray. Adjacent
arcs in the spiral track are only 1.6 𝜇m apart on a CD, 0.74 𝜇m apart on a DVD, and just
0.32 𝜇m apart on a Blu-ray. The lengths of the pits and the flat “lands” that separate them
represent numbers. The player examines these pits and lands as the disc turns and converts
their lengths into numbers, sound, and video.

0.83- μ m
minimum

(d) 0.74- μ m
spacing

DVD

0.40- μ m
minimum

Fig. 14.2.2 (repeated)
(b) A CD’s aluminum layer
has tiny pits that are
detected by a 780-nm
laser beam. (d ) A DVD’s
reflective and semireflective
layers have pits that are
detected by a 650-nm laser
beam. Using a shorterwavelength laser allows the
DVD player to focus its light
to a smaller spot and observe
the DVD’s narrower, more
closely spaced reflective
features.

408

CHAPT ER 14 Optics and Electronics

The pit lengths and the spacings between arcs weren’t chosen arbitrarily. Since electromagnetic waves are unable to detect structures much smaller than their wavelengths (see
Section 12.2), the laser beam’s wavelength limits the size of the smallest features on a disc.
In a CD player, that beam’s wavelength is 780 nm in air and 503 nm in polycarbonate plastic—short enough to detect the pits of a CD easily. In a DVD player, the laser beam’s
wavelength is between 635 and 650 nm in air and between 410 and 420 nm in plastic—just
short enough to detect the pits in a DVD. The wavelength reduction inside the disc occurs
because polycarbonate plastic has an index of refraction of 1.55, meaning that the light’s
speed in that plastic is reduced from its vacuum speed by a factor of 1.55. Its wavelength is
reduced by the same factor. In a Blu-ray player, the laser beam’s wavelength is 405 nm in
air and about 260 nm in plastic, and it is just able to observe the tiny pits.
The player detects a pit by bouncing light from the disc and determining how much of
it reflects. As the focused laser beam passes over a pit, the reflection becomes dim, in part
because the curved pit scatters light in all directions and in part because of interference
effects. Light that’s reflected back from a pit travels farther than light that’s reflected from
the flat region around it, so electric and magnetic fields in the two waves are shifted relative
to one another. The pit depth was chosen so that the two reflected waves are approximately
out of phase and they interfere destructively. Overall, the player’s light sensors detect relatively little light when the laser beam is located over a pit.
A CD, DVD, or Blu-ray player uses a laser diode to produce its light. The 780-nm
standard for CD players was adopted in 1980, when 780-nm infrared laser diodes were
reliable but still fairly expensive. Technology advanced by the mid-1990s, however, and the
635- to 650-nm standard for DVD players reflects the development of inexpensive red laser
diodes. New standards follow technology, so with the development of reliable blue laser
diodes, new optical recording systems appeared. Blu-ray players and discs, which first
appeared in 2006, are based on a 405-nm laser. Because a Blu-ray player can focus its blue
laser beam to a much smaller spot than either a CD or a DVD player, a Blu-ray disc holds
far more information than either of the earlier formats.
Check Your Understanding #3: The Blue-Light Special
Blu-ray disc players use blue lasers with a wavelength of 405 nm in air or vacuum. A CD player uses
an infrared laser with a wavelength of 780 nm. How must the pit depths in the reflective layer of a
Blu-ray disc compare to the pit depths in a CD?
Answer: The pits in a Blu-ray disc must be about half as deep as those in a CD.
Why: The pits in the reflective layer should be about a quarter of a wavelength deep so that light
reflected from the bottom of a pit interferes destructively with light reflected from an adjacent flat
region. Halving the wavelength of the laser light requires halving the depth of the pits to achieve
destructive interference.

The Optical System of a CD, DVD, or Blu-ray Player
A CD, DVD, or Blu-ray player’s optical system measures the lengths of the tiny pits as they
move by on a spinning disc. That reading process requires incredible precision. Not only
must the player focus its spot of laser light exactly on the reflective layer, but it must also
follow the spiral track as it moves by. The disc itself is neither perfectly flat nor perfectly
round, so the player must continuously adjust its reading unit during playback. The optical
system must keep its laser beam focused on the reflective layer (autofocusing) and must
follow the track as it passes (autotracking). These two automatic processes are beautiful
examples of the use of feedback.
The basic structure of a typical CD, DVD, or Blu-ray player is shown in Fig. 14.2.3.
Light from a laser diode passes through several optical elements on its way to the disc’s
reflective layer. It comes to a tight focus on that layer, where it illuminates only a single

Optical Recording and Communication
Collimating
lens
Laser
diode

Polarization
beam splitter

Objective
lens

Quarterwave plate

Compact
disc

Fig. 14.2.3 In the optical system
of a CD, DVD, or Blu-ray player,
light from a laser diode passes
through a polarization beam splitter,
a collimating lens, a quarter-wave
plate, and an objective lens before
focusing on the reflective layer inside
the disc. Reflected light turns 90°
at the polarization beam splitter and
focuses on an array of photodiodes.

Photodiodes

track. Some light reflects from the layer and returns through the optical elements. Finally,
the reflected light turns 90° at a special mirror called a polarization beam splitter and
focuses on an array of light detectors. The player measures the electric currents flowing
through the detectors and uses those measurements both to obtain data from the disc and to
control the focusing and tracking systems.
Let’s examine this optical system one element at a time. After leaving the laser diode,
light passes through a polarization beam splitter. This device analyzes the light’s polarization. As we saw in Section 13.1, different polarizations of light reflect differently when they
strike a transparent surface at an angle. In this case, polarized light from the laser passes
through the 45° surface, but light of the other polarization reflects. The beam splitter is
specially coated to separate the two polarizations almost perfectly.
Light from the laser diode diverges rapidly as it passes through the beam splitter.
It’s not that the laser diode is broken or poorly designed; it’s that a light wave emerging
from a small opening naturally spreads outward, like ripples on a pond. This spreading
is known as diffraction and occurs whenever a light wave is truncated by passing
through an opening. The smaller the opening, the worse is the spreading. Because the
emitting surface of the laser diode is essentially a very small opening, the laser beam
spreads rapidly as it heads away from the diode. The player uses a converging lens
located after the beam splitter to stop this spreading. At that point, the light beam is
already wide enough that diffraction causes little additional spreading. The beam leaves
the lens collimated, meaning that it maintains a nearly constant diameter after passing
through the lens.
The laser light then passes through a quarter-wave plate. This remarkable device performs half the task of converting horizontally polarized light into vertically polarized light
or vice versa. Horizontally and vertically polarized lights are said to be plane polarized
because their electric fields always oscillate back and forth in one plane as they move
through space. The quarter-wave plate turns plane polarized light into circularly polarized
light. We encountered circular polarization before in the radio transmissions from FM stations. In circularly polarized light, the electric field actually rotates about the direction in
which the light is traveling.
Now the light passes through an objective lens that focuses it onto the reflective layer
of the disc. On its way to the reflective layer, the light enters the plastic surface of the disc.
At its entry point, the beam is still more than 0.5 mm in diameter, which explains why dust
or fingerprints on the disc’s surface don’t cause much trouble. While contamination may
block some of the laser light, most of it continues onward to the reflective layer.
The light comes to a tight focus just as it arrives at the reflective layer. Although it
might seem that all the light should converge together to a single point on that surface, it
actually forms a spot roughly 1 wavelength in diameter. This spot size is limited by the

409

410

CHAPT ER 14 Optics and Electronics

wave nature of light. No matter how perfectly you try to focus light, you can’t
make a spot that’s much smaller than the light’s wavelength. Instead, the beam
Laser beam
forms a narrow waist and then spreads apart (Fig. 14.2.4). This beam waist is
Beam
about 1 wavelength of the light in diameter and a few wavelengths long,
waist
depending on the f-number of the converging lens. Since that waist is less than
Converging
2 𝜇m long, the player’s autofocusing system must keep the objective lens just
lens
the right distance from the reflective layer.
Fig. 14.2.4 When a
This fundamental limitation on how tightly a beam of light can be focused is another
converging lens focuses
example of diffraction; the focusing lens truncates the light wave and inevitably introduces
a laser beam, the light
doesn’t meet at a single
spreading. However, even reaching this ideal focusing limit requires careful design and
point in space. Instead, it
fabrication of the optical elements. Although most other optical systems fall short of their
reaches a narrow waist with
ideal limits, a CD, DVD, or Blu-ray player’s optical system does as well as can be done
a diameter roughly equal to
within the constraints of diffraction itself. Its optics are essentially perfect and are said to
the wavelength of the light.
be diffraction limited.
The amount of light that reflects from the layer depends on whether or not the laser
spot hits a pit. This reflected light follows the optical path in reverse. The light is collimated
by the objective lens and then passes through the quarter-wave plate again. The plate now
finishes the job it started earlier; the light ends up plane polarized but with the opposite
polarization it had when it left the laser. Horizontally polarized light is now vertically
polarized, and vice versa.
The reflected light then passes through the collimating lens, which makes the light converge, and then strikes the polarization beam splitter. Because the light’s polarization has
changed, the beam splitter no longer allows the beam to pass directly through. Instead, it turns
this reflected beam 90° and directs it toward the detector array. This clever redirection scheme
is important for two reasons. First, it conserves laser light by allowing most of it to travel from
the laser diode to the detector. Second, it prevents reflected light from returning to the laser
diode, where that light would be amplified and cause the laser diode to misbehave.
The light comes to a focus on an array of photodiodes. This array allows the player to
detect pits via the reflected light intensity and also to determine whether the objective lens
is properly positioned relative to those pits. For generality, Fig. 14.2.3 omits optical elements involved in autofocusing and autotracking. However, because of those elements, the
pattern of light hitting the detector array indicates which way the objective lens should
move, if necessary. That lens is attached to coils of wire that are suspended near permanent
magnets. By varying the currents flowing through those coils, the player uses Lorentz
forces to move its objective lens about rapidly and keep it in the right place over the disc.
Check Your Understanding #4: That’s Why It’s Called a Laser Disc
Why must the CD, DVD, or BRD player use a laser diode rather than a more conventional light source
such as an incandescent bulb?
Answer: The light in a CD, DVD, or BRD player must be coherent so that it can be focused to a single
diffraction-limited spot on the reflective layer and experience destructive interference when it
encounters a pit.
Why: You can’t focus light from an incandescent bulb to a diffraction-limited spot. Each photon
leaving the bulb is independent and will focus at a somewhat different point in space. The bulb’s
incoherent light also doesn’t experience the strong interference effects of laser light.

Optical Fibers
Optical playback of prerecorded discs is fine for music and movies, but it isn’t of much use
when you want up-to-the-minute information. The Internet and World Wide Web require
communication links that operate at lightning speed. Yet, even here, optics and light have
an important role to play. The fastest way to send enormous amounts of information is to
use optical fibers.

Optical Recording and Communication

An optical fiber is a glass conduit that guides light from one place to another. Nearly
every photon that enters the fiber at one end emerges from the other end moments later. In
its simplest form, the fiber is made from two different glasses: a solid core of one glass surrounded by a cladding of the other glass. Both glasses are so incredibly transparent that light
can travel through them for kilometers with little loss. For comparison, look through the
edge of an ordinary piece of window glass and you’ll see how dark the glass looks. It absorbs
far too much light to be suitable for optical fibers. They’re made of the purest glasses known.
If both glasses are almost perfectly transparent, what keeps the light from leaking out
of the sides of the fiber? The answer is a phenomenon known as total internal reflection. As
light tries to move from the inner glass core to the outer glass cladding, it’s reflected perfectly and thus can’t escape.
Total internal reflection is an extreme case of refraction. When light encounters the
boundary between two materials with different indices of refraction, refraction causes that
light to bend (Fig. 14.2.5). If the material it enters has a smaller index of refraction than the one
it leaves, the light bends away from a line perpendicular to the boundary. The amount of this
bend depends on the two indices of refraction and on the angle at which the light approaches
the boundary. As long as the approach angle is steep enough, light will succeed in entering the
second material. However, if the approach angle is too shallow, the light won’t enter the second
material at all. Instead, it will reflect perfectly from the boundary. In fact, total internal reflection is far more efficient at reflecting light than a conventional metal mirror.
To keep the light inside the fiber’s core, the core glass must have a higher index of
refraction than the cladding glass. As light in the high-index core encounters the boundary
with the low-index cladding, it experiences total internal reflection and bounces back into
the core (Fig. 14.2.6a). As long as the fiber doesn’t bend too sharply, the light bounces back
and forth inside the core and can’t escape. As a result, light entering the fiber core through
one of its cut ends follows the fiber all the way to its other cut end.
A large-diameter fiber (typically 50 𝜇m or more) has a problem. Light rays bouncing
through it at slightly different angles travel different distances during their passage through
the fiber. Light heading almost straight down the center of the fiber rarely bounces and takes
less time to complete its trip than light that bounces many times. Because this wide fiber
has many bouncing paths or “modes” in which light can travel through it, a short pulse of
light going through the fiber gets stretched out in time (Fig. 14.2.6a). This pulse-broadening
severely limits the rate at which information can be sent through a multimode fiber.
(a)
Cladding
Core
Incoming
light
pulse Multimode fiber

Cladding

Outgoing
light
pulse

(b)
Cladding
Core
Incoming
light
pulse Graded index multimode fiber

Cladding

Outgoing
light
pulse

(c)
Cladding
Incoming
light
pulse Graded index single-mode fiber

Core
Cladding

Outgoing
light
pulse

High refractive
index

411

Low refractive
index

Total internal
reflection

Refraction
Light

Fig. 14.2.5 When light
traveling through one
material enters a second
material with a lower
refractive index, it bends
toward the boundary
between those materials.
If its approach angle is too
shallow, the light will bend
so much that it will simply
reflect from the boundary.
This effect is called total
internal reflection.

Fig. 14.2.6 Light trying to
leave the high-index core of
an optical fiber at a shallow
angle undergoes total
internal reflection at the
boundary with the low-index
cladding. (a) In an ordinary
multimode fiber, a pulse
of light can follow many
paths through the core and
becomes spread out in time.
(b) A core with a graded
refractive index exhibits
less temporal spreading
because the reflection
process is more gradual.
(c) The least spreading
occurs in a single-mode
fiber. The small core diameter
of this fiber provides light
with only one mode of travel
so that the only spreading
occurs because of ordinary
dispersion.

412

CHAPT ER 14 Optics and Electronics

To reduce stretching problems, the core of a better-performance optical fiber has a
graded refractive index. The core glass is specially treated so that its index of refraction
decreases smoothly away from its center toward the cladding. Instead of bouncing abruptly
when it reaches the boundary between core and cladding, light in this graded-index environment turns smoothly back toward the core (Fig. 14.2.6b). The path differences between
the modes in a graded-index multimode fiber aren’t so different, and a short pulse of light
isn’t stretched very much in a fiber of moderate length.
In very long fibers, however, even small path differences add up, and short pulses
become blurred in multimode fibers. Therefore, the highest-performance optical conduits
are single-mode fibers. These fibers have very narrow graded-index cores that permit light
to travel only in one mode—effectively right down the center of the fiber (Fig. 14.2.6c).
The core is typically only 9 𝜇m in diameter. A pulse of light entering this narrow core
broadens very little in time during its passage.
What little broadening occurs in a single-mode fiber isn’t caused by the light taking
different paths; it’s caused by ordinary dispersion in the glass. To carry information, the
light wave must change with time and thus must have a range of frequencies and wavelengths. As usual, the shorter wavelengths travel slower than the longer wavelengths and
the pulses get stretched out in time. To minimize these dispersion effects, the highest-speed
optical fibers operate at wavelengths that minimize dispersion. They also operate at wavelengths that minimize the loss of light through absorption in the glass. These two wavelengths coincide at 1550 nm in dispersion-shifted fibers, so this infrared wavelength is
commonly used in long-haul optical communication.
Check Your Understanding #5: If It Looks like a Mirror . . .
When you look into an aquarium from the front, the sides of the aquarium often look like mirrors.
Those sides are actually clear glass, so why do they reflect light so well?
Answer: The light you see is experiencing total internal reflection as it tries to leave the glass at a
shallow angle. You see perfect reflections of the fish inside the aquarium.
Why: Light has trouble passing from water or glass into the air at a shallow angle. When it tries, it
experiences total internal reflection and bounces off the surface without losing any intensity at all.

Optical Communication
A typical optical communication transmitter uses a 1550-nm laser diode to generate short
pulses of light. These pulses carry information from the transmitter to a receiver somewhere far away. The transmitter produces its pulses by varying the current passing through
the laser diode. Light emerging from the laser diode is focused into the exposed core of a
single-mode optical fiber, and it follows the core all the way to the other end of the fiber.
When the light emerges, it’s gathered by a lens and focused onto the receiver’s photodiode.
Each pulse of light causes a pulse of current to flow through the photodiode, allowing the
receiver to begin processing the information.
A laser diode and a single-mode optical fiber can send billions of bits of data per second for 50 km or 100 km without significant errors. At longer distances, the gradual absorption of light in the glass makes it difficult to receive the information reliably. The easiest
solution to this problem is to receive the data before the light becomes too weak and then
to retransmit it with another laser diode.
Instead of interrupting the optical transmission with a receiver and retransmitter, some
long-haul communication systems employ erbium-doped fiber amplifiers (EDFAs). An
EDFA is a piece of optical fiber that has about 0.01% erbium ions in its glass core. When
the EDFA is exposed to 980-nm or 1480-nm light, it becomes a laser amplifier for 1550-nm
light. As the weakened pulses of light from a long fiber pass through the fiber amplifier, the
amplifier duplicates photons and brightens the pulses. These amplified pulses then continue

Audio Players

413

through ordinary fiber before being amplified again. Undersea optical cables often splice
fiber amplifiers into the fibers every 50 km or so. These amplifiers allow light to travel
thousands of kilometers through a continuous path, from one side of an ocean to the other.
To get the most out of a single optical fiber, many communication systems use several
laser diodes operating at somewhat different wavelength ranges around 1550 nm. Light from
these diodes is merged together and focused into the fiber. When the light emerges at the far
end of the fiber, its different wavelength ranges are split apart and directed onto individual
receivers. The different wavelength ranges are like different channels, so that this wavelength-division multiplexing allows one fiber to carry far more information than it could
with light from a single laser. Remarkably enough, an EDFA can amplify all of these different channels at once because erbium ions can copy a wide range of wavelengths.
Check Your Understanding #6: Making Something Out of Nothing
If light weakens gradually as it passes through a long optical fiber, why can’t you simply wait until the
very end of the fiber to amplify what little light remains and then send the amplified light into a receiver?
Answer: As the light is absorbed, the number of photons in a pulse gradually diminishes. When that
number gets to zero, there’s nothing left to amplify.
Why: Each pulse of light in the fiber contains a limited number of photons. The glass absorbs many
of these photons during their long passage through a fiber, so they must be amplified before their
numbers become so small that there’s a chance that none of them makes it at all.

Audio Players

SECTION 14.3

Liquid
crystal
display

iPod
Music
Extras
Settings
Shuffle Songs
Backlight

MENU

>
>
>

Menu
access

Next
track

Previous
track

Play

Audio players have revolutionized portable music systems.
Everywhere you look, people are sporting earpieces and listening
to their favorite tunes with these little electronic marvels or their
smartphone siblings. Part computer and part stereo system, an
audio player is a spectacular synthesis of some of the highest
forms of modern electronic technology. Because they contain
such a broad range of electronic components, audio players offer
an excellent introduction to much of modern electronics.

To understand how audio players work, we need to look at
how sound can be represented electronically and at how those
electronic representations can be stored, retrieved, and ultimately used to re-create the sound itself. That exploration will
take us all the way from the digital world of computers to the
analog world of amplifiers and headphones.
It will also expose us to that workhorse of modern electronics—the transistor. Early audio electronic devices were
built with vacuum tubes, which were relatively bulky components that wasted power and aged quickly. Transistors have
made audio electronics much more practical. They have also
made computers so small and inexpensive that every audio
player can have its own computer.
Questions to Think About: What does it mean to store songs?
How can a computer use numbers to represent music? Why
does an audio player need electric power to operate? Why does
an audio player become warm as it operates? Does the volume
of the sound affect the battery life? What does an audio amplifier’s power rating mean? How are electric power and sound
volume related? How do the treble and bass controls of an
audio player affect the sound?
Experiments to Do: Find an audio player or a smartphone.
Turn it on, and notice that it takes a short time to “wake up.”
You’re observing the boot process of a computer. But if all of
the computer’s information is already inside it, why does it
need to do so much work as its starts? As we’ll soon see, the
device’s computer uses different types of memory, some of

414

CHAPT ER 14 Optics and Electronics

which are wiped clean when the audio player is turned off.
With that tidbit in mind, try to imagine what is happening
during the boot process.
Play some music and experiment with the sound controls.
The volume control determines how much power reaches the
headphones. Recall that a flashlight with a poor connection
produces dim light. If you create a poor connection between

the player and the earpiece, what happens to the volume?
Where did the lost power go?
Now experiment with the bass and treble controls. If the
player has any other audio effects, try them. Are you still hearing
sound as it was originally performed? How do the player’s tone
settings influence the sound reproduction? Is the most perfect
imitation of the original sound always what you want to hear?

Transistors

Electrons
Current

Channel

The story of audio players begins with the story of transistors. Invented in 1948 by three
American physicists, William Shockley (1910–1989), John Bardeen (1908–1991), and
Walter Brattain (1902–1987), transistors are key elements in nearly all modern electronic
equipment. Like the diodes we examined in Section 13.3, transistors are built from doped
semiconductors—semiconductors such as silicon to which chemical impurities have been
added. However, unlike diodes, which operate in only a single circuit, transistors allow the
current in one circuit to control the current in another circuit.
There are many types of transistors, but the simplest and most important type is the
field-effect transistor. Actually, even here there are several varieties, so we’ll focus on the
one that’s most widely used in audio players, cell phones, video equipment,
(a)
Drain
and computers: the n-channel metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor (or n-channel MOSFET). Despite its complicated name, the n-channel
N-type
Insulator
semiconductor
MOSFET is a relatively simple device, consisting principally of three semiconductor layers and a nearby metal or metal-like surface (Fig. 14.3.1). The three
layers are called the drain, the channel, and the source, and the metal surface
Gate
P-type
is called the gate.
semiconductor
The drain and the source consist of a strongly doped n-type semiconductor
(many
conduction-level electrons) and the channel between them consists of a
Metal
N-type
lightly doped p-type semiconductor (a few empty valence levels) (Fig. 14.3.2a).
semiconductor
When those three layers touch, they form two back-to-back p-n junctions, and
Source
conduction-level electrons from the drain and source migrate into the channel to
Inside of n-channel MOSFET
fill its few empty valence levels (Fig. 14.3.2b). The completed transistor is thus
left with a vast depletion region (a region devoid of empty valence levels or occuDrain
(b)
pied conduction levels) extending all the way from its drain to its source. With
nothing to convey charge through its channel, the transistor can’t conduct current
Gate
between its drain and source. The MOSFET is effectively Off.
However, if more electrons could be coaxed into the channel somehow,
those electrons would have to go into the channel’s conduction levels and the
Source
channel would then behave like an n-type semiconductor. With an n-type chanSymbol for n-channel MOSFET
nel sandwiched between an n-type drain and an n-type source, the p-n junctions would vanish and so would the depletion region. The three layers would
Fig. 14.3.1 (a) In an
become,
in
effect, a single piece of n-type semiconductor, and the transistor would then
n-channel MOSFET, the
be able to conduct current between its drain and source. The MOSFET would be effecchannel is normally a
depletion region that cannot
tively On.
carry current between the
Drawing extra electrons into the channel is the task of the metal-like gate. Sepasource and drain. But
rated
from the channel by an incredibly thin insulating layer, the gate controls the chanwhen positive charge on
nel’s
ability
to carry current. When a tiny positive charge is placed on the gate through
the gate attracts electrons
a wire, it attracts extra electrons into the channel’s conduction levels from the source,
into the channel, however,
the channel becomes an
drain, and their wires and the transistor begins to conduct current (Fig. 14.3.2c). The
n-type semiconductor and
more positive charge there is on the gate, the more extra electrons are drawn into the
allows current to flow. (b)
channel and the more current can flow through the transistor. In effect, the transistor
The symbol representing
behaves like an adjustable resistor with a resistance that decreases as the positive charge
an n-channel MOSFET in a
on its gate increases.
schematic diagram.

Audio Players
(a) N-channel MOSFET (unassembled)
Conduction band
Band

Energy

Gap

Valence band

N-type drain

P-type channel

N-type source

Band
Gap
Band
52 positive charges

44 positive charges

52 positive charges

Position
(b) N-channel MOSFET Off (nonconducting)
Gate
Conduction band
Band

Energy

Gap

Depleted channel

Valence band

Band
Gap

Depletion region

Band
Position
(c) N-channel MOSFET On (conducting)
Gate
Conduction band
Band

Energy

Gap

Valence band

N-type drain

N-type channel

N-type source

Band
Gap
Band
Position

Fig. 14.3.2 (a) An n-channel MOSFET is formed from three pieces of semiconductor: a n-type drain,
p-type channel, and n-type source. (b) When those pieces touch, conduction-level electrons from the
n-type source and drain fill the empty valence levels of the p-type channel and form a vast insulating
depletion region. The depleted channel is nonconducting and the MOSFET is Off. (c) When positive
charge is placed on the nearby gate, however, it attracts extra electrons into the channel’s conduction
levels and the negatively charged channel then behaves as n-type semiconductor. The entire structure
is conducting and the MOSFET is On.

We can now understand the n-channel MOSFET’s name. N-channel refers to the channel’s n-type behavior when its gate is positively charged and the transistor can carry current. Although the channel is chemically p-type (Fig. 14.3.2a), it becomes electrically
n-type when extra electrons are drawn into it and it acquires a negative net charge (Fig.
14.3.2c). Metal-oxide-semiconductor indicates that the metal or metal-like gate is separated from the semiconductor channel by a thin insulating layer of oxide. This insulator can
be as little as 1.2 nm thick and agonizingly easy to puncture, so modern electronic devices are
heavily protected against the damaging effects of static electricity. Field-effect transistor
indicates that the electric field from charge on the gate is what draws electrons into the
channel and controls the current flow through the transistor.

415

416

CHAPT ER 14 Optics and Electronics

Check Your Understanding #1: Power and Control
Widening the channel of an n-channel MOSFET allows it to handle more current between its source
and drain. However, the enlarged transistor needs more positive charge on its gate to control that
current. Explain.
Answer: The larger transistor also has a larger gate. With more surface over which to spread its
charge, the gate needs more positive charge to draw conduction-level electrons into the channel.
Why: MOSFETs range in size from remarkably small (less than 0.01 𝜇m2) to relatively large (several
square millimeters). The smallest ones are used in computer chips, where millions of MOSFETs are
created on a single wafer of silicon only a centimeter square. A tiny charge on the gate of one of these
MOSFETs will allow it to conduct current. The largest MOSFETs are used in power-control devices
such as amplifiers and power supplies. These transistors have large gates, and much more charge is
needed to allow one of them to conduct current.

Storing Digital Sound Information
An audio player is half computer and half stereo system. It stores and manipulates sound
information in digital form like a computer but then amplifies that information for the headphones in analog form like a stereo system. We’ll mirror that sequence when examining the
player’s electronics: we’ll start with its digital memory and processing systems and finish
with its audio amplifier.
Inside the digital portion of the audio player, air pressure measurements and other
numbers are represented in binary form. How large or precise those numbers are determines how many binary digits are needed to represent them. Each binary digit is called a
bit, and using more bits allows you to represent larger or more precise numbers. In general,
the more detailed the information, the more bits are needed to represent it.
Eight bits can be used to represent any number from 0 (which is 00000000) to 255
(which is 11111111). Since there are fewer than 256 of many common objects, these
objects can be identified by groups of 8 bits. For example, the symbols used in ordinary text
have been assigned numbers between 0 and 255, with 65 denoting the letter A. Since the 8
bits 01000001 represent 65, they also specify an A. Groups of 8 bits are so common and
useful that they are called bytes.
Although it’s possible to store sound information using 1 byte per air pressure measurement, a byte usually doesn’t provide enough precision for quality sound reproduction. More
often, digital audio is saved using 2 bytes per pressure measurement. These pressure measurements are made tens of thousands of times per second, usually from several microphones
simultaneously to provide stereo or surround sound. Even when sophisticated data compression techniques are used to eliminate redundant or inconsequential information, a great many
bits are still needed to represent an album. Thus an audio player needs a lot of memory.
There are several ways in which the audio player, like any computer, stores a bit. In its
main working memory (often called random access memory, or RAM), each bit is a tiny
capacitor that uses the presence or absence of separated electric charge to denote a 1 or a 0.
The player stores a bit by producing or removing separated charge and recalls the bit by
checking for that charge.
Each capacitor is built right at the end of its own n-channel MOSFET. That MOSFET
controls the flow of charge to or from the capacitor. To store or recall a bit, the audio player
places positive charge on the gate of the MOSFET so that the MOSFET becomes electrically conducting. The memory system can then transfer charge to or from the bit’s capacitor.
Storing the bit is relatively easy; the player simply sends the appropriate charge
through the MOSFET to the capacitor. Recalling the bit is harder because the charge on the
capacitor is extremely small. Sensitive amplifiers in the memory system detect any charge
flowing through the MOSFET from the capacitor and report what they find to the audio
player. Since this reading process removes charge from the capacitor, the memory system
must immediately store the bit again.

Audio Players

Unfortunately, these tiny capacitors can’t hold separated charge forever because it
leaks out to their surroundings. Memory that uses charged capacitors to store bits is called
dynamic memory and must be refreshed (read and restored) hundreds of times each second
to ensure that a 1 doesn’t accidentally switch to a 0 or vice versa.
Dynamic memory is also volatile—its contents are lost when the audio player turns
off. To conserve its batteries, the player keeps its music information in nonvolatile memory,
memory that doesn’t need power to retain its information. New possibilities for nonvolatile
memory appear almost every year, but at present the three leading forms are flash, magnetic
disk, and optical disc memories.
Flash memory resembles dynamic memory in that each bit is stored as the presence or
absence of charge associated with a MOSFET. In flash memory, though, that charge resides
on the MOSFET’s floating gate—a second, unattached gate located in the insulating layer
between the channel and the normal gate. Since this floating gate is surrounded by insulator, it can keep its charge for decades. As long as that charge is present, it will determine
the MOSFET’s conductivity and whether the bit is a 0 or a 1.
Reading bits from flash memory is easy, but storing them is a challenge. The same isolation
that traps charge on the floating gate for years makes that charge difficult to change. To add or
remove electrons from the floating gate, the memory system applies relatively large voltages to
the MOSFET’s source, drain, and normal gate and the resulting strong electric fields permit
electrons to cross through the insulation separating the channel from the floating gate.
To add electrons to the floating gate, the electric fields are arranged so they accelerate
channel electrons to such high speeds that those electrons simply burrow right through the
insulating layer to the floating gate. To remove electrons from the floating gate, the electric
fields are arranged so that the floating gate’s electron standing waves are distorted into the
insulator. When these distorted waves reach far enough into the insulator, electrons begin
to leak through it into the channel via a process known as quantum tunneling. (We’ll return
to explore quantum tunneling in Chapter 15.)
Flash memory is fast to read but relatively slower to write. Moreover, the electron
burrowing process causes cumulative damage to the insulating layer and limits the number
of times flash memory can be written. An audio player uses a mixture of dynamic memory
and flash memory; it does its computational work in dynamic memory but retains its longterm information in flash memory.
However, there’s another memory concept that remains more cost-effective than flash
memory for storing vast amounts of information—magnetic disk memory. Although flash
memory has largely replaced magnetic disks in audio players, computers still depend
extensively on magnetic disks.
Just as the magnetic strip on a credit card (Fig. 11.1.6) can store information in the
locations of its magnetic poles, the surface of a magnetic disk can store information in the
orientations of its magnetic poles. Actual hard disks are smooth aluminum platters that
have been coated with hi-tech hard magnetic materials. Using microscopic electromagnets
to write magnetic poles and sophisticated semiconductor magnetic sensors to read them,
modern hard disks can pack over 1 billion bits into a square millimeter of surface (over 80
gigabytes per square inch). Simply locating those microscopic bits on platters that rotate
over 100 times per second is an electromechanical tour de force, yet these disks do it routinely even while you are moving your laptop around the room.
Check Your Understanding #2: Like Sending a Letter to Yourself
Every few thousandths of a second, a computer’s memory system stops briefly to read and then
rewrite every bit in its dynamic memory. What is going on?
Answer: The computer is making sure that the charge stored on each capacitor in the dynamic memory adequately represents that bit’s contents.
Why: Since charge leaks quickly from the capacitors in dynamic memory, the contents of each bit
must be refreshed many times a second. This refreshing process, reading each bit and storing it back
into memory, slows the computer down slightly.

417

418

CHAPT ER 14 Optics and Electronics

The Audio Player’s Computer
Input

Output

Input

Output

1
0

0
1

Fig. 14.3.3 An inverter,
shown here symbolically,
produces 1 output bit
that is the inverse of its
1 input bit.

+3 V
P-channel
MOSFET
Input

Output
N-channel
MOSFET
0V

Fig. 14.3.4 When
negative charge arrives
at the input of a CMOS
inverter, its p-channel
MOSFET (top) permits
positive charge to flow to
the output. When positive
charge arrives at the input,
the n-channel MOSFET
(bottom) sends negative
charge to the output.

Input 1
Output
Input 2

Input 1 Input 2
1
1
0
0

1
0
1
0

Output
0
1
1
1

Fig. 14.3.5 The output
bit of a Not-AND or
NAND gate, shown here
symbolically, is a 1 unless
both input bits are 1s.

We’ve seen how sound information can be represented and stored as bits, so now let’s look
at how an audio player’s computer works with those bits. This digital processing is done by
electronic devices that take groups of bits as their inputs and produce new groups of bits as
their outputs. Since their output bits are related to their input bits by the rules of logic, these
electronic devices are called logic elements.
The simplest logic element is the inverter, which has only one input bit and one output
bit. Its output is the inverse of its input (Fig. 14.3.3). If an inverter’s input bit is a 1, then its
output bit is a 0, and vice versa. Inverters are used to reverse an action—turning a light on
rather than off or starting a song rather than stopping it. Inverters are also used as parts of
more complicated logic elements.
But inverters aren’t just abstract logic elements; they’re real electronic devices. They
act on electrical inputs and create electrical outputs. In an audio player’s computer, inverters and other logic elements represent input and output bits with electric charge. Positive
charge represents a 1, and negative charge represents a 0. Thus when positive charge arrives
at the input of an inverter, the inverter releases negative charge from its output.
Inverters and other logic elements are usually constructed from both n-channel and
p-channel MOSFETs. We’ve already seen that n-channel MOSFETs conduct current only
when their gates are positively charged. P-channel MOSFETs do just the reverse, conducting current only when their gates are negatively charged. The drain and source of a p-channel
MOSFET are made from p-type semiconductor, and the channel is made from n-type semiconductor. Since n-channel and p-channel MOSFETs are exact complements to one
another, logic elements built from them are called complementary MOSFET or CMOS
elements. An audio player’s computer is built almost entirely from CMOS elements.
A CMOS inverter consists of one n-channel MOSFET and one p-channel MOSFET
(Fig. 14.3.4). The n-channel MOSFET is connected to the negative terminal of the computer’s power supply and controls the flow of negative charge to the inverter’s output. The
p-channel MOSFET is connected to the power supply’s positive terminal and controls the
flow of positive charge to the output. When negative charge arrives at the inverter’s input
and moves onto the gates of the MOSFETs, only the p-channel MOSFET conducts current
and the output becomes positively charged. When positive charge arrives at the input, only
the n-channel MOSFET conducts current and the output becomes negatively charged.
A computer, however, needs logic elements that are more complicated than inverters.
One such element is the Not-AND or NAND gate. This logical element has 2 input bits and
1 output bit, and its output bit is 1 unless both input bits are 1s (Fig. 14.3.5). It’s called a
Not-AND gate because it’s the inverse of an AND gate. An AND gate produces a 0 output
unless both input bits are 1s. Simple memoryless logic elements are often called gates.
A CMOS NAND gate uses two n-channel MOSFETs and two p-channel MOSFETs
(Fig. 14.3.6). The two n-channel MOSFETs are arranged in series—one after the next—so
that current passing through one must also pass through the other. If either transistor has
negative charge on its gate, no current can flow through the series. Components arranged in
series all carry the same current, but they may experience different voltage drops.
The two p-channel MOSFETs are arranged in parallel—one beside the other—so that
current can flow through either one of them to the output. If either transistor has negative
charge on its gate, current can flow from one side of the pair to the other. Components
arranged in parallel share the current they receive through one wire and deliver it together
to the second wire. Although parallel components may share the current unevenly among
themselves, they all experience the same voltage drop.
If negative charge arrives at either input of the CMOS NAND gate, the series of n-channel MOSFETs will be nonconducting and one of the p-channel MOSFETs will deliver positive charge to the output. However, if positive charge arrives at both inputs, both p-channel
MOSFETs will be nonconducting and the series of n-channel MOSFETs will deliver negative charge to the output. Thus the CMOS NAND gate has the correct logic behavior.

Audio Players

These two logic elements, inverters and NAND gates, can be combined to produce any
conceivable logic element. For example, they can be used to build an adder, a device that
sums the numbers represented by two groups of input bits and produces a group of output
bits representing that sum. These adders can themselves be used to build multipliers, and
multipliers can be built into still more complicated devices. In this fashion, the simplest
logic elements can be used to construct an entire computer.
Actually, a computer isn’t built exclusively from NAND gates and inverters. To
improve its speed and reduce its size, it uses a few other basic logic elements as well. Like
the CMOS NAND gate and inverter, these elements are constructed directly from n-channel and p-channel MOSFETs.
All these logic elements are wired together in an intricate pattern to create a complete
computer (Fig. 14.3.7). In an audio player, this computer retrieves and organizes music
information and prepares it for the playback electronics, which are not digital. The computer’s last act is to deliver the digital music information, the air pressure measurements, to a
digital-to-analog converter, or DAC. This electronic device is the interface between the two
representations of information: digital and analog. The music information leaves the DAC
as a voltage that’s proportional to air pressure. This voltage is the input for the audio player’s main analog component, its audio amplifier. Actually, the player has two complete
analog audio systems so that it can produce stereo sound. But since those systems are
identical, we’ll focus on only one of them.
Check Your Understanding #3: Getting It Together
How could you use inverters and NAND gates to create an AND gate, a logic element that has two
inputs and one output, with the output being 1 only if both of the inputs are also 1s?
Answer: You could connect an inverter to a NAND gate so that the output signal of the NAND gate is
the input signal of the inverter. When both of the NAND gate’s input signals are 1s, it will produce
an output of 0. This 0 will arrive at the inverter, which will invert it and yield an output of 1.
Why: Connecting logic elements together one after the next is the standard method for producing
more complicated logic elements. In this case, two elements connected together produce a third.

The Audio Player’s Audio Amplifier

© Michael W. Davidson/Photo Researchers, Inc.

The fluctuating voltage provided by the audio player’s DAC is often called an audio signal
because it represents audio information. Many analog or digital representations of information are called signals, including video signals, data signals, and even turn signals. But
although the player’s audio signal contains all the information needed to reproduce the
original sound, in convenient analog format, it doesn’t have the power that the headphones
need to produce that sound at a reasonable volume. Something must first enlarge the audio
signal; it needs to be amplified.

Fig. 14.3.7 This microscope photograph
shows an integrated circuit microprocessor—
approximately a computer on a chip.
Aluminum strips connect millions of
MOSFETs and other components that have
been formed by photographic techniques on
the surface of a thin wafer of silicon.

419

+3 V
Input 1
Output
Input 2

0V
Fig. 14.3.6 A CMOS
NAND gate has two input
bits. When negative
charge arrives through
either input, the chain
of n-channel MOSFETs
(bottom) stops conducting
current and one of the two
p-channel MOSFETs (top)
permits positive charge to
reach the output. Only if
both inputs are positively
charged will negative
charge reach the output.

420

CHAPT ER 14 Optics and Electronics

Fig. 14.3.8 A simple audio amplifier can be built with one
n-channel MOSFET, two resistors, and two capacitors. A 9-V
battery powers the device.

+9 volts
50 Ω

100 kΩ

100 μF

1 μF
Output
Input

0 volt
+9 volts
50 Ω

A

0 volt
Fig. 14.3.9 The voltage at
A depends on the resistance
of the MOSFET. The lined
triangle at the bottom
signifies connection to
ground (often Earth itself).

+9 volts
50 Ω

100 kΩ

A

0 volt
Fig. 14.3.10 The 100-kΩ
resistor transfers positive
charge to the gate until the
voltage at A drops to about
5 V.

Devices that enlarge various characteristics of signals are called amplifiers. An audio
amplifier is an amplifier that’s designed to boost signals in the frequency range that we hear
or feel (20 to 20,000 Hz). It has two separate circuits—an input circuit and an output circuit—and it uses the small current passing through its input circuit to control a much larger
current passing through its output circuit. In this manner, the amplifier provides more
power to its output circuit than it receives from its input circuit. Since energy is conserved,
an amplifier needs a separate power source to provide its amplification—in this case, the
9-V battery.
Figure 14.3.8 shows the schematic diagram for a simple audio amplifier, built from the
components we’ve just studied. This amplifier has only five components: an n-channel
MOSFET, two resistors, and two capacitors. It draws power from a 9-V battery (or an
equivalent power adapter) and amplifies a tiny alternating current in its input circuit into a
large alternating current in its output circuit.
To understand how this amplifier works, let’s first remove everything but the MOSFET
and the 50-Ω resistor (Fig. 14.3.9). These two components are in series, so any current that
passes through one must also pass through the other. When the MOSFET doesn’t conduct
current, no current flows through the 50-Ω resistor and it experiences no voltage drop. So
the voltage at A is 9 V. However, if the transistor does conduct current, a voltage drop will
appear through the 50-Ω resistor and the voltage at A will decrease.
The transistor will conduct current only if positive charge is put on its gate. That can
be done by connecting the gate to A with a 100-kΩ resistor (Fig. 14.3.10). Since A is at
9 V, it is positively charged and pushes charge toward anything at lower voltage. Current
flows slowly through the resistor from A to the gate. However, as positive charge accumulates on the gate, the transistor begins to conduct current and the voltage at A drops. When
the voltage at A reaches the voltage on the gate, current stops flowing through the resistor.
The amplifier is then in a stable equilibrium; A has a voltage of approximately 5 V and
the transistor’s gate has a modest amount of charge on it. The 100-kΩ resistor provides the
transistor with feedback; that is, it provides the transistor with information about the present situation at A that the transistor can use to correct or improve that situation. Although
the feedback is slowed by the resistor’s large electrical resistance, it perpetually acts to
return the voltage at A to its equilibrium value. If the transistor conducts too little current,
charge flows onto its gate and makes it conduct more. If the transistor conducts too much
current, charge flows off its gate and makes it conduct less.
The amplifier is now exquisitely sensitive to small changes in the charge on the transistor’s gate. If you add just a tiny bit more positive charge to the gate, down goes the voltage
at A. If you remove just a tiny bit of positive charge from the gate, up goes the voltage at A.
Although current in the feedback resistor tries to undo these changes, it acts too slowly to
oppose short-timescale variations. The amplifier’s input signal successfully adds or subtracts positive charge from the gate, and the amplifier’s output signal emerges from A.

Audio Players

421

+9 volts
The amplifier has two input wires. An analog audio signal’s current flows into
the amplifier through one wire and returns through the other. However, the audio
50 Ω
signal is not connected directly to the gate. Instead, it’s connected to the gate
through a capacitor (Fig. 14.3.11). In addition to storing charge and energy, a
capacitor can transfer current between two wires that have different voltages.
100 kΩ
Such voltage flexibility is important in battery-powered audio amplifiers that must
A
do their amplifying exclusively with positive voltages. Aided by input and output
1 μF
capacitors, our audio amplifier can have an average operating voltage of about +5
V while it also has average input and output voltages of 0 V.
Input
To see how a capacitor passes along current, let’s watch input current flow current
rightward into our amplifier’s input capacitor. As that current’s positive charge
accumulates on the capacitor’s left plate, it attracts negative charge onto the capacitor’s right plate and away from the gate. The capacitor remains electrically neutral,
0 volt
but the gate becomes more positively charged. Overall, the capacitor has conveyed
Fig. 14.3.11 Because
input current to the gate even though no charge has actually passed through its insulating current flowing back and
forth through the two input
layer and its two plates remain at different voltages.
With the help of the input capacitor, the amplifier’s fluctuating input current produces wires affects the charge on
the transistor’s gate, it also
a fluctuating charge on the transistor’s gate, and the voltage at A fluctuates as a result. Even affects the voltage at A.
a tiny fluctuating current on the input wires creates a large fluctuating voltage at A.
This fluctuating voltage is responsible for sending a fluctuating current
+9 volts
through the headphones. Although headphones are not truly ohmic devices, they
respond to fluctuating voltages by carrying fluctuating currents. By applying a
50 Ω
fluctuating voltage drop across the headphone’s two wires, the amplifier can
cause it to carry a fluctuating current and produce corresponding pressure fluctu100 μF
100 kΩ
ations and sound.
However, the voltage at A averages about 5 V, while the headphones expect
1 μF
an average voltage drop of 0 V. To convey the fluctuating voltages and currents
Output
from A to the headphones, while eliminating their large voltage difference, our
current
Input
amplifier connects them via an output capacitor (Fig. 14.3.12). As before, the current
fluctuations in current and voltage on the output capacitor’s left plate are mirrored by current and voltage fluctuations on its right plate. Even though the
amplifier operates at a high average voltage, the output signal for the head0 volt
phones has an average voltage of 0 V.
Fig. 14.3.12 The
Tiny fluctuating currents in our amplifier’s input circuit produce large fluctuating cur- amplifier causes currents
rents in its output circuit. This amplifier works remarkably well, given its simplicity. If you to flow back and forth
connect a microphone to the input wires and headphones to the output wires, the head- through the two output
wires. The alternating
phones will do a surprisingly good job of reproducing the sound in the microphone.
However, our simple amplifier isn’t perfect. It distorts the sound somewhat, and it current in the output wires
is a good replica of the
doesn’t handle all frequencies or amplitudes of sound equally. It also wastes a large amount alternating current in the
of electric power heating the 50-Ω resistor. The amplifiers in audio players carefully correct input wires, only larger.
for these problems. Most use feedback to make sure that their output signals are essentially
perfect replicas of their input signals, only larger. They sense their own shortcomings and
correct for them.
Perfect replication of the input signal isn’t always desirable. Sometimes you want to
boost the volume for part of the sound. The treble and bass controls on an audio player
allow you to selectively change the loudnesses for the high- and low-frequency portions of
the sound, respectively.
An amplifier is typically rated according to the peak power it can supply to the headphones (or speakers) and its average power should never reach that value. Yet the amplifier
can reach its peak power during a passage that’s not particularly loud. That’s because sound
waves often interfere with one another (see Section 9.3 to review wave interference), and
when their crests and troughs coincide at the microphone, constructive interference can
briefly produce enormous pressure fluctuations.

422

CHAPT ER 14 Optics and Electronics

To reproduce those overlapping waves properly, the audio amplifier must be able to
provide several times its average power, though only for a moment. If the amplifier can’t
deliver that much power, the audio signal it sends to the headphones or speakers will be
distorted and the sound will be unpleasant. That’s why audiophiles often use powerful
amplifiers even when they’re playing quiet music. Most modern amplifiers are designed
cleverly so that they consume only a little more electric power than they actually need to
produce their outputs. They consume little power during quiet passages but can still provide great power during the loud moments.
As for the headphones themselves, they generally use electromagnetic effects to move
a surface back and forth in sync with the amplifier’s current fluctuations. In most cases, the
amplifier’s current is sent through a coil of wire that’s immersed in a strong magnetic field
and attached to a movable surface. This current experiences a Lorentz force due to the
magnetic field, and that force drives the current, coil, and surface back and forth as the
current fluctuates. The moving surface alternately compresses and rarefies the air, thereby
reproducing the original sound. The electric power in the circuit becomes sound power for
your ears.

Check Your Understanding #4: Sound Control
When you connect a microphone to the input of a MOSFET-based amplifier, the microphone sends
current back and forth through the input wires. As a result, charge moves onto or off what critical
control element in the amplifier?
Answer: The critical control element is the gate of a MOSFET.
Why: In all likelihood, the input current adds or removes charges from the gate of a MOSFET in the
amplifier’s first stage of amplification.

Epilogue for Chapter 14
In this chapter we looked at several common objects and studied the ways in which they
use optics. In Cameras, we saw how a converging lens can form a real image of an object
and how that real image can be used to record a scene on a piece of film or an image sensor
chip. We learned about the roles of focal length and f-number in determining the size and
brightness of the real image and explored some of the complications that must be considered when designing lenses.
In Optical Recording and Communication, we studied the ways in which sound and
other information can be represented in digital form and stored as structural features on
optical discs. We looked at how laser light is affected by various optical devices and looked
at what happens to it when it’s focused to a small spot. We learned about total internal
reflection and how this effect makes it possible to send light hundreds or thousands of
kilometers through a fiber of ultraclear glass.
In Audio Players, we looked at the electronic techniques used to represent sound and
other information in digital and analog forms. We also examined the most important
modern electronic component—the transistor, a semiconductor device that allows the
current in one circuit to control the current in another circuit. We saw how an audio
player uses transistors and other electronic components in both its digital computer and
its analog amplifier.

Explanation: Magnifying Glass Camera
The magnifying glass forms a real image of the window on the wall. All the light rays passing through the lens from one point on the window converge together to one point on the
wall. Since each point on the window illuminates one point on the wall, you see a pattern

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations

of light on the wall that looks just like the window itself. The real image on the wall, however, is flipped upside down and its sides are reversed.
Because the window is closer to the lens than any of the objects outside the window,
the real image of the window itself forms farthest from the lens. When you hold the magnifying glass so that the window appears sharp on the wall, the objects outside the window
are blurry. To bring those more distant objects into sharp focus, you must move the lens
toward the wall. Very distant objects, such as a mountain or the moon, will form sharp
images on the wall when the distance between the magnifying glass and wall is equal to the
focal length of the lens.

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Cameras Work: A camera lens projects a real image of the scene in front of the
camera onto the image sensor inside the camera. This real image is formed when the
lens bends all the light reaching it from one part of the scene onto one part of the sensor. For this imaging process to work well, the distance between the lens and the image
sensor must be adjusted so that the light converges together (focuses) just as it reaches
the sensor. If the sensor is too close to or too far from the lens, the image is blurry. The
depth of focus depends on the effective diameter of the lens—its aperture. The smaller
the lens’s aperture, the less critical the focus but the less light the lens gathers. A longfocal-length lens brings the light to a focus far behind it, forming a relatively large but
dim real image on the image sensor. To brighten this image, the long-focal-length lens
must have a large aperture so that it gathers lots of light. The f-number, the ratio of a
lens’s focal length to its aperture, characterizes the brightness of the lens’s image.
How Optical Recording and Communication Work: A CD, DVD, or Blu-ray represents
sound or video information in digital form as a pattern of pits on a thin reflective layer
inside the disc. The player uses a beam of laser light to read that pattern. As the disc
rotates, the pits pass through the focused laser beam and the amount of reflected
light fluctuates up and down. The player monitors the reflected light and uses it both
to recreate the music and to keep its optical system properly aligned. This continual
realignment allows the player to follow the spiral track of pits as the disc turns and to
keep the laser beam tightly focused on the reflective layer. The optical system, which
includes a laser diode, several photodiodes, and a variety of lenses and other optical
elements, is so well designed and executed that the spot it creates on the reflective
layer is limited in how small it can be only by diffraction effects due to the wave nature of light.
Laser light can also carry information long distances through an optical fiber. Made
from a core of extremely transparent glass that is clad in a second glass, this fiber confines light via total internal reflection. As light attempts to leave the core at a shallow
angle, it is perfectly reflected from the boundary with the cladding and continues
through the fiber for great distances.
How Audio Players Work: An audio player combines a computer and an audio amplifier
into a single unit. The player’s computer stores and retrieves the sound information in
digital form, with each air pressure measurement represented by a collection of binary
bits. These bits can take only values of 0 or 1. For long-term storage, the player places
its digital sound information in flash memory and/or magnetic disk memory. For temporary storage while playing a song or working on its song collection, it uses dynamic
memory.
After the player’s computer has manipulated that information digitally, using logic
elements built primarily from MOSFETs, it passes the digital information to a digitalto-analog converter and that information then takes analog form. This analog signal

423

424

CHAPT ER 14 Optics and Electronics

represents sound as a current that’s proportional to the sound’s shift in air pressure
away from atmospheric pressure.
The analog sound signal enters the input circuit of the player’s audio amplifier,
which makes use of MOSFETs. This amplifier uses power obtained from the battery
to produce an output signal that represents the same sound but with increased voltage
and current. This amplified output signal has enough power to produce loud sound in
the headphones.
1. Lens equation: One divided by the focal length of a lens is
equal to the sum of one divided by the object distance and one
divided by the image distance, or

1
1
1
=
+
. (14.1.1)
focal length
object distance
image distance

15

Modern Physics

n recent years, scientists have been looking deeper into the atom to see how it’s made, farther
into space to see how the universe works, and more carefully into matter and motion to see how
complicated things can be understood in terms of simple laws. Among the most important tools
that these scientists have to work with are quantum theory and the theory of relativity. This chapter
will look at some of the ways in which modern physics affects our lives.

I 

ACTIVE LEARNING
EXPERIMENTS

Radiation-Damaged Paper

One path of modern physics involves the control and use
of high-energy radiation. Although our access to most
forms of high-energy radiation is restricted, there’s one
source that anyone can use—the sun. Because the sun’s
ultraviolet light is energetic enough to damage chemical
bonds and rearrange molecules, it can provide us with a
glimpse of the effects that occur with X-rays and
beyond.
To see sun damage for yourself, expose some sheets
of colored construction paper to direct sunlight for a few
days. Cover the paper with some opaque objects such as
coins and place it outdoors. Don’t cover the paper with
glass because glass absorbs enough ultraviolet light to
slow the damage process. After a day or two, you should

find that the exposed portions of the paper have lightened;
the sun’s ultraviolet radiation has destroyed some of the
dye molecules in the paper. If you find that nothing happens, the dye is evidently robust enough to tolerate ultraviolet light for a while.
Try the experiment again with different papers and
different colors. Which papers fade fastest? Do they seem
to have a half-life? How could you tell?
This same optical bleaching appears on items that are
displayed in shop windows and on outdoor furniture. It
was once the only method people had for whitening
fabrics. The sun’s ultraviolet light also damages your skin
when you sit in the sun—a sunburn isn’t thermal damage;
it’s radiation damage.

Chapter Itinerary
used to extract nuclear energy and convert it into electric energy.
We also look at the safety and health issues relating to nuclear
energy. In Medical Imaging and Radiation, we examine highenergy radiation and see how it’s used to help rather than hurt.
We study the ways in which X-rays and gamma rays are produced

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Fortunately ultraviolet light can’t penetrate far into your body. In
Nuclear Weapons, we look at more penetrating forms of radiation. We also explore the structures of atomic nuclei and see how
taking them apart or joining them together can release enormous
amounts of energy. In Nuclear Reactors, we study the approaches

425

426

CHAPT ER 15 Modern Physics

and how they interact with the atoms and molecules in a patient.
We also look at the particle accelerators that produce highenergy particles for radiation therapy. Finally, we discuss the bases
for computed tomography (CT) imaging and magnetic resonance

SECTION 15.1

imaging (MRI), which make it possible to prepare detailed maps
of patients’ insides without ever touching their bodies. For additional preview information, see the Chapter Summary and
Important Laws and Equations at the end of the chapter.

Nuclear Weapons
Fins
Radio trigger
High explosive lens
Plutonium (239Pu) sphere

nuclear weapons release nuclear energy? Why are nuclear
weapons so difficult to build? Why do we associate uranium
and plutonium with nuclear weapons? How much uranium or
plutonium does it take to build a bomb?

Uranium (238U) sphere

The atomic bomb is one of the most remarkable and infamous
inventions of the twentieth century. It followed close on the
heels of various developments in the understanding of nature,
developments that in many ways made the invention of nuclear
weapons inevitable. By the late 1930s, scientists had discovered most of the principles behind nuclear energy and were
well aware of how those principles might be applied. The
onset of World War II prompted concern that Germany would
choose to follow the military path of nuclear energy. Propelled
by fear, curiosity, and temptation, the scientists, engineers,
and politicians of that time brought nuclear weapons into existence. The world has lived in the shadow of these terrible
devices ever since.
Questions to Think About: Where is nuclear energy stored in
the atoms? From where did this nuclear energy come? How do

Experiments to Do: Since uranium and plutonium aren’t sold
in hardware stores, you won’t be able to build your own bomb.
However, you can get a feel for the way a chain reaction works
by playing with a box of dominoes. If you stand the dominoes
on end on a level table, each of them will have extra gravitational potential energy that it can release by tipping over. If
you spread the dominoes widely about the table and then give
the table a gentle shake, they’ll tip over one by one.
However, if you pack the dominoes tightly together, so
that one falling domino can knock over others, they’ll no longer
be independent. As you jiggle the table, nothing will happen
until the first domino falls, but then many or even all of the
dominoes will tip over in quick succession. You will have created a chain reaction, where a single event triggers an everincreasing number of subsequent events. What characteristics
of the dominoes and their arrangement determine whether or
not such a chain reaction occurs? Can you envision a scenario
in which a single tipping domino could trigger the release of an
enormous amount of stored energy? Another chain reaction,
this time in the decay of atomic nuclei, is what makes nuclear
weapons possible.

Background
At the end of the nineteenth century, classical physics reigned supreme. Here classical physics means the rules of motion and gravitation identified by such people as
Galileo, Newton, and Kepler, and the rules of electricity and magnetism developed by
others, including Ampère, Coulomb, Faraday, and Maxwell. It was generally felt that
most of physics was well understood. Physicists knew all the laws governing the
behavior of objects in our universe, and all that was left to do was to apply those laws
to more and more complicated examples. It was a time when physicists didn’t know
what they didn’t know.
However, a few nagging problems remained—specific difficulties that couldn’t be
explained by the rules of classical physics. Among these were the spectrum of light emitted
by a blackbody, the photoelectric effect in which electrons are ejected from metals by light,
and the apparent absence of an ether or medium in which light traveled. At the beginning
of the twentieth century, the whole of classical physics collapsed under the weight of these
seemingly trivial difficulties, and a largely new understanding of the universe emerged. The
major advances took 25 years, from 1901 to 1926, and the time since has largely been spent
applying those new laws to more and more complicated examples.

Nuclear Weapons

427

The two main developments, both essential to the making of the atomic bomb, were
the discoveries of quantum physics and relativity. Often these are called quantum theory
and the theory of relativity. But while the word theory might imply that they’re somehow
on shaky ground, they’re not theories in the sense of hypotheses waiting to be tested. In
fact, they’ve been confirmed countless times since they were developed and have been
shown to have enormous predictive power. Rather, they’re theories in the sense of being
carefully constructed and codified rules that model the behavior of the physical universe in
which we live. Between them, these two theories made the discovery of nuclear forces and
nuclear energy unavoidable. Finally, given people’s love for gadgets and power, they also
made nuclear weapons inevitable.
Check Your Understanding #1: In Theory, It Means That . . .
If something is referred to as a theory, how likely is it to be true?
Answer: That depends completely on the theory and the extent to which it has been compared to the
real world.
Why: A great many theories have been formulated to explain the world around us. Each of these
theories is an attempt at describing some particular behavior of our universe in terms of various rules
or mechanisms. However, until a theory has been tested by comparing it carefully to the system it’s
trying to explain, you can’t tell whether it’s true or not. Some theories are eventually proven true,
others false, and many remain uncertain. The theories of relativity and quantum physics have long
since been proven true, although there is always the possibility that they may be only parts of a more
complete theory.

The Nucleus and Radioactive Decay
Though the name atomic bomb has stuck for more than half a century, the more
correct name would be nuclear bomb. The items that are responsible for the
energy released by nuclear weapons are not atoms but tiny pieces of atoms—
their nuclei (plural of nucleus). Before we can discuss nuclei, though, let’s put
them into context. Let’s start by looking at atoms.
To get an idea of just how tiny atoms are, imagine magnifying a grain of
table salt, which is 1 mm (0.04 in) on a side, until it is the size of the state of
Colorado. That grain would then appear as an orderly arrangement of spherical
particles, each about the size of a grapefruit (Fig. 15.1.1). These spherical particles would be single atoms, and there would be about 7.2 million of them
along each edge of the grain.
Table salt crystal
(Sodium chloride)
Like most solids, table salt is a crystal and its atoms are bound to one
another by their outermost components, their electrons. Electrons dominate the
Chlorine negative ion
chemistry of atoms and molecules. Sodium is a reactive metal because of its
Diameter: 1.81 x 10–10 meter
electrons, and chlorine is a reactive gas because of its electrons. When mixed,
these two chemicals react violently to form table salt and release a considerSodium positive ion
Diameter: 0.97 x 10–10 meter
able amount of light and heat. This, then, is a true “atomic bomb.”
Fig. 15.1.1 A salt crystal
Obviously, something is missing here. If a crazy person could buy a kilogram or two of sodium and a tank of chlorine from a chemical company and destroy an is an orderly array of
positively charged sodium
entire city, rural living would be a whole lot more popular. Fortunately the energy released ions and negatively charged
by chemical reactions is fairly limited. A kilogram of chemical atomic explosives just can’t chlorine ions. These ions
do that much damage. However, nuclear bombs tap an entirely different store of energy are held together by the
attractive forces between
deep within the atoms.
Although all nuclear weaponry is often attributed to Einstein’s famous equation, E = mc2, oppositely charged ions.
The ions are so small that
that notion is vastly oversimplified. Nonetheless, this equation is quite significant. As we there are about 7.2 million
noted in Section 4.2, one of Einstein’s discoveries at the beginning of the twentieth century ions on the edge of a
was that matter and energy are in some respects equivalent. In certain circumstances, mass 1-mm-wide salt crystal.

428

CHAPT ER 15 Modern Physics

Sodium nucleus
(11 protons, 12 neutrons)
Neutron
Diameter: 1 x 10–15 meter
Proton
Diameter: 1 x 10–15 meter
Fig. 15.1.2 At the center
of a sodium ion is a tiny
nucleus containing about
99.975% of the ion’s mass.
It consists of 11 positively
charged protons and 12
uncharged neutrons. The
protons repel one another
at any distance, but the
protons and neutrons are
bound together by the
highly attractive nuclear
force as long as they touch
one another.

Courtesy Lou Bloomfield

Fig. 15.1.3 This hopping
toy stores energy as its
spring is compressed and
retains that energy while
its suction cup grips its
base. When the suction
cup lets go, the toy leaps
into the air.

can become energy or energy can become mass. This equivalence is part of the theory of
relativity and has some interesting consequences. It implies that an object can reduce its
mass by transferring energy to its surroundings. Thus, if you weigh an object before and
after it undergoes some internal transformation, you can use any weight loss to determine
how much energy was released from the object by that transformation.
Because of this equivalence, mass and changes in mass can be used to locate energy
that’s hidden within normal matter. This technique is important in nuclear physics, but it
also applies to chemistry. When sodium and chlorine react to form table salt, their combined mass decreases by a tiny amount. What’s missing is some chemical potential energy,
which becomes light and heat and escapes from the mixture. In leaving, this chemical
potential energy reduces the mass of the sodium and chlorine mixture by about 1 part in 10
billion. That tiny change in mass is too small to detect with present measuring devices,
although scientists are working on techniques that will soon make it possible to measure
mass changes due to forming chemical bonds.
Electrons are, however, by far the lightest part of an atom and thus have relatively little
mass to release as energy. Most of an atom’s mass is located in its nucleus. The nucleus is
fantastically small—only a little more than 10−15 m in diameter. If you were to peer into
one of the grapefruit-size sodium ions of our giant salt crystal, you would see a tiny particle
at its center. There, just at the threshold of visibility, would be the ion’s nucleus, only 1 μm
(0.00004 in) in diameter. The remaining 99.9999999999999% of the ion is occupied only
by its 10 electrons in their orbitals.
The sodium nucleus contains 11 protons and 12 neutrons (Fig. 15.1.2). Each of these
nuclear particles, or nucleons, has about 2000 times as much mass as an electron, so
99.975% of the sodium ion’s mass is in this nucleus. Thus, while the electrons are certainly
important to chemistry and matter as we know it, their contribution to the ion’s mass is
insignificant. The ion is mostly empty space, lightly filled with fluffy electrons and having
a tiny nuclear lump at its center.
The nucleons that make up this nucleus experience two competing forces. The first of
these forces is the familiar electrostatic repulsion between like electric charges. Because
each proton in the nucleus has a single positive charge, they’re constantly trying to push
one another out of the nucleus. However, the second of these forces is attractive and holds
the nucleus together. This new force is called the nuclear force, and at short distances it
dominates the weaker electrostatic repulsion. However, the nuclear force attracts the nucleons toward one another only when they’re touching. As soon as they’re separated, they’re
on their own.
The competition between these two forces—the repulsive electrostatic force between
like charges and the attractive nuclear force between nucleons—is analogous to what happens in a familiar toy (Figs. 15.1.3 and 15.1.4). This hopping toy has a suction cup attached
to a spring, and the spring tries to separate the toy’s top from its base while the suction cup
tries to keep the two parts together. When the two parts are well separated, only the spring
exerts a force. But when the two parts touch, the suction cup begins to act and holds the two
parts together.
What makes the hopping toy exciting is that its suction cup leaks. Eventually, the
suction cup lets go and allows the spring to toss the toy into the air. Suppose, however,
that the suction cup didn’t leak. Once pushed together, the pieces would never separate
and the spring would retain its stored energy indefinitely. To get the suction cup to let go,
you would have to pull it away from the base. Only then could the spring release its
stored energy.
In effect, an energy barrier would be preventing the leak-free toy from hopping. Until
you did a little work on it by pulling the suction cup off the base, it wouldn’t be able to
release its stored energy. Another example of a system that needs energy to release energy
is a bottle of champagne, where you must push on the cork to help it out of the neck. After
that initial investment of energy, a great deal of energy is released as gas inside the bottle
blasts the cork across the room.

Nuclear Weapons

The nucleus is in a similar situation. The attractive nuclear force prevents the nucleus
from coming apart, despite the enormous amount of electrostatic potential energy it contains. The nuclear force creates an energy barrier that prevents the nucleons from separating. Unless something adds energy to the nucleus to help the nucleons break free of the
nuclear force, the nucleus will remain together forever. At least, that’s the prediction of
classical physics.
Quantum physics, however, has an important influence on the behavior of the nucleus.
One of the many peculiar effects of quantum physics is that you can never really tell exactly
where an object is located, or at least not for long. That fuzziness is a manifestation of the
Heisenberg uncertainty principle, which observes that some pairs of physical quantities,
such as position and momentum or energy and time, are not entirely independent and cannot be determined simultaneously beyond a certain accuracy. This principle is a result of
the partly wave and partly particle nature of objects in our universe (Section 13.2). Since
waves are normally broad things that occupy a region of space rather than a single point,
objects in our universe normally don’t have exact locations.
The smaller an object’s mass, the fuzzier it is and the more uncertain its location.
Although the fuzzy nucleons in a nucleus will normally stay in contact with one another for
an extremely long time, there’s always a tiny chance that they’ll find themselves temporarily separated by a distance that’s beyond the reach of the nuclear force. The nucleons will
then suddenly be free of one another, and electrostatic repulsion will push them apart in a
process called radioactive decay. The quantum process that allows the nucleons to escape
from the nuclear force without first obtaining the energy needed to surmount the energy
barrier is called tunneling because the nucleons effectively tunnel through the barrier. We
first encountered quantum tunneling in Section 14.3, when we saw that erasing flash memory requires that electrons tunnel through an insulating barrier.
Natural radioactive decay is a perfectly random process. Although half of a large population of identical radioactive nuclei will decay in a certain amount of time, you absolutely cannot predict in advance which of the original nuclei will have survived. Because of
this randomness, radioactive decay is characterized simply by a half-life, the time required
for half of the nuclei to decay. After one half-life, only half the original nuclei will remain
intact. If you wait a second half-life, only a quarter of the original nuclei will remain (half
of the remaining half). After a third half-life, only an eighth will remain (half of the remaining half of a half). And so on.
This halving of the population with each additional half-life is a type of exponential
decay. In general, the fraction of nuclei remaining after a given amount of time is one-half
raised to the power of the time divided by the half-life. Written as a word equation, that
relationship is:
elapsed time∕half-life

1
fraction remaining = ( )
2

(15.1.1)

in symbols:
t /T1/ 2

N
1
=( )
N0
2
and in everyday language:

Radioactivity goes away, but you have to wait it out.
Although most radioactive nuclei have short half-lives and don’t linger long in our
environment, there are a few with half-lives of billions of years. It is those long-lived radioactive nuclei, particularly uranium and thorium nuclei, that have survived since the formation of Earth, remain abundant in nature, and gave rise to nuclear weapons.

429

Top

Suction
cup

Spring

Base
Hopping toy with
suction cup released
Top

Suction
cup

Spring
Base

Hopping toy with
suction cup holding
Fig. 15.1.4 A spring and
a suction cup combine
to form a toy that hops
suddenly after a long
wait. The spring tries to
separate the top from the
base, while the suction cup
tries to hold the two parts
together. Energy you store
in the spring is released
when the leaking suction
cup eventually allows the
spring to expand.

430

CHAPT ER 15 Modern Physics

Check Your Understanding #2: Who Hid the Energy?
When a large nucleus breaks apart into fragments, it releases a great deal of energy. In what form was
that energy stored in the intact nucleus?
Answer: It was stored as electrostatic potential energy in the repulsion between protons.
Why: Although it is routinely called nuclear energy, much of the energy stored in radioactive nuclei
is actually electrostatic potential energy. Assembling a giant nucleus out of positively charged particles requires a considerable amount of work against electrostatic forces, and it is that stored work
that’s released when the nucleus decays.

Check Your Figures #1: A Real Hand-Me-Down
A small fraction of the carbon found in Earth’s atmosphere is carbon 14, a rare, radioactive form that’s
synthesized by cosmic rays and has a half-life of 5730 years. While plants and animals are alive, they
incorporate carbon 14 into their tissues along with ordinary carbon. Once they die, the fraction of
carbon 14 in their tissues begins to decrease as the carbon 14 nuclei decay. If you are a museum
curator and someone donates a garment that is supposed to be 1001 years old, what fraction of the
original carbon 14 should you expect to find in that garment when you examine its carbon content?
Answer: The fraction of the original carbon 14 that remains should be about 0.886.
Why: According to Eq. 15.1.1, the fraction of carbon 14 nuclei remaining after 1001 years should be
1001 years∕5730 years

1
fraction remaining = ( )
2

0.1747

1
=( )
2

= 0.886

If you find that fraction of carbon 14 when you test the garment, that indicates that the fibers in the
garment come from plants or animals that died approximately 1001 years ago, although you can’t tell
exactly when the fabric itself was woven. If you find a larger fraction, that proves that the garment is
less than 1001 years old.

Fission and Fusion
The more protons there are in a nucleus, the more they repel one another and the more
likely they are to cause radioactive decay. Adding additional neutrons to the nucleus reduces
this proton-proton repulsion by increasing the size of the nucleus without adding to its
positive charge. However, adding too many neutrons also destabilizes the nucleus for reasons that we’ll discuss in Section 15.3. Thus, constructing a stable nucleus is a delicate
balancing act.
In nuclei with only a few protons, the attractive nuclear force wins big over the repulsive electrostatic force and the nucleons stick like crazy. These nuclei resemble hopping
toys with weak springs and big suction cups; once brought together, the pieces never come
apart. In fact, the average binding energy of the nucleons (the energy required to separate
them from one another divided by the number of nucleons) would increase if these nuclei
had even more protons and neutrons.
In nuclei with many protons, the electrostatic repulsion is so severe that the nuclear
force can’t hold the nucleons together for long. These nuclei decay rapidly. They resemble
hopping toys with strong springs and small suction cups. The average binding energy of the
nucleons would increase if these nuclei had fewer protons and neutrons.
In nuclei with roughly 26 protons, in between the two extremes we’ve just considered,
the attractive nuclear force and repulsive electrostatic force are nicely balanced. These
nuclei are extremely stable, and you can’t increase the average binding energy of their
nucleons by adding or subtracting nucleons. Smaller nuclei can release potential energy by
growing to reach this intermediate size, while larger nuclei can release potential energy by
shrinking toward the same goal.

Nuclear Weapons

431

Fission
For a small nucleus to grow, something must push more nucleons
fragments
toward it. Electrostatic repulsion will initially oppose this growth, but once
everything touches, the nuclear force will bind the particles together and
release a large amount of potential energy. This coalescence process is
90Rb
called nuclear fusion.
For a large nucleus to shrink, something must separate its pieces Incoming
beyond the reach of the nuclear force. Electrostatic repulsion will then neutron
push the fragments apart and release a large amount of potential energy.
Free
neutrons
This fragmentation process is called nuclear fission.
The energies released when small nuclei undergo fusion or when large
235U
nuclei undergo fission are enormous compared to chemical energies. Uranium, a large nucleus, converts about 0.1% of its mass into energy when it
breaks apart. Hydrogen, a tiny nucleus, converts about 0.3% of its mass
into energy when it fuses with other hydrogen nuclei. Kilogram for kilo143Cs
gram, nuclear reactions release about 10 million times more energy than
= Proton
chemical reactions. Fortunately, they’re much harder to start.
With that scientific background, let’s follow a sequence of discover= Neutron
ies near the start of the twentieth century. Natural radioactive decay was
Fig. 15.1.5 When a
discovered accidentally by French physicist Antoine-Henri Becquerel
(1852–1908) in 1896. Intrigued by the recent discovery of X-rays, he began looking for neutron strikes a uranium
nucleus, there’s a good
materials that might emit X-rays after exposure to light. To his surprise, he found that chance that the nucleus will
uranium fogged photographic plates, even through an opaque shield and even without fall apart into fragments.
exposure to light. His discovery was soon confirmed and elaborated on by Polish-born This process is called
French physicist Marie Curie (1867–1934) and French chemist Pierre Curie (1859– induced fission. Among the
1906). This wife and husband team discovered several new radioactive elements, includ- fragments of induced fission
are other neutrons.
ing polonium (named after Marie’s homeland) and radium.
In 1911, British physicist Ernest Rutherford (1871–1937) discovered that atoms have
nuclei. He subsequently found that nuclei sometimes shatter when struck by energetic helium
nuclei. In 1932, British physicist James Chadwick (1891–1974) discovered a fragment of the
nucleus, the neutron, that has no electric charge and can thus approach a nucleus without any
electrostatic repulsion. It was soon discovered that neutrons stick to the nuclei of many atoms.
The crucial discovery that made the atomic bomb possible was neutron-induced fission of nuclei. In 1934, Italian physicist Enrico Fermi (1901–1954) and his colleagues were
trying to solve a particular riddle about the nucleus, a radioactive decay process called beta
decay. They were adding neutrons to the nuclei of every atom they could get hold of. When
they added neutrons to uranium, with its huge nucleus, they observed the production of
some very short-lived radioactive systems. They thought that they had formed ultraheavy
nuclei and even went so far as to give these new elements tentative names.
Four years later, however, Austrian physicists Lise Meitner (1878–1968) and Otto
Frisch (1904–1979) and German chemists Otto Hahn (1879–1968) and Fritz Strassmann
(1902–1980) collectively showed 1 that what Fermi’s group had actually done was to
fragment uranium into lighter nuclei (Fig. 15.1.5). Many of the fragments created by this
induced fission were neutrons, which could themselves cause the destruction of other uranium nuclei.

Check Your Understanding #3: A Sticky Nuclear Problem
If you take two intermediate-size nuclei and combine them to make a single uranium nucleus, will
the process release or consume energy?
Answer: It will consume energy.
Why: To merge two smaller nuclei and form a uranium nucleus, you will have to push the two together
with considerable force because they contain many protons. You will have to do considerable work to
bring these nuclei close enough for the nuclear force to bind them. The energy you invested in this
new nucleus is the same energy that is released when it undergoes fission.

432

CHAPT ER 15 Modern Physics

1 Austrian-born physicist
Lise Meitner moved to
Berlin in 1907 and soon
began a 30-year collaboration with chemist Otto
Hahn. In 1934, she
convinced Hahn to join
her in studying nuclear
processes, and they made
great progress. Unfortunately, Meitner’s Jewish
ancestry made her a target
of Nazi academic
restriction and she fled to
Sweden in 1938. Meitner
continued to guide their
collaboration through
letters. Only months after
she left, Hahn and his
assistant Fritz Strassmann
found that neutron
irradiation of heavy
elements was creating
smaller rather than larger
nuclei. Meitner and her
nephew Otto Frisch soon
developed a model of
nuclear fission based on
these measurements.
Hahn, however, published
the results without
Meitner’s name on the
paper, ostensibly to avoid
Nazi interference. As a
result of this omission, the
1944 Nobel Prize in
Chemistry was awarded to
Hahn alone. Hahn went
on to claim that Meitner
was simply his assistant,
rather than the leader of
their joint effort. In
recognition of this gross
injustice, element 109 was
named meitnerium in
1994.

96Y

235U
98Zr

Incoming
neutron

144La
235U

137I

92Kr

89Br
141Xe
235U

235U
92Sr

135Te

141Ba
91Rb

235U
142Cs

235U

Fig. 15.1.6 A chain reaction occurs when the fragments of one fissioning nucleus induce fission in
at least one additional nucleus. Such a chain reaction is particularly easy in 235U, the light isotope of
uranium, where each fissioning nucleus releases an average of 2.5 neutrons.

Chain Reactions and the Fission Bomb
Physicists quickly realized that a chain reaction was possible, a reaction in which the fission of one uranium nucleus would induce fission in two nearby uranium nuclei, which
would in turn induce fission in four other uranium nuclei, and so on (Fig. 15.1.6). The result
would be a catastrophic nuclear process in which many or even most of the nuclei in a piece
of uranium would shatter and release fantastic amounts of energy.
In a sense, the remaining work toward both the atomic bomb and the hydrogen bomb
was a matter of technical details. Only four conditions had to be satisfied for an atomic or
fission bomb to be possible:
1. A source of neutrons had to exist in the bomb to trigger the explosion.
2. The nuclei making up the bomb had to be fissionable; that is, they had to fission
when hit by a neutron.
3. Each induced fission had to produce more neutrons than it consumed.
4. The bomb had to use the released neutrons efficiently so that each fission induced
an average of more than one subsequent fission.
Meeting the first condition was easy. Many radioactive elements emit neutrons. Meeting the
second and third conditions was more difficult. Here is where uranium fit into the picture. It
was known to be fissionable, and it was known to release more neutrons than it consumed.
However, not all uranium nuclei are the same. Although a uranium nucleus must contain 92 protons, so that it forms a neutral atom with 92 electrons and has all the chemical
characteristics of uranium (U in Fig. 13.2.5), the number of neutrons in that nucleus is
somewhat flexible. Nuclei that differ only in the numbers of neutrons they contain are
called isotopes, and natural uranium nuclei come in two isotopes: 235U and 238U, where the
number specifies how many nucleons are in each nucleus. The 235U nucleus contains 92
protons and 143 neutrons, for a total of 235 nucleons. In contrast, the 238U nucleus contains
238 nucleons: 92 protons and 146 neutrons.

Nuclear Weapons

It turns out that only 235U is suitable for a bomb. It’s marginally stable, with too many
protons for the nuclear force to keep together, even with the diluting effects of 143 neutrons. Like many proton-rich nuclei, 235U eventually undergoes alpha decay; it emits a
helium nucleus (4He) and thereby loses two protons and two neutrons. 235U has a radioactive half-life of 710 million years. However, when struck by a neutron, 235U shatters immediately into fragments, and this induced fission releases about 2.5 neutrons.
238
U is slightly more stable than the lighter isotope, and its half-life is 4.51 billion years.
238
The U nucleus absorbs most neutrons without undergoing fission. Instead, it undergoes a
series of complicated nuclear changes that eventually convert it into plutonium, an element
not found in nature. It becomes 239Pu, which has a nucleus with 94 protons and 145 neutrons.
As we’ll see later on, plutonium itself is useful for making nuclear weapons.
Thus 238U actually slows a chain reaction rather than encouraging it. Since only 235U can
support a chain reaction, natural uranium has to be separated before it can be used in a bomb.
235
U is quite rare, however. Earth’s store of uranium nuclei was created long ago, in the explosion of a dying star. That supernova heated the nuclei of smaller atoms so hot that they collided together and stuck. Uranium nuclei were formed, with the supernova’s energy trapped
inside them. They were incorporated in the Earth during its formation about 4 or 5 billion
years ago and have been decaying ever since. The only uranium isotopes that remain in any
quantity are 235U and 238U. Since 235U is less stable, its percentage of the naturally occurring
uranium nuclei has dwindled to only 0.72%. The remaining 99+% of the uranium is 238U.
Separating 235U from 238U is extremely difficult. Since atoms containing these two
nuclei differ only in mass, not in chemistry, they can be separated only by methods that
compare their masses. Because the mass difference is relatively small, heroic measures are
needed to extract 235U from natural uranium. During World War II and the Cold War era,
the U.S. government developed enormous facilities for separating the two uranium isotopes. The need for such installations is one of the major obstacles to the proliferation of
nuclear weapons.
The last condition for sustaining a chain reaction is that the bomb must use neutrons
efficiently, so that each fission induces an average of more than one subsequent fission.
That means that the bomb’s contents can’t absorb neutrons wastefully and that it can’t let
too many of them escape without causing fission. A lump of relatively pure 235U wouldn’t
absorb neutrons wastefully, but it might allow too many of them to escape through its surface. For a chain reaction to occur, the lump must be large enough that each neutron has a
good chance of hitting another nucleus before it leaves the lump. The lump also should
have a minimal amount of surface. It should be a sphere.
How large must that sphere be? Since atoms are mostly empty space, a neutron can
travel several centimeters through a lump of uranium without hitting a nucleus. Thus a golf
ball–size sphere of uranium would allow too many neutrons to escape. For a bare sphere of
235
U, the critical mass required to initiate a chain reaction is about 52 kg (115 lbm), a ball
about 17 cm (7 in) in diameter. At that point, each fission will induce an average of one
subsequent fission. For an explosive chain reaction, in which each fission induces an average of much more than one fission, additional 235U is needed—a supercritical mass. About
60 kg (132 lbm) will do it.
By 1945, the scientists and engineers of the Manhattan Project had found ways to meet
these four conditions and were prepared to initiate an explosive chain reaction. They had
accumulated enough 235U to construct a supercritical mass. Carefully machined pieces of
235
U would be put into the bomb so that they would join together at the moment the bomb
was to explode. When the critical mass was reached, a few initial neutrons would start the
chain reaction. When the uranium became supercritical, catastrophic fission would quickly
turn it into a tremendous fireball.
However, assembly was tricky. The supercritical mass had to be completely assembled
before the chain reaction was too far along; otherwise the bomb would begin to overheat
and explode before enough of its nuclei had time to fission. In pure 235U, the time it takes for
one fission to induce the next fission is only about 10 ns (10 nanoseconds or 10 billionths of

433

© Gamma-Keystone/Getty
Images, Inc.

CHAPT ER 15 Modern Physics

© JT Vintage/Glasshouse/
Aurora Photos, Inc.

434

Fig. 15.1.7 The Little Boy (a) used a cannon to fire a cylinder of uranium into an incomplete sphere
of uranium. The Fat Man (b) used high explosives to crush a sphere of plutonium to extreme density.
Little Boy destroyed Hiroshima, and Fat Man destroyed Nagasaki.

a second). In a supercritical mass, each generation of fissions is much larger
than the previous generation, so it takes only a few dozen generations to shatter
Cannon
a significant fraction of the uranium nuclei. The whole explosive chain reaction
is over in less than a millionth of a second, with most of the energy released in
235U
the last few generations (about 30 ns).
High
To make sure that the assembly was complete before the bomb exploded, it
explosives
had
to
be done extraordinarily quickly. For the 235U bomb called “Little Boy”
Steel and tungsten
(Fig. 15.1.7a) that was exploded over Hiroshima, Japan, on August 6, 1945, at
carbide tamper
8:15 am and was responsible for the deaths of about 200,000 Japanese citizens,
Fig. 15.1.8 The concept
the
supercritical
mass was assembled when a cannon fired a cylinder of 235U through a hole
behind Little Boy was
235
235
in a sphere of U (Fig. 15.1.8). When the cylinder was centered in the hole, it completed
simple. A sphere of
U
was divided into two
a 60-kg sphere of uranium, housed in a tungsten carbide and steel container. This container
parts so that neither
confined the uranium, holding it together with its inertia as the explosion began. An explowas a critical mass on
sive chain reaction started immediately, and by the time the uranium blew itself apart, 1.3%
its own. One part was a
of the 235U nuclei had fissioned. The energy released in that event was equal to the explohollow sphere, and the
sion of about 15,000 tons of TNT.
other part was a cylinder
that would complete that
But Little Boy was actually the second nuclear explosion. Its concept was so foolproof
sphere. When the bomb
and its 235U so precious that Little Boy was dropped without ever being tested. However,
was detonated, a cannon
the Manhattan Project had also developed a plutonium-based bomb that involved a much
fired the cylinder into the
more sophisticated concept. This bomb was much less certain to work, so it was tested once
hollow sphere, creating
before it was used.
a supercritical mass and
initiating an explosive
“The Gadget,” as the first atomic bomb was called, didn’t use 235U. Instead, it used
chain reaction.
plutonium that had been synthesized from 238U in nuclear reactors. A nuclear reactor carries out a controlled chain reaction in uranium, and neutrons from this chain reaction can
convert 238U into 239Pu.
Like 235U, 239Pu meets the conditions for a bomb. The 239Pu nucleus is relatively unstable, with a half-life of only 24,400 years. It fissions easily when struck by a neutron and
releases an average of three neutrons when it does. Thus 239Pu can be used in a chain reaction. For a bare sphere of 239Pu, the critical mass is about 10 kg (22 lbm)—a ball about
10 cm (4 in) in diameter.
There is a problem with 239Pu, however. It’s so radioactive and releases so many neutrons when it fissions that a chain reaction develops almost instantly. There is much less
time to assemble a supercritical mass of plutonium than there is with uranium. The cannon
assembly method won’t work because the plutonium will overheat and blow itself apart
before the cylinder can fully enter the sphere.
Thus a much more sophisticated assembly scheme was employed for the Gadget. At
5:29 am on June 16, 1945, over 2000 kg (4400 lbm) of carefully designed high explosives
crushed or imploded a sphere of plutonium (Fig. 15.1.9) inside The Gadget (Fig. 15.1.10)
at Alamogordo, New Mexico. By itself, the 6.1-kg (13.4-lbm) sphere wasn’t large enough
to be a critical mass; it was a subcritical mass. However, it was surrounded by a tamper of
238
U whose massive nuclei reflected many neutrons back into the plutonium like marbles
235U

Nuclear Weapons
© Sueddeutsche Zeitung Photo/The Image Works

Fig. 15.1.9 The first atomic bomb,
nicknamed “The Gadget,” was
detonated on a tower at a remote
desert site near Alamogordo, New
Mexico, on June 16, 1945. Here
employees of the top-secret Manhattan
Project are seen hoisting parts of the
plutonium bomb onto the tower before
the explosion.

bouncing off bowling balls. The implosion process compressed the plutonium well beyond
its normal density. With the plutonium nuclei packed more tightly together, they were more
likely to be struck by neutrons and undergo fission.
The scheme worked. The chain reaction that followed caused 17% of the plutonium
nuclei to fission and released energy equivalent to the explosion of about 22,000 tons of
TNT. The tower and equipment at the Trinity test site disappeared into vapor, and the desert
sands turned to glass for hundreds of meters in all directions. A nearly identical device
named “Fat Man” (Fig. 15.1.7b) was dropped over Nagasaki, Japan, on August 9, 1945, at
11:02 am, where it ultimately killed about 140,000 people.
In the years following the first fission bombs, development focused on how best to
bring the fissionable material together. The longer a supercritical mass could be held
together before it overheated and exploded, the larger would be the fraction of its nuclei
that would fission and the greater the explosive yield. The crushing technique of The Gadget and Fat Man became the standard, and bombs grew smaller and more efficient at using
their nuclear fuel. The implosion process reduced the amount of plutonium needed to reach
a supercritical mass, so very small fission bombs were possible. The smallest atomic bomb,
the “Davy Crockett,” weighed only about 220 N (50 lbf).

Check Your Understanding #4: Tickling the Dragon’s Tail
What would happen if you slowly moved two 30-kg (66-lbm) hemispheres of 235U together to form a
single sphere?
Answer: Before they actually touched, a chain reaction would occur.
Why: As soon as the hemispheres became close enough that each fission began to induce an average
of one subsequent fission, a chain reaction would occur. You would have assembled a critical mass.
The hemispheres would begin to get hotter and hotter and would eventually melt or explode. Because
they would blow apart before most of the nuclei could fission, any explosion would be rather small.
But you would suffer severe radiation injury. Just such an accident killed Louis Slotin during the
Manhattan Project.

The Fusion or Hydrogen Bomb
Since fissionable material begins to explode as soon as it exceeds critical mass, this critical
mass limits the size and potential explosive yield of a fission bomb. In search of a way
around this limit, bomb scientists took a look back at small nuclei and figured out how to
extract energy by sticking them together.
The fission bomb brought to Earth, for the first time, temperatures that had previously been observed only in stars. Stars obtain most of their energy by fusing hydrogen

High
explosives

435

238U

239Pu

Fig. 15.1.10 The concept
used in The Gadget and
Fat Man was relatively
sophisticated. Carefully
shaped high explosives
crushed a baseball-sized
sphere of 239Pu inside a
neutron-reflecting shell
of 238U. The plutonium
was compressed to high
density and quickly reached
supercritical mass, initiating
an explosive chain reaction.

436

CHAPT ER 15 Modern Physics

nuclei together to form helium nuclei, a process that releases a great deal of
energy. Because hydrogen nuclei are protons and repel one another with tremendous forces, hydrogen doesn’t normally undergo fusion here on Earth.
To cause fusion, something must bring those protons close enough for the
nuclear force to stick them together. The only practical way we know of to
bring the nuclei together is to heat them so hot that they crash into each
other. That is what happens in a fusion bomb, also called a thermonuclear or
hydrogen bomb.
Deuterium,
In a fusion bomb, an exploding fission bomb heats a quantity of hydrotritium,
or lithium deuteride
gen to about 100 million degrees Celsius (Fig. 15.1.11). At that temperature, hydrogen nuclei begin to collide with one another. To ease the nuclear
fusion processes, heavy isotopes of hydrogen are used: deuterium (2H) and
tritium (3H). While the normal hydrogen nucleus (1H) contains only a proHigh
ton, the deuterium nucleus contains a proton and a neutron. The tritium
explosives 238U
nucleus contains a proton and two neutrons. When a deuterium nucleus collides with a tritium nucleus, they stick to form a helium nucleus (4He) and a
free neutron. Because this process converts about 0.3% of the original mass
239Pu
into energy, the helium nucleus and the neutron fly away from one another
at enormous speeds.
Since hydrogen won’t explode spontaneously, even in huge quantities,
a hydrogen bomb can be extremely large. A fission bomb is used to set it off,
238U
but after that, the sky’s the limit. Some enormous fusion bombs were constructed and tested during the early days of the Cold War. These bombs
usually consisted of a fission starter and a hydrogen follower, all wrapped
up in a tamper of 238U. The tamper confined the hydrogen as the fusion
Fig. 15.1.11 A fusion
began. Once fusion was underway, converting deuterium and tritium into
bomb releases energy by
helium
and
neutrons,
the neutrons collided with 238U nuclei in the tamper. These fusion
fusing deuterium (2H) and
neutrons were so energetic that they were able to induce fissions even in 238U nuclei and
tritium (3H) nuclei together
release still more energy. Overall, this structure is sometimes called a fission–fusion–
to form helium (4He) and
fission bomb.
neutrons. This fusion is
initiated by heating the
A variation on this bomb is the so-called neutron or enhanced radiation bomb.
hydrogen to more than
That bomb has no 238U tamper, so the energetic neutrons from the fusion process travel
100 million degrees Celsius
out of the explosion and irradiate everything in the vicinity. This bomb is lethal to
with a fission bomb. Highhumans, but because its blast is relatively weak, it is not particularly destructive to
energy neutrons released
property.
by the fusion process then
induce fission in the 238U
Tritium is a radioactive isotope created in nuclear reactors. It has too many neutrons to
tamper, releasing still
be a stable nucleus and slowly decays into a light isotope of helium (3He). Because tritium
more energy. Lithium
has a half-life of 12.3 years, fusion bombs containing tritium require periodic maintenance
(6Li) produces tritium when
to replenish their tritium.
exposed to neutrons.
Many fusion bombs use solid lithium deuteride instead of deuterium and tritium gases.
Lithium deuteride is a salt containing lithium (6Li) and deuterium (2H). When a neutron
from the fission starter collides with a 6Li nucleus, the two fragment into a helium nucleus
(4He) and a tritium nucleus (3H). In the bomb, lithium deuteride is quickly converted into a
mixture of deuterium, tritium, and helium, which then undergoes fusion.

Check Your Understanding #5: It’s Hard to Get Together
Why must hydrogen be heated to an extremely high temperature to initiate fusion?
Answer: The protons in hydrogen nuclei repel one another quite strongly at short distances. They
must be moving very quickly with lots of thermal energy for them to touch.
Why: In a gas, thermal energy takes the form of kinetic energy. The hotter the gas, the faster the
particles are moving. At 100 million degrees Celsius, the hydrogen nuclei are moving so fast that
they can overcome their electrostatic repulsion and touch. When they do, the nuclear force pulls
them together and they fuse.

Nuclear Weapons

Heat, Radiation, and Fallout
Once a nuclear weapon has exploded—after its fissionable material has fissioned and its
fusible material has fused—what then? First, a vast number of nuclei and subatomic particles emerge from the explosion at enormous speeds, many at nearly the speed of light.
These particles crash into nearby atoms and molecules, heating them to fantastic temperatures and producing a local fireball around the bomb itself. They also cause extensive radiation damage in the surrounding area.
Second, a flash of light emerges from the explosion, caused partly by the fission and
fusion processes themselves and partly by the ultrahot fireball that follows. This light is not
only visible light, but also every portion of the electromagnetic spectrum from infrared to
visible to ultraviolet to X-rays to gamma rays. It burns things nearby, inside and out.
Third, the explosion creates a huge pressure surge in the air around the fireball. A
shock wave propagates outward from the fireball at the speed of sound, knocking over
everything in its path for a considerable distance. Fourth, the rarefied and superheated air
rushes upward, lifted by buoyant forces, to create a towering mushroom cloud.
However, the most insidious aftereffect of a nuclear explosion is fallout, the creation
and release of radioactive nuclei. Fission converts uranium and plutonium nuclei into
smaller nuclei. Each new nucleus has several dozen protons and its share of neutrons from
the nucleus that fissioned. These new nuclei attract electrons and become seemingly normal atoms like iodine or cobalt. But while large nuclei such as uranium need extra neutrons
to dilute their protons and reduce their electrostatic repulsions, intermediate and small
nuclei like those of iodine and cobalt don’t need as many neutrons. The new nuclei wind up
with too many neutrons and are radioactive. They have half-lives that are anywhere from
thousandths of a second to thousands of years.
Until they decay, the atoms that contain these nuclei are almost indistinguishable from
normal atoms. They are radioactive isotopes of common atoms, and our bodies naively incorporate them into our tissues. There they sit, performing whatever chemical tasks our bodies require
of them. Eventually, however, these radioactive atoms fall apart and release nuclear energy.
Because each radioactive decay that occurs near us or inside us releases perhaps a million times
more energy than is present in a chemical bond, these decays cause chemical changes in our
cells. They can kill cells or damage the cells’ genetic information, potentially causing cancer.
This transmutation of elements, the restructuring of nuclei to transform atoms of one
element into another, occurs in an uncontrolled fashion in nuclear weapons and produces a
lethal mix of unstable isotopes. Those isotopes take years to decay out of the environment,
and all anyone can do is wait. Even nuclear weapons with poor explosive yields, so-called
dirty bombs, can litter the surrounding landscape with radioactive debris. Nuclear reactors
produce similar mixtures of radioactive isotopes in their fuel assemblies and core structures, which is why disposing of spent nuclear fuel remains so problematic.
On the other hand, radioactive isotopes have been a boon to medicine and biochemistry, where many of them have found valuable and life-saving applications. Moreover, in
controlled circumstances, elements can be transmuted systematically to generate primarily
desirable isotopes rather than a random assortment. Such transmutation is difficult and
expensive, and it involves nuclear rather than chemical processes. Although the alchemists’
dream of transmuting lead into gold is finally possible, it’s not a path to riches.
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS: Radiation and Radioactivity
Misconception: When a material such as food is exposed to microwave, radio wave, infrared, or
ultraviolet radiation, it may become radioactive.
Resolution: To render a material radioactive, something must alter its nuclei so that they are no
longer stable. Such an alteration requires vastly more energy than one of those low-energy photons can provide. The only forms of electromagnetic radiation with enough energy per photon to
affect nuclei are gamma rays and, occasionally, X-rays.

437

438

CHAPT ER 15 Modern Physics

Check Your Understanding #6: Not So Good to Eat
Normal iodine (127I) is stable forever. But the fission product 131I is radioactive and has a half-life of
about 8 days. What are the consequences of eating 131I?
Answer: The 131I is incorporated into your body and exposes you to radiation, particularly during the
first few weeks before most of it has decayed away.
Why: Your body can’t distinguish 127I from 131I because they’re chemically identical. Since your body
uses iodine in its functions, any 131I that you ingest is likely to become part of your body’s iodine
supply. Over the next 8 days, about half of this iodine will decay and expose you to radiation. The
remaining 131I is also radioactive, and half of this amount will decay in the next 8 days. Thus after
16 days, only one-quarter of the original amount will remain. After 24 days, only one-eighth will
remain. And so on.

Nuclear Reactors

SECTION 15.2

Concrete
containment
building

power remains an elusive goal, but efforts continue to harness this form of nuclear energy as well. Competing concerns about nuclear safety, nuclear weapons proliferation,
and climate change will no doubt influence the future of
these technologies.

Control rods
Fuel rods
Reactor core
Electric motor
Coolant pump

Steam-powered
electric generators

Heat
exchanger

Steam
Feedwater

Making weapons weren’t the only possibilities open to
nuclear scientists and engineers at the end of the 1930s.
While nuclear fission chain reactions and thermonuclear
fusion were clearly ways to unleash phenomenal destructive
energy, they could also provide virtually limitless sources of
useful energy. By controlling the same nuclear reactions
that occur in nuclear weapons, people have since managed
to extract nuclear energy for constructive uses. In the half
century since their conception, nuclear fission reactors
have developed into a fairly mature technology and have
become one of our major sources of energy. Nuclear fusion

Questions to Think About: Why doesn’t a nuclear reactor
explode once it reaches a critical mass? How is the energy
released in a nuclear reactor turned into electricity? What
caused the famous accidents at Three Mile Island, Chernobyl,
and Fukushima Daiichi? How can hydrogen fusion be initiated
in a container? How is hydrogen held together at the temperatures needed for fusion?
Experiments to Do: A nuclear reactor operates very close to
critical mass. Below critical mass, each spontaneous fission
induces a limited number of subsequent fissions. Above critical mass, the number of subsequent fissions becomes unlimited. A similar effect occurs in a sand pile as it becomes
steeper. If you pour sand slowly onto the pile, its shape will
change and its steepness will increase. Initially, the grains will
stay where they land, but once the pile becomes quite steep,
they will begin to roll down the pile’s sides. If the pile becomes
too steep, a single grain of sand can trigger an avalanche. That
same behavior occurs in a reactor that’s near critical mass—a
single spontaneous fission can trigger an enormous number of
subsequent fissions.

Nuclear Fission Reactors
Assembling a critical mass of uranium doesn’t always cause a nuclear explosion. In fact,
it’s rather hard to cause a big explosion. The designers of the atomic bomb had to assemble
not just a critical mass but a supercritical mass, and they had to do it in much less than a
millionth of a second. That rapid assembly is not something that happens easily or by accident. It’s much easier to reach a critical mass slowly, in which case the uranium will simply
become very hot. It may ultimately explode from overheating, but it will not vaporize
everything in sight.

Nuclear Reactors

This slow assembly of a critical mass is the basis for nuclear fission reactors. Their
principal product is heat, which is usually used to generate electricity. Fission reactors are
much simpler to build and operate than fission bombs because they don’t require such
purified fissionable materials. In fact, with the help of some clever tricks, nuclear reactors
can be made to operate even with natural uranium.
Let’s begin by showing that a fission chain reaction doesn’t always lead to an explosion. What’s important is just how fast the fission rate increases. In an atomic bomb, it
increases breathtakingly quickly. At detonation, the fissionable material is far above the
critical mass, so the average fission induces not just one but perhaps two subsequent fissions. With only about 10 ns (10 nanoseconds) between one fission and the two it induces,
the fission rate may double every 10 ns. In less than a millionth of a second, most of the
nuclei in the material undergo fission, releasing their energy before the material has time
to blow apart.
However, things aren’t as dramatic right at critical mass, where the average fission
induces just one subsequent fission. Since each generation of fissions simply reproduces
itself, the fission rate remains essentially constant. Only spontaneous fissions cause it to
rise at all. The fissionable material steadily releases thermal energy, and that energy can be
used to power an electric generator.
A nuclear reactor contains a core of fissionable material. Because of the way in
which this core is assembled, it’s very close to a critical mass. Several neutronabsorbing rods, called control rods, which are inserted into the reactor’s core, determine whether it’s above or below critical mass. Pulling the control rods out of the core
increases the chance that each neutron will induce a fission and moves the core toward
supercriticality. Dropping the control rods into the core increases the chance that each
neutron will be absorbed before it can induce a fission and moves the core toward
subcriticality.
A nuclear reactor uses feedback to maintain the fission rate at the desired level. If the
fission rate becomes too low, the control system slowly pulls the control rods out of the
core to increase the fission rate. If the fission rate becomes too high, the control system
drops the control rods into the core to decrease the fission rate. It’s like driving a car. If
you’re going too fast, you ease off the gas pedal. If you are going too slowly, you push
down on the gas pedal.
The car-driving analogy illustrates another important point about reactors. Both cars
and reactors respond relatively slowly to adjustments of their controls. It would be hard to
drive a car that stopped instantly when you lifted your foot off the gas pedal and leaped to
supersonic speed when you pushed your foot down. Similarly, it would be impossible to
operate a reactor that immediately shut down when you dropped the control rods in and that
instantly exploded when you pulled the control rods out.
But reactors, like cars, don’t respond quickly to movements of the control rods.
That’s because the final release of neutrons following some fissions is slow. When a
235
U nucleus fissions, it promptly releases an average of 2.47 neutrons which induce
other fissions within a thousandth of a second. However, some of the fission fragments
are unstable nuclei that decay and release neutrons long after the original fission. On
average, each 235U fission eventually produces 0.0064 of these delayed neutrons, which
then go on to induce other fissions. It takes seconds or minutes for these delayed neutrons to appear, and they slow the response of the reactor. The reactor’s fission rate
can’t increase quickly because it takes a long time for the delayed neutrons to build up.
The fission rate can’t decrease quickly because it takes a long time for the delayed
neutrons to go away.
To further ease the operation of modern nuclear reactors, they are designed to be stable
and self-regulating. This self-regulation ensures that the core automatically becomes subcritical if it overheats. As we’ll see later on, this self-regulation was not present in the
design of Chernobyl Reactor Number 4 and that led to disaster.

439

440

CHAPT ER 15 Modern Physics

Check Your Understanding #1: No Delayed Decays
If the fission of 235U produced only stable fission fragments, would a nuclear reactor be easier or
harder to operate?
Answer: It would be much harder to operate.
Why: Without any delayed neutrons, one generation of fissions would finish inducing the next generation of fissions in about a thousandth of a second and the response of the reactor core to changes
in the criticality would become extremely rapid. When the reactor core became supercritical, its fission rate would skyrocket and when it became subcritical, its fission rate would plummet. Trying to
keep the fission rate steady would be a wild roller coaster ride, and the reactor would be impossible
or impractical to control. Fortunately the delayed neutrons slow the reactor’s response to changes in
criticality, so it can be controlled fairly easily.

Thermal Fission Reactors
The basic concept of a nuclear reactor is simple: assemble a critical mass of fissionable
material and adjust its criticality to maintain a steady fission rate. But what should the fissionable material be? In a fission bomb, it must be relatively pure 235U or 239Pu. In a fission
reactor, however, it can be a mixture of 235U and 238U. It can even be natural uranium. The
trick is to use thermal neutrons, slow-moving neutrons that have only the kinetic energy
associated with the local temperature.
In a fission bomb, 238U is a serious problem because it captures the fast-moving neutrons
emitted by fissioning 235U nuclei. Natural uranium alone can’t sustain a chain reaction because
its many 238U nuclei gobble up most of the fast-moving neutrons before they can induce more
fissions in the rare 235U nuclei. The uranium must be highly enriched—most of its 238U nuclei
must be removed so that it contains far more than the natural abundance of 235U.
Slow-moving neutrons have a different experience as they travel through natural uranium. For complicated reasons, the 235U nuclei seek out slow-moving neutrons and capture
them with remarkable efficiency. 235U nuclei are so good at catching slow-moving neutrons
that they easily win out over the more abundant 238U nuclei. Even in natural uranium, a
slow-moving neutron is more likely to be caught by a 235U nucleus than it is by a 238U
nucleus. As a result, it’s possible to sustain a nuclear fission chain reaction in natural uranium if all of the neutrons are slow moving.
Because 235U nuclei emit fast-moving neutrons when they fission, natural or slightly
enriched uranium alone can’t use the slow-moving-neutron effect to maintain a chain reaction. However, most nuclear reactors contain something else besides uranium, natural or
otherwise. Along with uranium, they use a material called a moderator that slows the neutrons down so that 235U nuclei can grab them. A fast-moving neutron from a fissioning 235U
nucleus enters the moderator, rattles around for about a thousandth of a second, and emerges
as a slow-moving neutron, one with only thermal energy left. It then induces fission in
another 235U nucleus. Once the moderator is present, even natural uranium can sustain a
chain reaction! Reactors that carry out their chain reactions with slow-moving, or thermal,
neutrons are called thermal fission reactors.
To be a good moderator, a material must remove energy and momentum from the neutrons without absorbing them. A fast-moving fission neutron entering that moderator
should leave with only thermal energy. The best moderators are small nuclei that rarely or
never absorb neutrons and don’t fall apart during collisions with them. Hydrogen (1H),
deuterium (2H), helium (4He), and carbon (12C) are all good moderators. When a fastmoving neutron hits the nucleus of one of these atoms, the collision resembles that between
two bumper cars (Section 2.3). Because the fast-moving neutron transfers some of its
energy and momentum to the nucleus, the neutron slows down while the nucleus speeds
up. That collision is most effective when the neutron and nucleus have similar masses, so
small nuclei are better moderators than large ones.

Nuclear Reactors

Moderator
Uranium
Moderator
Uranium
Moderator

Uranium
Moderator
Uranium
Moderator
Uranium
Moderator
Uranium
Moderator
Uranium

Moderator
Uranium
Moderator
Uranium
Moderator

Control rods

Reactor coolant
Fig. 15.2.1 The core of a thermal fission reactor consists of uranium pellets interspersed with a moderator
that slows the fission neutrons to thermal energies. Neutron-absorbing control rods are inserted into the
core to control the fission rate. A cooling fluid such as water flows through the core to extract heat.

Water, heavy water (water containing the heavy isotope of hydrogen, deuterium or 2H),
and graphite (carbon) are the best moderators for nuclear reactors. They slow neutrons
down to thermal speeds without absorbing many of them. Of these moderators, heavy
water is the best because it slows the neutrons quickly yet doesn’t absorb them at all. However, heavy water is expensive because only 0.015% of hydrogen atoms are deuterium and
separating that deuterium from ordinary hydrogen is difficult.
Graphite moderators were used in many early reactors because graphite is cheap and
working with it is easy (see 2 ). However, graphite is a less efficient moderator than heavy
water, so graphite reactors had to be big. Furthermore, graphite can burn and was partly
responsible for two of the world’s four major reactor accidents. Normal, or “light,” water is
cheap, safe, and an efficient moderator, but it absorbs enough neutrons that it can’t be used
with natural uranium. For use in a light-water reactor, uranium must be enriched slightly,
to about 2–3% 235U.
The core of a typical thermal fission reactor consists of small
uranium oxide (UO2) fuel pellets separated by layers of moderator (Fig. 15.2.1). A neutron released by a fissioning 235U nucleus
Steam
usually escapes from its fuel pellet, slows down in the moderator,
and then induces fission in a 235U nucleus in another fuel pellet.
By absorbing some of these neutrons, the control rods determine
Reactor
whether the whole core is subcritical, critical, or supercritical.
core
The 238U nuclei are basically spectators in the reactor since most
235
of the fissioning occurs in the U nuclei.
In a practical thermal fission reactor, something must extract
the heat released by nuclear fission. In many reactors, cooling
Water
water passes through the core at high speeds. Heat flows into this
water and increases its temperature. In a boiling water reactor, the
water boils directly in the reactor core, creating high-pressure
steam that drives the turbines of an electric generator (Fig.
15.2.2). In a pressurized water reactor, the water is under enormous pressure, so it can’t boil (Fig. 15.2.3). Instead, it’s pumped to a heat exchanger outside the reactor. This heat exchanger transfers heat to water in another pipe, which boils to
create the high-pressure steam that drives a generator (Fig. 15.2.4).
When properly designed, a water-cooled thermal fission reactor is inherently stable.
The cooling water is actually part of the moderator. If the reactor overheats and the water
escapes, there will no longer be enough moderator around to slow the fission neutrons
down. The fast-moving neutrons will be absorbed by 238U nuclei, and the chain reaction
will slow or stop.

441

2 The first nuclear reactor
was CP–1 (Chicago
Pile–1), a thermal fission
reactor constructed in a
squash court at the
University of Chicago.
Each of the graphite bricks
used in this pile contained
two large pellets of natural
uranium. By December 2,
1942, the pile was
complete and would reach
critical mass once the
control rods were
removed. As Enrico
Fermi, the project leader,
directed the slow removal
of the last control rod, the
pile approached criticality
and the neutron emissions
began to mount. It was
noon, so Fermi called a
famous lunch break. When
everyone returned, they
picked up where they had
left off. At 3:25 pm, the
pile reached critical mass
and the neutron emissions
increased exponentially.
The reactor ran for 28
minutes before Fermi
ordered the control rods to
be dropped back in.

Highpressure
steam
Steam
turbines
Lowpressure
steam
Cooling
towers
Water
Coolant
pump
Fig. 15.2.2 In a boiling
water reactor, cooling water
boils inside the reactor core.
It creates high-pressure
steam that drives steam
turbines and an electric
generator. The spent steam
condenses in a cooling
tower and is then pumped
back into the reactor.

CHAPT ER 15 Modern Physics

Hot
Water

Highpressure
steam

Steam

Steam
turbines
Lowpressure
steam

Heat
exchanger

442

Reactor
core

Cooling
towers

Cool
Water

Water

Coolant
pump

Water
Water
pump

Fig. 15.2.3 In a pressurized water reactor, liquid water under great pressure extracts heat from the
reactor core. A heat exchanger allows this cooling water to transfer heat to the water used to generate
electricity. Water in the generating loop boils to form high-pressure steam, which then powers the
steam turbines connected to the electric generators. The steam condenses back into liquid water and
returns to the heat exchanger to obtain more heat.

Check Your Understanding #2: Nuclear Candles
Would wax made from hydrogen and carbon atoms be a good moderator?
Answer: Yes.
Why: Paraffin wax is made up of carbon and hydrogen atoms, both of which are good moderators. The
fast fission neutrons don’t care what molecules the carbon or hydrogen nuclei are inside. They just
collide with those nuclei and lose energy and momentum. The problem with using wax as a reactor
moderator is that it decomposes chemically in the intense radiation. However, wax can safely slow
small numbers of neutrons in a laboratory situation.

Low-pressure
steam return

Shaft

Insulators
Power
lines

High-pressure
steam inlet

Turbine
blade

Steam
turbines

AC generator

Magnetic Stationary
rotor
armature

Fig. 15.2.4 High-pressure steam from a boiling water reactor core or the heat exchanger of a
pressurized water reactor enters a series of turbines. There it does work on the turbine blades, losing
pressure and temperature in the process. It emerges from the turbines as low-pressure steam and
goes to the cooling towers to condense back into liquid water for reuse. The rotary mechanical power
provided by the turbines turns generators that produce AC electric power.

Nuclear Reactors

Fast Fission Reactors
Thermal reactors require simple fuel and are relatively straightforward to construct. However, they consume only the 235U nuclei and leave the 238U nuclei almost unaffected. Anticipating the day when 235U will become scarce, several countries have built a different kind
of reactor that contains no moderator. Such reactors carry out chain reactions with fast-moving neutrons and are thus called fast fission reactors.
A fast fission reactor operates much like a controlled fission bomb and requires highly
enriched uranium fuel as well. While a thermal fission reactor can get by with natural uranium
or uranium that has been enriched to about 2–3% 235U, a fast fission reactor needs 25–50%
235
U fuel. That way, there are enough 235U nuclei around to maintain the chain reaction.
There is a side effect to operating a fast fission reactor. Many of the fast fission neutrons are captured by 238U nuclei, which then transform into 239Pu nuclei. Thus the reactor
produces plutonium as well as heat. For that reason, fast fission reactors are often called
breeder reactors—they create new fissionable fuel. The 239Pu can eventually replace the
235
U as the principal fuel used in the reactor.
A thermal fission reactor makes some plutonium, which is usually allowed to fission
in place, but a fast fission reactor makes a lot of it. Because plutonium can be used to make
nuclear weapons, fast fission reactors are controversial. However, because they convert
otherwise unusable 238U into a fissionable material, they use natural uranium far more efficiently than thermal fission reactors.
One interesting complication of the unmoderated design is that fast fission reactors
can’t be water-cooled. If they were, the water would act as a moderator and slow the neutrons down. Instead, they are usually cooled with liquid sodium metal. The sodium nuclei
of 23Na rarely interact with fast-moving neutrons, so they don’t slow them down.
Check Your Understanding #3: A Mix-Up at the Uranium Plant
What would happen if someone tried to fuel a fast fission reactor with natural uranium?
Answer: It would not sustain a chain reaction.
Why: Fast neutrons aren’t good at inducing fission in 235U. If the reactor doesn’t slow down the neutrons, most of them will zip right by the 235U nuclei and be captured by the more abundant 238U
nuclei of the natural uranium.

Fission Reactor Safety and Accidents
One of the greatest concerns with nuclear fission reactors is the control of radioactive
waste. Anything that comes in contact with the reactor core or the neutrons it emits becomes
somewhat radioactive. The fuel pellets themselves are quickly contaminated with all sorts
of fission fragments that include radioactive isotopes of many familiar elements. Some of
these radioactive isotopes dissolve in water or are gases, and all of them must be handled
carefully.
The first line of defense against the escape of radioactivity is the large and sturdy containment vessel around the reactor. Because most of the radioactive materials remain in the
reactor core itself or in the cooling fluid, they are trapped in the containment vessel. Whenever the nuclear fuel is removed for reprocessing, care is taken not to allow radioactive
materials to escape.
The other great concern is the safe operation of the reactors themselves. Like any
equipment, reactors experience failures of one type or another, and a safe reactor must not
respond catastrophically to such failures. Toward that end, reactors have emergency cooling systems, pressure-relief valves, and many ways to shut down the reactor. For example,
injecting a solution of sodium borate into the core cools it and stops any chain reactions.
The boron nuclei in sodium borate absorb neutrons extremely well and are the main con-

443

444

CHAPT ER 15 Modern Physics

tents of most control rods. However, the best way to keep reactors safe is to design them so
that they naturally stop their chain reactions when they overheat.
There have been five major reactor accidents since the dawn of the nuclear age. The
first of these accidents began on October 7, 1957, during a maintenance procedure at Windscale Pile 1, one of Britain’s two original plutonium production reactors. The reactor was
cooled by air rather than water and had a graphite moderator. The reactor’s intense radiation modified the graphite’s crystalline structure so that it gradually accumulated large
amounts of chemical potential energy. That potential energy had to be released periodically
by heating the graphite to about 250 °C so that it recrystallized. During the accident, however, hot spots developed unexpectedly in the moderator and fuel rods, the metallic uranium in those rods ignited, and the burning reactor core distributed radioactive debris
across the British countryside.
The second serious accident occurred at Three Mile Island on March 28, 1979. This
pressurized water thermal fission reactor shut down appropriately when the pumps that
circulated water in the power-generating loop stopped unexpectedly. Although this water
loop wasn’t directly connected to the reactor, it was important for removing heat from the
reactor core. Even though the reactor shut down immediately, its neutron-absorbing control
rods swiftly stopping its chain reaction, the radioactive nuclei created by recent fissions
were still decaying and releasing energy. The core continued to release heat, and it eventually boiled the water in the cooling loop. This water escaped from the loop through a pressure-relief valve, and the top of the reactor core became exposed. With nothing to cool it,
the core became so hot that it suffered permanent damage. Some of the water from the
cooling loop found its way into an unsealed room, and the radioactive gases it contained
were released into the atmosphere.
The third and most serious accident occurred at Chernobyl Reactor Number 4 on April
26, 1986. This water-cooled, graphite-moderated thermal fission reactor was a cross
between a pressurized water reactor and a boiling water reactor. Cooling water flowed
through the reactor at high pressure but didn’t boil until it was ready to enter the steamgenerating turbines.
The accident began during a test of the emergency core-cooling system. To begin the
test, the operators tried to reduce the reactor’s fission rate. However, the core had accumulated
many neutron-absorbing fission fragments, which made it incapable of sustaining a chain
reaction at a reduced fission rate. The chain reaction virtually stopped. To get the chain reaction running again, the operators had to withdraw a large number of control rods. These
control rods were motor-driven, and it would take about 20 seconds to put them back in again.
The operators now initiated the test by shutting off the cooling water. That should have
immediately shut down the reactor by inserting the control rods, but the operators had
overridden the automatic controls because they didn’t want to have to restart the reactor a
second time. With nothing to cool it, the reactor core quickly overheated and the water
inside it boiled. The water had been acting as a moderator along with the graphite. However, the reactor was overmoderated, meaning it had more moderator than it needed. Getting rid of the water actually helped the chain reaction because the water had been absorbing some of the neutrons. The fission rate began to increase.
The operators realized they were in trouble and began to shut down the reactor manually. However, the control rods moved into the core too slowly to make a difference. As
water disappeared from the core, the core went “prompt critical.” The chain reaction no
longer had to wait for neutrons from the decaying fission fragments because prompt neutrons from the 235U fissions were enough to sustain the chain reaction on their own. The
reactor’s fission rate skyrocketed, doubling many times each second. The fuel became
white hot and melted its containers. Various chemical explosions blew open the containment vessel, and the graphite moderator caught fire.
The fire burned for 10 days before firefighters and pilots encased the wreckage in concrete. Many of these heroic people suffered fatal exposures to radiation. The burning core

Nuclear Reactors

released all its gaseous radioactive isotopes and many others into the atmosphere, forcing
the evacuation of more than 100,000 people and leading to thousands or perhaps tens of
thousands of premature cancer deaths in the millions of people exposed to the radioactive
debris. The accident site remains dangerously radioactive and will need careful tending for
centuries.
Although not a true reactor accident, the September 30, 1999, disaster in Tokai-mura,
Japan, did involve a critical mass and a resulting chain reaction. At about 10:35 am, employees of the Conversion Test Facility of JCO Co., Ltd. Tokai Works were pouring a solution
of uranyl (uranium) nitrate into a precipitation tank. Destined for an experimental fast fission reactor, this uranium had been enriched to about 18.8% 235U. Although the equipment
and facilities were designed to prevent the assembly of a critical mass, the workers decided
to save time by circumventing the safeguards and combining many small batches into one
large one.
After they had poured six or seven batches of uranyl nitrate solution into the stainless
steel tank through a sampling hole, the solution suddenly reached critical mass. There was
about 16.6 kg of enriched uranium in the tank, and a sudden burst of radiation was released.
The water temperature leapt upward, and the solution’s resulting expansion dropped the
mixture below critical mass. However, as heat flowed from the solution to the water-cooled
jacket around the tank, the solution again approached critical mass. An episodic chain reaction continued in the tank for about 20 hours, until draining the cooling jacket of its neutron-reflecting water finally put an end to the critical mass.
The Fukushima Daiichi nuclear accident north of Tokyo, Japan (the fifth reactor accident), began on March 11, 2011, following the 9.0-magnitude Tohoku earthquake and the
resulting tsunami. The Fukushima nuclear facility housed six separate boiling water reactors, but only reactors 1, 2, and 3 were operating at the time, and they shut down automatically after the earthquake. Even after stopping their chain reactions, however, those reactor
cores continued to generate heat through the decay of their vast accumulations of radioactive nuclei, and they needed to be water-cooled to avoid overheating. Emergency generators began supplying power to maintain that cooling.
When the tsunami struck the Tohoku coast less than an hour after the earthquake, it
inundated the nuclear facility, flooded its generators and switching equipment, and detached
the entire area from the Japanese electric power grid. Reactor cooling soon ceased, and
despite heroic efforts by emergency workers, it wasn’t restored for days. By then, the reactors were damaged beyond repair, and the world’s second worst nuclear accident was well
underway.
Lacking adequate cooling, the cores of reactors 1, 2, and 3 gradually overheated and
then melted. Explosions, pressure venting, and discharges of cooling water into the sea all
contributed to an enormous release of radioactive nuclei into the environment. Even spent
fuel in storage pools at the facility contributed to the overall accident because it also suffered overheating and damage when cooling was lost. The Fukushima Daiichi plant will
never reopen and will remain a radioactive disaster area for years to come.

Check Your Understanding #4: A Breath of Not-So-Fresh Air
One of the common fission fragments of 235U is 131I, a radioactive isotope of iodine. Iodine easily
becomes a gas. Why shouldn’t you sit in a room full of used uranium pellets?
Answer: The 131I will enter the room air, and you will breathe it in. It will be incorporated into your
body’s iodine supply.
Why: The fission products of 235U include radioactive isotopes of almost every element. Some of
these isotopes are gaseous and can be absorbed by your lungs. Others can be carried away in water.
To safely contain the fission fragments from used nuclear fuel, these fragments must be carefully
separated and stored. Because the radioactive isotopes may continue to change from one element to
another, such storage is particularly tricky.

445

446

CHAPT ER 15 Modern Physics

Nuclear Fusion Reactors
Nuclear fission reactors use a relatively rare fuel—uranium. Although Earth’s supply of
uranium is vast, most of that uranium is distributed broadly throughout Earth’s crust. There
are only so many deposits of high-grade uranium ores that are easily turned into pure uranium or uranium compounds. Fission reactors also produce all sorts of radioactive fission
fragments that must be disposed of safely. There is still no comprehensive plan for the
safekeeping of spent reactor fuels. These must be kept away from any contact with people
and animals virtually forever. No one really knows how to store such dangerous materials
for hundreds of thousands of years.
An alternative to nuclear fission is nuclear fusion. By joining hydrogen nuclei together,
heavier nuclei can be constructed. The amount of energy released in such processes is
enormous. Recall, however, that fusion is much harder to initiate than fission because it
requires that at least two nuclei be brought extremely close together. These nuclei are both
positively charged, and they repel one another fiercely. To make them approach one another
closely enough to stick, we must heat the nuclei to temperatures of more than 100 million
degrees Celsius.
The sun combines four hydrogen nuclei (1H) to form one nucleus of helium (4He), a
very complicated and difficult nuclear fusion reaction. For fusion to occur on Earth, it must
be done between the heavy isotopes of hydrogen: deuterium and tritium. These are the
isotopes used in thermonuclear weapons. If a mixture of deuterium and tritium are mixed
together and heated to about 100 million degrees Celsius, their nuclei will begin to fuse and
release energy. The deuterium and tritium become helium and neutrons.
In contrast to fission reactions, there are no radioactive fragments produced in fusion.
Tritium itself is radioactive, but it can easily be reprocessed into fuel and retained within
the reactor system. The dangerous neutrons can be caught in a blanket of lithium metal,
which then breaks into helium and tritium. It’s convenient that new tritium is created by the
reaction because tritium isn’t naturally occurring and must be made using nuclear reactions. Thus, fusion holds up the promise of producing relatively little radioactive waste. If
the neutrons that are released by fusion events are trapped by nuclei that don’t become
radioactive, then there will be no radioactive contamination of the fusion reactor either.
This is easier said than done, but it’s better than in a fission reactor.
Unfortunately, heating deuterium and tritium and holding them together long enough
for fusion to occur isn’t easy. There are two main techniques that are being tried: inertial
confinement fusion and magnetic confinement fusion.
Inertial confinement fusion uses intense pulses of laser light to heat and compress a
tiny sphere containing deuterium and tritium (Fig. 15.2.5). The pulses of light last only a
few trillionths of a second, but in that brief moment they vaporize and superheat the surface
of the sphere. The surface explodes outward, pushing off the inner portions of the sphere.
The sphere’s core experiences huge inward forces as a result, and it implodes. As the core
is compressed, its temperature rises to that needed to initiate fusion. In effect, it becomes a
tiny thermonuclear bomb, with the laser pulses providing the starting heat.
To date, inertial confinement fusion experiments have observed fusion in a small fraction of the deuterium and tritium nuclei. The technique is called inertial confinement fusion
because there is nothing holding or confining the ball of fuel. The laser beams crush it while
it’s in free fall, and its own inertia keeps it in place while fusion takes place. Unfortunately,

Fig. 15.2.5 In inertial confinement fusion experiments,
several laser beams are focused onto a tiny sphere
containing deuterium and tritium. These ultra-intense
pulsed beams compress and heat the sphere so that
fusion occurs.

Laser
beam

Laser
beam
Target

Lens

Lens

Nuclear Reactors

Why can’t you initiate fusion by running an electric discharge through deuterium and tritium in a
glass tube?
Answer: The gases will lose heat to the glass tube and will never reach the temperatures needed to
start fusion.

M

Why: Very hot gases lose heat extremely easily. The hotter the gas, the faster heat flows out of it.
Without something to keep the gas from touching the walls of the glass tube, it will never get close
to the 100 million degrees Celsius needed for fusion.

a

el d
c fi
e ti
n
g

Spiral path of
charged particles

Tokamak fusion reactor

Fig. 15.2.7 A tokamak magnetic
confinement fusion reactor consists
of a doughnut-shaped chamber with a
similarly shaped magnetic field inside
it. Plasma particles moving inside the
tokamak’s chamber travel in spirals and
circle around the field lines inside the
chamber. Because the plasma doesn’t
touch the walls of the tokamak, it retains
heat well enough to reach temperatures
at which fusion can occur.

North

Check Your Understanding #5: Trying for Fusion in Your Basement

South

North

South

the lasers and other technologies needed to carry out inertial confinement fusion
are sufficiently complex and troublesome that this may never be viable as a
source of energy. Nonetheless, these experiments provide important information on the behaviors of fusion materials at high temperatures and pressures.
The other technique being developed to control fusion is magnetic confinement. When
you heat hydrogen atoms hot enough, they move so quickly and hit one another so hard that
their electrons are knocked off. Instead of a gas of atoms, you have a gas of free, positively
charged nuclei and negatively charged electrons—a plasma. A plasma differs from a normal gas because it’s affected by magnetic fields.
Because of the Lorentz force (see Section 12.2), charged particles that are moving in a
magnetic field tend to circle around magnetic field lines (Fig. 15.2.6). This cyclotron
motion occurs, for example, in the magnetron of a microwave oven. If the magnetic field
surrounding a charged particle is carefully shaped in just the right way, the charged particle
will find itself trapped by the magnetic field. No matter what direction it heads, the charged
particle will spiral around the magnetic field lines and will be unable to escape.
Magnetic confinement makes it possible to heat a plasma of deuterium and tritium to
fantastic temperatures with electromagnetic waves. Since the heating is done relatively
slowly, it’s important to keep heat from leaving the plasma. Magnetic confinement prevents
the plasma from touching the walls of the container, where it would quickly cool off.
One of the most promising magnetic confinement schemes is the tokamak. The main
magnetic field of the tokamak runs around in a circle to form a magnetic doughnut, or toroid (the geometrical name for a doughnut-shaped object) (Fig. 15.2.7). The magnetic field
is formed inside a doughnut-shaped chamber by running an electric current through coils
that are wrapped around the chamber. Plasma nuclei inside the chamber travel in spirals
around the magnetic field lines and don’t touch the chamber walls. They are confined inside
the chamber and race around the doughnut endlessly. The nuclei can then be heated to the
extremely high temperatures they need to collide and fuse.
Magnetic confinement fusion reactors have observed considerable amounts of fusion.
They can briefly achieve scientific break-even, the point at which fusion is releasing enough
energy to keep the plasma hot all by itself. However, much more development is needed to
meet and exceed practical break-even, the point at which the entire machine produces more
energy than it needs to operate.

447

Fig. 15.2.6 When a
charged particle moves in
the magnetic field between
two magnetic poles, it
experiences the Lorentz
force and undergoes
cyclotron motion. It travels
in a spiral path around
the magnetic field lines
connecting them. The
particle is confined to a
particular region of space.

448

CHAPT ER 15 Modern Physics

SECTION 15.3

Medical Imaging and Radiation

Magnetic resonance
imaging machine

Superconducting
magnet
Liquid helium coolant
Coolant container
Thermal insulation

Patient support

Some of the most important recent advances in health care
have occurred at the border between medicine and physics. As
scientists have refined their understanding of atomic and
molecular structure and learned to control various forms of
radiation, they have invented tools that are enormously valuable for diagnosing and treating illness and injury. The developments continue, with new applications of physics appearing
in clinical settings almost every time you turn around. In this
section, we’ll examine two of the most significant examples of
medical physics: the imaging techniques that are used to
detect problems and the radiation therapies that are used to
treat them.
Questions to Think About: What’s different about bones and
tissue that makes bones appear light in an X-ray image while
tissue appears dark? How can a CT scan or an MRI image show

a cross-sectional view of a living person without touching that
person? If X-rays are a form of electromagnetic radiation, why
don’t opaque materials absorb them? Why does a CT scan
show primarily bone, while an MRI image shows primarily tissue? The subatomic particles used in radiation therapy often
have enormous energies. From where do these energies come?
Experiments to Do: One triumph of medical imaging is its
ability to locate objects inside a person without actually entering the body. This is often done using X-rays to look through
the person from several different angles. From each vantage
point, the imaging machine determines which objects are to
the left or right of one another, but it can’t tell how far away
those objects are. Nonetheless, by piecing together information from many different observations, the imaging machine
can locate each object exactly.
You can experiment with this process by sprinkling a number of coins onto the surface of a small table, without looking
to see where they come to rest. Close your eyes, and bring your
head to the height of the table’s surface. Open only one eye,
and take a brief look at the coins. If the lighting is bright and
uniform, and you don’t move your head, you’ll have trouble
telling how far the coins are from your eye. Although you’ll
know something about where each coin is, you won’t know
enough to locate one exactly on the table’s surface. Now move
your head to a new position around the table, and take a second brief look. Again, you won’t be able to tell how far away the
coins are, but you’ll learn more about their relative positions.
How many such views will it take for you to learn exactly where
the coins are? How does the presence of many opaque coins
complicate the problem? Why does opening both eyes at once
make it much easier for you to locate the coins?

X-Rays
Since their discovery in 1895, X-rays have played an important role in medical treatment.
Their usefulness was obvious from the very evening they were discovered. It was November 8, and German physicist Wilhelm Conrad Roentgen (1845–1923) was experimenting
with an electric discharge in a vacuum tube. He had covered the entire tube in black cardboard and was working in a darkened room. Some distance from the tube, a phosphored
screen began to glow. Some kind of radiation was being released by the tube, passing
through the cardboard and the air, and causing the screen to fluoresce. Roentgen put various objects in the way of the radiation, but they didn’t block the flow. Finally, he put his
hand in front of the screen and saw a shadowed image of his bones. He had discovered
X-rays and their most famous application at the same time.
The first clinical use of X-rays was on January 13, 1896, when two British doctors
used them to find a needle in a woman’s hand. In no time, X-ray systems became common
in hospitals as a marvelous new technique for diagnosis. However, this imaging capability
was not without its side effects. Although the exposure itself was painless, overexposure to
X-rays caused deep burns and wounds that took some time to appear. Evidently the X-rays
were doing something much more subtle to the tissue than simply heating it.

Medical Imaging and Radiation

449

X-rays are a form of electromagnetic radiation, as are radio waves, microwaves, and
light. These different forms of electromagnetic radiation are distinguished from one another
by their frequencies and wavelengths—while radio waves have low frequencies and long
wavelengths, X-rays have extremely high frequencies and short wavelengths. They’re also
distinguished by their photon energies. Because of its low frequency, a radio wave photon
carries little energy. A medium-frequency photon of blue or ultraviolet light carries enough
energy to rearrange one bond in a molecule. But a high-frequency X-ray photon carries so
much energy that it can break many bonds and rip molecules apart.
In a microwave oven, the microwave photons work together to heat and cook food. The
amount of energy in each microwave photon is unimportant because they don’t act alone.
In radiation therapy, however, the X-ray photons are independent. Each one carries enough
energy to damage any molecule that absorbs it. That’s why X-ray burns involve little heat
and appear long after the exposure—the molecular damage caused by X-rays takes time to
kill cells.
Check Your Understanding #1: Forms of Radiation
Which is more closely related to X-rays: the beam of electrons traveling through a microwave oven’s
magnetron tube or the infrared light from the hot filament of a toaster?
Answer: The infrared light from the hot filament is more closely related to X-rays.
Why: Infrared light and X-rays are both forms of electromagnetic radiation. All that distinguishes
them is their frequencies and wavelengths, and the energy of their photons. The beam of electrons
in a magnetron tube is also a form of radiation, but it involves particles of matter, not electromagnetic waves.

Making X-Rays
Medical X-ray sources work by crashing fast-moving electrons into heavy atoms. These
collisions create X-rays via two different physical mechanisms: bremsstrahlung and X-ray
fluorescence.
Bremsstrahlung occurs whenever a charged particle accelerates. This process is nothing really new, since we know that radio waves are emitted when a charged particle accelerates on an antenna. In a radio antenna, however, the electrons accelerate slowly and emit
low-energy photons. Bremsstrahlung usually refers to cases in which a charged particle
accelerates extremely rapidly and emits a very high-energy photon. In X-ray tube
bremsstrahlung, a fast-moving electron arcs around a massive nucleus and accelerates so
abruptly that it emits an X-ray photon (Fig. 15.3.1). This photon carries away a substantial
fraction of the electron’s kinetic energy. The closer the electron comes to the nucleus, the
more it accelerates and the more energy it gives to the X-ray photon. However, the electron
is more likely to miss the nucleus by a large distance than to almost hit it, so bremsstrahlung
is more likely to produce a lower-energy X-ray photon than a higher-energy one.
In X-ray fluorescence, the fast-moving electron collides with an inner electron in a
heavy atom and knocks that electron completely out of the atom (Fig. 15.3.2). The collision
leaves the atom as a positive ion, with a vacant orbital close to its nucleus. An electron in
that ion then undergoes a radiative transition, shifting from an outer orbital to this empty
inner one and releasing an enormous amount of energy in the process. This energy emerges
from the atom as an X-ray photon. Because this photon has an energy that’s determined by
the ion’s orbital structure, it’s called a characteristic X-ray.
To discuss the energies carried by X-ray photons, we’ll use the energy unit we encountered in Section 13.3—the electron volt (eV). Photons of visible light carry energies of
between 1.6 eV (red light) and 3.0 eV (violet light). Because the ultraviolet photons in
sunlight have energies of up to 7 eV, they are able to break chemical bonds and cause sunburns. X-ray photons have much larger energies than even ultraviolet photons.

Outbound
electron

Nucleus

Inbound
electron
X-ray
photon
Atom
Fig. 15.3.1 When a
fast-moving electron arcs
around a massive nucleus,
it accelerates rapidly.
This sudden acceleration
creates a bremsstrahlung
X-ray photon, which carries
off some of the electron’s
energy.

450

CHAPT ER 15 Modern Physics

(a)

Outbound
electron

Inbound
electron

Ejected
K-shell
electron

Fig. 15.3.3 In a medical X-ray machine, electrons from
a hot filament accelerate toward a positively charged
metal disk. They emit X-rays when they collide with the
disk’s atoms. A motor spins the disk to keep it from
melting. The filter absorbs useless low-energy X-rays.

High-voltage
power supply
–

+

Vacuum tube
Tungsten
anode

Atom
(b)

Induction
motor
Stator
Rotor

Electrons
X-ray
photon

Stator

Hot cathode
Filter
X-ray photons

Fig. 15.3.2 (a) When
a fast-moving electron
collides with an electron in
one of the inner orbitals of
a heavy atom, it can knock
that electron out of the
atom. (b) An electron from
one of the atom’s outer
orbitals soon drops into the
empty orbital in a radiative
transition that creates a
characteristic X-ray.

In a typical medical X-ray tube, electrons are emitted by a hot cathode and accelerate
through vacuum toward a positively charged metal anode (Fig. 15.3.3). The anode is a
tungsten or molybdenum disk, spinning rapidly to keep it from melting. The energy of the
electrons as they hit the anode is determined by the voltage difference across the tube. In a
medical X-ray machine, that voltage difference is typically about 87,000 V, so each electron has about 87,000 eV of energy. Since an electron gives a good fraction of its energy to
the X-ray photon it produces, the photons leaving the tube can carry up to 87,000 eV of
energy. No wonder X-rays can damage tissue!
When the electrons collide with a target of heavy atoms, they emit both bremsstrahlung
and characteristic X-rays (Fig. 15.3.4). The characteristic X-rays have specific energies, so
they appear as peaks in the overall X-ray spectrum. The bremsstrahlung X-rays have different energies but are most intense at lower energies. Because lower-energy X-ray photons
injure skin and aren’t useful for imaging or radiation therapy, medical X-ray machines use
absorbing materials, such as aluminum, to filter them out.
Check Your Understanding #2: The Origins of Synchrotron Radiation
The giant particle accelerators used in high-energy physics are often built as rings so that they can
use the same electrically charged particles over and over again. As these particles travel in circles
around the rings, they emit X-rays. Explain.
Answer: Because a particle traveling in a circle is accelerating, it emits electromagnetic waves. In
this case, those waves are X-rays.
Why: A rapidly accelerating charged particle will emit an X-ray, whether it’s accelerating around the
nucleus of a heavy atom or around the ring of a particle accelerator. In an accelerator, these X-rays
are called synchrotron radiation. Synchrotron radiation is useful in research and industry and is often
deliberately enhanced by adding special magnets to the ring of the accelerator.
Characteristic
X-rays

35
30

Fig. 15.3.4 When electrons with 87,000 eV of
energy collide with tungsten metal, they emit X-rays via
bremsstrahlung and X-ray fluorescence. Although the
bremsstrahlung X-rays have a broad range of energies,
an absorbing filter blocks the low-energy ones. X-ray
fluorescence produces characteristic X-rays with specific
energies.

X-ray intensity

Atom

25
20
15
10
5

Filter
effect

Bremsstrahlung

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
X-ray energy (×1000 eV)

Medical Imaging and Radiation

Using X-Rays for Imaging

451

Outgoing
X-ray photon

X-rays have two important uses in medicine: imaging and radiation therapy. In
Incoming
X-ray imaging, X-rays are sent through a patient’s body to a sheet of film or
X-ray
photon
an X-ray detector. Some of the X-rays manage to pass through tissue, but most
of them are blocked by bone. The patient’s bones form shadow images on the
film behind them. In X-ray radiation therapy, the X-rays are again sent through
a patient’s body, but now their lethal interaction with diseased tissue is what’s
important.
Atom
X-ray photons interact with tissue and bone through four major processes:
Fig. 15.3.5 When an
elastic scattering, the photoelectric effect, Compton scattering, and electronpositron pair production. Elastic scattering is already familiar to us as the cause of X-ray photon scatters
elastically from an atom,
the blue sky; an atom acts as an antenna for the passing electromagnetic wave, absorb- the whole atom acts as
ing and reemitting it without keeping any of its energy (Fig. 15.3.5). Because this an antenna. The passing
process has almost no effect on the atom, elastic scattering isn’t important in radiation photon jiggles all the
therapy. However, it’s a nuisance in X-ray imaging because it produces a hazy back- charges in the atom, and
ground; some of the X-rays passing through a patient bounce around like pinballs and these charges absorb the
photon and reemit it in a
arrive at the film from odd angles. To eliminate these bouncing X-ray photons, X-ray new direction.
machines use filters to block X-rays that don’t approach the film from the direction of
the X-ray source.
The photoelectric effect is what makes X-ray imaging possible. In this effect, a passing photon induces a radiative transition in an atom; one of the atom’s electrons absorbs the
photon and is tossed completely out of the atom (Fig. 15.3.6). If the atom were using the
X-ray photon to shift an electron from one orbital to another, that photon would have to
have just the right amount of energy. However, because a free electron can have any amount
of energy, the atom can absorb any X-ray photon that has enough energy to eject one of its
electrons. Part of the photon’s energy is used to remove the electron from the atom, and the
rest is given to the emitted electron as kinetic energy.
The likelihood of such a photoemission event decreases as the ejected electron’s energy
increases. This decreasing likelihood makes it difficult for a small atom to absorb an X-ray
photon. All its electrons are relatively weakly bound, and the X-ray photon would give the
ejected electron a large kinetic energy. Rather than emitting a high-energy electron, a small
atom usually just ignores the passing X-ray photon.
In contrast, some of the electrons in a large atom are quite tightly bound and require
most of the X-ray photon’s energy to remove them. These electrons would depart with
relatively little kinetic energy. Because the photoemission process is most likely
Outgoing
when low-energy electrons are produced, a large atom is likely to absorb a pass- Incoming
electron
X-ray
ing X-ray. Thus, whereas the small atoms found in tissue (carbon, hydrogen,
photon
oxygen, and nitrogen) rarely absorb medical X-rays, the large atoms found in
bone (calcium and phosphorus) absorb X-rays frequently. That’s why bones
cast clear shadows onto X-ray film. Tissue shadows are also visible, but they’re
less obvious.
Although one shadow image of a patient’s insides may help to diagnose a
broken bone, more subtle problems may not be visible in a single X-ray image. For
Atom
a better picture of what’s going on inside the patient, the radiologist needs to see
Fig. 15.3.6 In the
shadows from several different angles. Better yet, the radiologist can turn to a computed photoelectric effect, an
tomography (CT) scanner. This computerized device automatically forms X-ray shadow absorbed photon ejects
images from hundreds of different angles and positions and produces a detailed three-di- an electron from an atom.
Part of the photon’s energy
mensional X-ray map of the patient’s body.
The CT scanner works one “slice” of the patient’s body at a time. It sends X-rays is used to remove the
electron from the atom,
through this narrow slice from every possible angle, including the two shown in Fig. 15.3.7, and the rest becomes
and determines where the bones and tissues are in that slice (Fig. 15.3.8). The scanner then kinetic energy in the
shifts the patient’s body to work on the next slice.
electron.

CHAPT ER 15 Modern Physics

(a)

X-ray detectors

(b)

X-ray detectors

X-ray source

X-ray source

© Alfred Pasieka/Photo Researchers, Inc.

Fig. 15.3.7 A computed tomography (CT) scan image is formed by analyzing X-ray shadow images
taken from many different angles and positions. An X-ray source and an array of electronic X-ray
detectors form a ring that rotates around the patient as the patient slowly moves through the ring.

© Steve Allen/Brand X Pictures/Getty Images, Inc.

452

Fig. 15.3.8 (a) The CT scanner on the left uses X-rays to image layer after layer of the patient’s
body. With the help of a computer, it produces a three-dimensional (3D) map of heavy elements in the
patient. (b) Part of that map, showing the patient’s head.

Check Your Understanding #3: Aluminum X-Ray Windows
Aluminum atoms are much smaller than calcium atoms. Although aluminum metal blocks visible
light, it’s relatively transparent to high-energy X-rays. Explain.
Answer: The electrons in an aluminum atom are so weakly bound that they are unlikely to absorb
high-energy X-ray photons through the photoelectric effect.
Why: Like the small atoms in biological tissue, aluminum atoms rarely use the photoelectric effect
to absorb high-energy X-rays. This result makes it possible to use thin films of aluminum as windows
and filters for X-ray sources.

Using X-Rays for Therapy
Radiation therapy also uses X-rays, but not the ones used for medical imaging. Even
though tissue absorbs fewer imaging photons than bone, most imaging photons are
absorbed before they can pass through thick tissue. For example, only about 10% of the
imaging photons make it through a patient’s leg even when they miss the bone. That percentage is good enough for making an image, but it wouldn’t do for radiation therapy
because most imaging X-rays would be absorbed long before they reached a deep-seated
tumor. Instead of killing the tumor, intense exposure to these X-rays would kill tissue near
the patient’s skin.

Medical Imaging and Radiation

To attack malignant tissue deep beneath the skin, radiation therapy uses
Incoming
extremely high-energy photons. At photon energies near 1,000,000 eV, the
X-ray photon
photoelectric effect becomes rare in tissue and bone, and the photons are much
more likely to reach the tumor. Photons still deposit lethal energy in the tissue
and tumor, but they do this through a new effect—Compton scattering.
Compton scattering occurs when an X-ray photon collides with a single
electron so that the two particles bounce off one another (Fig. 15.3.9). The
X-ray photon knocks the electron right out of the atom. This process is different from the photoelectric effect because Compton scattering doesn’t involve
the atom as a whole and the photon is scattered (bounced) rather than absorbed.
The physics behind this effect resembles that of two billiard balls colliding,
although it’s complicated by the theory of relativity. The fact that it occurs at all is proof
that a photon carries both energy and momentum and that these quantities are conserved
when a particle of light collides with a particle of matter.
Compton scattering is crucial to radiation therapy. When a patient is exposed to
1,000,000-eV photons, most of the photons pass right through, but a small fraction undergo
Compton scattering and leave some of their energy behind. This energy kills cells and can
be used to destroy a tumor. By approaching a tumor from many different angles through the
patient’s body, the treatment can minimize the injury to healthy tissue around the tumor
while giving the tumor itself a fatal dose of radiation.
Compton scattering isn’t the only effect that occurs when high-energy photons encounter matter. X-rays with slightly more than 1,022,000 eV can do something remarkable
when they pass through an atom; they can cause electron-positron pair production. A
positron is the antimatter equivalent of an electron. Our universe is symmetrical in many
ways, and one of its nearly perfect symmetries is the existence of antimatter. Almost every
particle in nature has an antiparticle with the same mass but opposite characteristics. A
positron, or antielectron, has the same mass as an electron, but it’s positively charged.
There are also antiprotons and antineutrons.
Antimatter doesn’t occur naturally on Earth, but it can be created in high-energy collisions. When an energetic photon collides with the electric field of an atom, the photon can
become an electron and a positron. In the previous section, we discussed matter becoming
energy; pair production is an example of energy becoming matter. It takes about 511,000 eV
of energy to form an electron or a positron, so the photon must have at least 1,022,000 eV
to create one of each. Any extra energy goes into kinetic energy in the two particles.
The positron doesn’t last long in a patient. It soon collides with an electron and the two
annihilate one another—the electron and positron disappear, and their mass becomes
energy. They turn into photons with a total of at least 1,022,000 eV. Thus energy became
matter briefly and then turned back into energy. This exotic process is present in highenergy radiation therapy and becomes quite significant at photon energies above about
10,000,000 eV. Not surprisingly, it also helps to kill tumors.
Check Your Understanding #4: More of a Good Thing
About how much energy would a photon need to create a proton-antiproton pair?
Answer: It would need about 2,000,000,000 eV.
Why: A proton has about 2000 times the mass of an electron, so producing a proton-antiproton pair
should take about 2000 times the 1,000,000-eV energy required to produce an electron-positron pair.

Gamma Rays
Producing very high-energy photons isn’t quite as easy as producing those used in X-ray
imaging. In principle, a power supply could create a huge voltage difference through an
X-ray tube so that very high-energy electrons would crash into metal atoms and produce

453

Outgoing
X-ray photon

Outgoing
electron

Atom
Fig. 15.3.9 In Compton
scattering, an X-ray photon
collides with a single
electron and the two
bounce off one another.
The electron is knocked
out of the atom.

454

CHAPT ER 15 Modern Physics

very high-energy photons. However, million-volt power supplies are complicated and dangerous, so other schemes are used instead.
One of the easiest ways to obtain very high-energy photons is through the decay of
radioactive isotopes. The isotope most commonly used in radiation therapy is cobalt
60 (60Co). The nucleus of 60Co has too many neutrons and, like many neutron-rich nuclei,
60
Co undergoes beta decay; that is, one of its neutrons breaks up into a proton, an electron,
and a neutrino (or more precisely, an antineutrino). Beginning with that beta decay, 60Co
undergoes a series of transformations that produce two high-energy photons: one with
1,170,000 eV and one with 1,330,000 eV. These photons penetrate tissue well and are quite
effective at killing tumors.
Although the process by which 60Co produces those two high-energy photons is complicated, beta decay itself shows that protons, electrons, and neutrons are not immutable
and that there are other subatomic particles in our universe. Neutrons that are by themselves or in nuclei with too many neutrons are radioactive and experience beta decay. When
that beta decay process occurs in a 60Co nucleus, the negatively charged electron and neutral neutrino quickly escape from the nucleus but the newly formed proton remains. The
nucleus thus becomes nickel 60 (60Ni).
The neutrino is a subatomic particle with no charge and little mass. Neutrinos
aren’t found in normal atoms. Although important in nuclear and particle physics, neutrinos are difficult to observe directly because they travel near the speed of light and
hardly ever collide with anything. Without charge, they don’t participate in electromagnetic forces and, unlike the electrically neutral neutron, they don’t experience the
nuclear force. They experience only gravity and the weak force, the last of the four
fundamental forces known to exist in our universe. (The other three fundamental forces
are the gravitational force; the electromagnetic force; and the strong force, which is a
more complete version of the nuclear force that we discussed in Section 15.1.) Because
it’s weak and occurs only between particles that are very close together, the weak force
rarely makes itself apparent. One of the few occasions on which it plays an important
role is in beta decay.
With almost no way to push or pull on another particle, a neutrino can easily pass right
through the entire Earth. Neutrinos are detected occasionally, but only with the help of
enormous detectors. That’s why physicists first showed that neutrinos are emitted from
decaying neutrons by measuring energy and momentum before and after the decay. The
proton and electron produced by the decay don’t have the same total energy and momentum as the neutron had before the decay. Something must have carried away the missing
energy and momentum, and that something is the neutrino.
Once 60Co has turned into 60Ni, the decay isn’t quite over. The 60Ni nucleus that forms
still has extra energy in it. Nuclei are complicated quantum physical systems, just as atoms
are, and they have excited states, too. The 60Ni nucleus is in an excited state, and it must
undergo two radiative transitions before it reaches the ground state. These radiative transitions produce very high-energy photons or gamma rays that are characteristic of the 60Ni
nucleus: one with 1,170,000 eV of energy and the other with 1,330,000 eV. The gamma
rays are what make 60Co radiation therapy possible.

Check Your Understanding #5: A Visit from the Snake Oil Salesman
If someone offered to sell you a bottle of neutrinos, you’d be foolish to buy it. What’s wrong with the
idea of a bottle of neutrinos?
Answer: The bottle couldn’t confine neutrinos because it barely interacts with them.
Why: Because neutrinos experience only gravity and the weak force, the bottle couldn’t trap them for
long. Actually, you’re being bathed in neutrinos from the sun all the time without even noticing it.
They’re as common as dirt and you can’t do anything with them anyway.

Medical Imaging and Radiation

Particle Accelerators
Electromagnetic radiation isn’t the only form of radiation used to treat patients. Energetic
particles such as electrons and protons are also used. Like tiny billiard balls, these fastmoving particles collide with the atoms inside tumors and knock them apart. As usual, this
atomic and molecular damage tends to kill cells and destroy tumors.
However, obtaining extremely energetic subatomic particles isn’t easy. High-voltage
power supplies can be used to accelerate an electron or proton to about 500,000 eV, but that
isn’t enough. When a charged particle enters tissue, it experiences strong electric forces
and is easily deflected from its path. To make sure that it travels straight and true, all the
way to a tumor, the particle must have an enormous energy. Giving each charged particle
the millions or even billions of electron volts it needs for radiation therapy takes a particle
accelerator.
Particle accelerators use resonant cavities, the microwave-frequency tank circuits we
encountered in Section 12.2. Each of these metal chambers acts simultaneously as a capacitor and an inductor and thus has a natural resonance for sloshing charge. In the resonant
cavities of a particle accelerator, this sloshing charge creates huge electric fields that change
with time. Those electric fields push charged particles through space until they reach
incredible energies.
One important type of particle accelerator is the linear accelerator. In this device,
the electric fields in a series of resonant cavities push charged particles forward in a
straight line (Fig. 15.3.10). Each of these cavities has charge sloshing back and forth
rhythmically on its wall. When a small packet of charged particles enters the first cavity
through a hole, it’s suddenly pushed forward by the strong electric field inside that cavity
(Fig. 15.3.10a). The packet accelerates forward and leaves the first resonant cavity with
more kinetic energy than it had when it arrived—the electric field in that cavity has done
work on the packet.
If the fields in the cavities were constant, the electric field in the second cavity would
slow the packet down. In Fig. 15.3.10a, you can see that the electric field in the second
cavity points in the wrong direction. By the time the packet reaches the second cavity, the
charge sloshing in its walls has reversed and so has the electric field (Fig. 15.3.10b). The
packet is again pushed forward, and it emerges from the second cavity with still more
kinetic energy.
Microwave cavities

(a)

Acceleration
Velocity

(b)

Electric
fields

Fig. 15.3.10 In a linear accelerator,
moving charged particles are pushed
forward by electric fields that change
with time. (a) While the positive
charge is moving toward the right
through the first of a series of
microwave cavities, the electric field
there pushes it toward the right. (b)
By the time the charge has entered
the second cavity, however, the
electric fields have reversed and the
electric field there pushes it toward
the right again.

455

456

CHAPT ER 15 Modern Physics

© Doug Martin/Photo
Researchers, Inc.

Fig. 15.3.11 This
radiation therapy unit uses
a linear accelerator to
produce extremely highenergy subatomic particles.
These particles penetrate
deep inside the patient to
destroy a cancerous tumor.
The linear accelerator
itself is hidden from view
in the room behind this
one. Its beam is steered by
magnets in the rotatable
arm toward a particular
spot in the patient. The
arm moves periodically
during treatment so
that its beam intersects
the tumor from many
different directions and
causes less damage to
healthy tissue nearby. That
multidirectional strategy is
also widely used in X-ray
and gamma-ray therapies.

Each resonant cavity in this series adds energy to the packet, so that a long string of
cavities can give each of the packet’s charged particles millions or even billions of electron
volts. This energy comes from microwave generators that cause charge to slosh in the
accelerator’s resonant cavities. The linear accelerator then has only to inject charged particles into the first cavity, using equipment resembling the insides of a television picture
tube, and those charged particles will come flying out of the last cavity with incredible
energies (Fig. 15.3.11).
This acceleration technique, however, has a few complications. Most important, each
cavity must reverse its electric field at just the right moment to keep the packet accelerating
forward. For simplicity of operation, all the cavities have the same resonant frequency and
reverse their electric fields simultaneously. Since the packet spends the same amount of
time in each cavity and since it speeds up as it goes from one cavity to the next, each cavity
must be longer than the previous one.
As the packet approaches the speed of light, something strange happens. The packet’s
energy continues to increase as it goes through the cavities, but its speed stops increasing very
much. This effect is a consequence of special relativity, the rules governing motion at speeds
comparable to the speed of light. As we saw in Section 4.2, the simple relationship between
kinetic energy and speed given in Eq. 2.2.1 isn’t valid for objects moving at almost the speed
of light; we must use Eq. 4.2.4 instead. As a further consequence of relativity, the packet can
approach the speed of light but can’t actually reach it. Although each charged particle’s
kinetic energy can become extraordinarily large, its speed is limited by the speed of light.
Because the packet’s speed stops increasing significantly after it has gone through the
first few cavities of the linear accelerator, the lengths of the remaining cavities can be constant. Only the first few cavities have to be specially designed to account for the packet’s
increasing speed inside them. The charged particles emerge from the accelerator traveling
at almost the speed of light. They pass through a thin metal window that keeps air out of the
accelerator and enter the patient’s body. They have so much energy that they can penetrate
deep into tissue before coming to a stop.
Check Your Understanding #6: Particle Recycling
Many research accelerators send each packet of electrons through the same series of resonant cavities several times. After the packet leaves the last cavity, magnets steer it around in a circle and send
it back through the cavities again. With each pass through the cavities, the packet acquires more
energy, so how can it possibly stay synchronized with the reversing electric fields in the cavities?
Answer: The packet is traveling at almost the speed of light, so its speed barely changes as its energy
increases.
Why: If the packet were speeding up with each trip through the cavities, it wouldn’t stay synchronized
with the reversing electric fields inside them. However, the packet’s speed is so nearly constant once it
nears the speed of light that it can travel through the cavities over and over again without any problem.

Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Although X-rays do an excellent job of imaging bones, they aren’t as good for imaging
tissue. A better technique for studying tissue is magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). This
technique locates hydrogen atoms by interacting with their magnetic nuclei. Since hydrogen atoms are common in both water and organic molecules, finding hydrogen atoms is a
good way to study biological tissue.
The nucleus of an ordinary hydrogen atom, 1H, is a proton. Protons, like electrons,
have two possible internal quantum states, usually called spin-up and spin-down. Calling it
spin is appropriate because spin-up and spin-down protons have equal but oppositely
directed angular momentum. When electric charge and rotation are both present, it’s not
surprising that magnetism is, too; electric currents are magnetic, after all. Sure enough,
protons have magnetic dipoles—equal north and south poles at a distance from one another.

Medical Imaging and Radiation

© Pasieka/Science Photo Library/Getty
Images, Inc.

© Lefkowitz/Photographer’s Choice/Getty
Images, Inc.

A spin-up proton acts as though it has its north pole on top, while a spin-down proton acts
as though it has its south pole on top.
When a proton is immersed in a magnetic field, it tends to align its magnetic dipole
with that field. Doing so minimizes its magnetic potential energy. But although protons
would align perfectly with the field at absolute zero, they are less successful near room
temperature. Thermal energy agitates the protons so that, even in a strong, upward-pointing
magnetic field, spin-up protons only slightly outnumber spin-down protons.
In that upward-pointing magnetic field, each proton has two possible quantum states:
alignment with the field (spin-up) or anti-alignment (spin-down). Because alignment
reduces the proton’s magnetic potential energy, it’s the ground state—the lower energy of
the two possible states. The anti-aligned state is the excited state.
With its two possible states, ground and excited, a proton in a magnetic field can
exhibit many of the behaviors we explored when looking at atoms in Section 13.2. Most
important, the proton can experience radiative transitions between its two states. A groundstate proton can absorb a photon while making a radiative transition to its excited state, and
an excited-state proton can emit a photon while transiting to its ground state.
In Section 13.2, we saw that a given atom can absorb or emit only certain photons,
photons carrying exactly the right amount of energy to shift the atom from one quantum
state to another. For example, neon signs are red because neon atoms have states that are
separated in energy by the energy of red photons. Similarly, a proton in a magnetic field can
absorb or emit only certain photons, photons carrying exactly the right amount of energy to
shift the proton from one quantum state to the other.
However, unlike a neon atom, which always interacts with red photons, a proton in a
magnetic field interacts with photons that vary in “color” according to the strength of the
magnetic field. That’s because the energy separating the proton’s two states is proportional
to the magnetic field in which it resides. As a result, the photon energy needed to cause
radiative transitions between the proton’s two states is also proportional to the magnetic
field. If the field changes, so does the photon energy.
When a patient enters the strong magnetic field of an MRI machine (Figs. 15.3.12 and
15.3.13), the protons in the patient’s body respond to the field and a small excess of aligned
protons develops. Only these excess aligned protons matter to the MRI machine because effects
due to the remaining protons, which are equally aligned and anti-aligned, cancel completely.
The excess aligned protons are in their ground state, and they are what the MRI machine studies.
The MRI machine interacts with these ground-state protons using radio wave photons,
photons with energies equal to the energy difference between their ground and excited
states. The protons can absorb and subsequently emit those radio wave photons, and they
can also exhibit a variety of fascinating and useful quantum interference effects.

Fig. 15.3.13 (a) The patient is entering the intense magnetic field of an MRI system. Using the
interactions between electromagnetic waves and protons that take place in magnetic fields, MRI
produces a three-dimensional map of hydrogen atoms in the patient’s body. (b) A portion of this map,
showing the patient’s head.

457

Magnetic
field

Fig. 15.3.12 A magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI)
machine places the patient
in a strong magnetic field.
This field varies spatially,
so that protons at different
places in the patient’s body
experience different fields
and absorb different radio
wave photons.

458

CHAPT ER 15 Modern Physics

If the protons in the patient’s body were all experiencing exactly the same magnetic
field, they would all interact with the same radio wave photons—but the protons don’t all
experience the same field. The MRI machine introduces a slight spatial variation to its
magnetic field. Because the magnetic field is different for different protons, only some of
them can interact with radio wave photons of a particular energy. This selective interaction
is how the MRI imager locates protons within a patient.
In its simplest form, an MRI machine applies a spatially varying magnetic field to the
patient’s body. It then sends various radio waves through the patient and looks for the radio
wave photons to interact with protons. Since only a proton that is experiencing the right
magnetic field can interact with a particular radio wave photon, the MRI machine can
determine where each proton is by the photons with which it interacts. By changing the
spatial variations in the magnetic field and adjusting the energies of the radio wave photons, the MRI machine gradually locates the protons in the patient’s body. It builds a
detailed three-dimensional map of the hydrogen atoms. A computer manages this map and
can display cross-sectional images of the patient from any angle or position.
Check Your Understanding #7: Major Magnets
Some of the most modern MRI machines use extremely strong magnetic fields. As a machine’s magnetic field gets stronger, what must happen to the radio waves that are used to interact with protons
in a patient?
Answer: Each radio wave photon must carry more energy (the radio waves must have higher frequencies).
Why: The stronger the magnetic field in which a proton is immersed, the more energy separates the
proton’s two states. The MRI machine must use higher-frequency, more energetic radio waves to
cause radiative transitions between those two states. There are many advantages to using extremely
strong magnetic fields, including lower noise and better spatial resolution in the image. However, the
magnetic fields of these advanced MRI machines are so strong that they can erase credit cards from
across the room and rip steel objects right out of your pockets.

Epilogue for Chapter 15
In this chapter we examined some of the applications of modern physics. In Nuclear
Weapons, we examined nuclear fission to see how nuclear chain reactions can be used to
release electrostatic potential energy stored in the large nuclei of uranium and plutonium
atoms. We also studied nuclear fusion and found that when small nuclei of hydrogen bind
together, they release a potential energy associated with the nuclear force. We learned
about radioactive isotopes and fallout.
In Nuclear Reactors, we studied the techniques used to harness nuclear energy for less
destructive purposes. We saw that natural or slightly enriched uranium can support a chain
reaction if the fission neutrons are slowed in a moderator. We reviewed reactor and safety
issues and looked at the world’s most significant nuclear accidents.
In Medical Imaging and Radiation, we learned how X-rays are produced and why
those X-rays pass more easily through tissue than through bone. We saw how X-rays can
be used to make images and explored the uses of gamma rays for radiation therapy. We
looked at particle accelerators and concluded by examining magnetic resonance imaging.

Explanation: Radiation-Damaged Paper
The paper fades because the ultraviolet light photons in sunlight have enough energy to
shift electrons out of the orbitals that bond the dye molecules together. These dye molecules
then fall apart and leave the paper without color. In some cases, the photons of light completely remove the electrons from the dye molecules. The process is the same photoelectric
effect that makes it possible to distinguish tissue from bone in X-ray imaging.

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations

459

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Nuclear Weapons Work: A fission bomb releases nuclear energy through a chain reaction in the fissionable isotopes of uranium or plutonium. In a chain reaction, each fission
induces, on average, at least one subsequent fission. Assembling a supercritical mass must
be done rapidly so that the bomb doesn’t blow itself apart before most of the nuclei have
undergone fission.
A fusion bomb uses heat from a fission bomb to initiate fusion in the heavy isotopes of
hydrogen: deuterium and tritium. Because tritium has a short half-life, it must be replaced
frequently. In some fusion bombs, the tritium is created during the explosion by neutron
collisions with lithium.
How Nuclear Reactors Work: A thermal fission reactor can sustain a controlled chain reaction in natural or slightly enriched uranium. By slowing its fission neutrons to thermal velocities in a moderator, the reactor is able to make those neutrons interact almost exclusively
with the rare 235U nuclei and leave the more common 238U nuclei almost unaffected. The
235
U nuclei fission in a chain reaction and release heat that is used to power electric generators. The presence of some delayed fission neutrons makes it easy to control the chain reaction using neutron-absorbing control rods.
To use the 238U nuclei, a fast fission or breeder reaction uses more highly enriched uranium and no moderator. Although the chain reaction initially proceeds primarily among the
235
U nuclei, the fast fission neutrons gradually transform the 238U nuclei into 239Pu nuclei.
Like 235U nuclei, those 239Pu nuclei are fissionable and can participate in the chain reaction,
so the fast fission reaction can ultimately extract energy from all the original uranium nuclei.
239
Pu is also chemically separable from uranium and can be used to manufacture nuclear
weapons. Fast fission reactors therefore pose the danger of nuclear proliferation.
Although the goal of obtaining energy from the fusion of hydrogen nuclei on Earth remains elusive, gradual progress is being made. The main challenge is to contain and heat the
hydrogen nuclei to the enormous temperatures needed to make them collide and fuse.
How Medical Imaging and Radiation Work: Because X-rays pass more easily through tissue
than they do through bone, X-rays form shadow images of a patient’s bones. These X-rays are
produced when energetic electrons accelerate near metal nuclei and when they knock other
electrons out of the metal atoms.
Radiation therapy is done with very high-energy X-rays and gamma rays because they
pass more easily through tissue. These electromagnetic waves kill tumor cells by depositing
energy in the atoms and molecules of those cells. Gamma rays are usually obtained from
radioactive nuclei. Some radiation therapy is done with energetic particles that are given
enormous energies by particle accelerators.
Magnetic resonance imaging uses the magnetic nature of hydrogen nuclei (protons) to
locate hydrogen atoms in a patient’s body. The patient is put in a strong magnetic field, and
the protons tend to align with this field. The imaging machine then uses radio waves to reverse the alignments of those protons. By making the magnetic field vary slightly from place
to place, the machine is able to locate the protons in the patient’s body. A computer records
and analyzes the results so that it can present cross-sectional images of the hydrogen atoms
in a patient’s body.
1. Exponential decay of radioactive nuclei and particles: The

fraction of a large original population of identical radioactive
systems remaining is equal to one-half raised to the power of the
elapsed time divided by the half-life of those systems, or

elapsed time/ half-life

1
fraction remaining = (
2)

(15.1.1)

Appendix A

Vectors
Some physical quantities are simply numbers (e.g., 0, −1.5, and 𝜋)
or numbers with units (e.g., 10 s, 5 kg, and 1 m3). These are
known as scalar quantities, that is, quantities that have only
magnitudes (amounts). Many other physical quantities, however, are vectors—they have both magnitudes and directions.
In our three-dimensional world, vector quantities are quite
common and useful, and they include position, velocity, acceleration, force, torque, momentum, and angular momentum.
Because vector quantities include both magnitude and direction,
they convey more information than scalar quantities and they’re
also a bit more difficult to understand.
Position is probably the easiest vector quantity to visualize:
you specify an object’s position by giving its position vector—
its distance and direction from a reference point. For example,
you can specify the library’s position with respect to your home
by giving both its distance from your home (say 3.162 km, or
1.965 miles) and its direction from your home (18.43° east of
due north). That position vector is all the information someone
would need to travel from your home to the library.
In illustrations, such as Fig. A.1, vector quantities are
drawn as arrows. The length of each arrow indicates the vector’s
magnitude, while the direction of the arrow indicates which way
the vector points. Suppose that you live in a city with major
east-west and north-south streets spaced 1 km apart. Figure A.1
shows four aerial views of your city. The vector A in Fig. A.1a
shows the position of the library with respect to your home. It
begins at your home and ends at the library, thus indicating both
the magnitude and direction of the library’s position.
Let’s look at another position vector. The vector B in Fig.
A.1b begins at the library and ends at your friend’s home. This
position vector shows the position of your friend’s home with
respect to the library and is 2.828 km long and points 45° east of
south. If you happen to be at the library, you can use this vector
to find your friend’s home.
But how can you go from your home to your friend’s
home? To make this trip, you must add two vectors: you first
follow vector A from your home to the library and then follow
vector B from the library to your friend’s home. This combined
trip is shown as the upper path in Fig. A.1c. But you could also
go directly from your home to your friend’s home by following
a new vector in Fig. A.1c—vector C. This vector from your home
to your friend’s home is the sum of vectors A and B, and is 3.162
km long and points 18.43° north of east. Using bold letters to
indicate that A, B, and C are vectors, we can write A + B = C,
meaning that vector C is the sum of vectors A and B.
Another interesting path from your home to your friend’s
home is shown in Fig. A.1d; you first travel along vector B
460

and then along vector A. On this path, you will arrive at your
friend’s home without visiting the library. The first leg of this
journey will take you into new territory, but the second leg will
leave you at your friend’s home. The sum of vectors B and A is
still vector C, or B + A = C. Thus vectors added in any order
yield the same sum.
While you can estimate the sum of two vectors by drawing
arrows on a sheet of paper, obtaining an accurate sum requires
some thought. Adding their magnitudes is unlikely to give you
the magnitude of the sum vector, and adding their directions
doesn’t even make sense. To add two vectors, it helps to specify
them in another form: as their components along two or three
directions that are at right angles with respect to one another. In
our example of travel in a city, two right-angle directions are all

(a)

(1,3)

(b)
Library
(0,0)

A
N
(0,0) Your
home

(c)

(1,3)

B
E

W
S

Library

Friend's
home
(3,1)

C

B
(3,1)

Your
home

Friend's
(2,–2) home

(d)

A

(0,0)

Library

C

Friend's
home

(0,0)
Your
home

B

A

(2,–2)

Fig. A.1. Four aerial views of your city, showing the major
north-south and east-west streets that are spaced 1 km apart.
(a) To go from your home to the library, you must travel 3.162
km in the direction 18.43° east of north, which is vector A.
(b) To go from the library to your friend’s home, you must travel
2.828 km in the direction 45° east of south, which is vector B.
(c) You can go from your home to your friend’s home by two
routes: you can go first to the library along vector A and then go
to your friend’s home along vector B, or you can travel directly
along vector C, which is the sum of vectors A and B. (d) You can
also reach your friend’s home by going first along vector B and
then along vector A. The sum of these two vectors is still vector
C. However, you will not visit the library on that trip.

Appendix A

we need. If height were also important, we’d need three right-angle directions.
For the two right-angle directions we need in the city,
let’s choose east and north. We can then specify vector A as its
component toward the east and its component toward the north.
Its east component is 1 km and its north component is 3 km, so
vector A, the position of the library with respect to your home,
is 1 km to the east and 3 km to the north.
This new form for vector A, a pair of distances, is often
more convenient than the old form, a distance and a direction.
If you go to the library by walking 3.162 km in the direction
18.43° east of north, you’ll have to pass through a lot of other
buildings and backyards. Walking to the library by heading 1 km
east and 3 km north allows you to travel on the sidewalks.
If we designate the position of your home as 0 km east and
0 km north, then the position of the library is 1 km east and 3 km
north. These positions are labeled in Fig. A.1a as (0,0) and (1,3),
respectively. The first number in the parentheses is the distance
east, measured in kilometers, and the second number is the
distance north, also in kilometers.
To go from the library to your friend’s home, you must
go 2 km east and 2 km south. That’s the new form of vector B.
Because a southward position has a negative component along

461

the northward direction, the position of your friend’s home with
respect to the library is 2 km east and −2 km north. In Fig. A.1b,
the library is at (0,0) and your friend’s home is at (2,−2).
Now adding these vectors A and B is relatively easy. To
go from your home to your friend’s home by way of the library,
you must move east first 1 km and then 2 km for a total of 3 km,
and you must move north 3 km and then −2 km for a total of
1 km. Thus the position of your friend’s home with respect to
your home, vector C, is 3 km east and 1 km north. In Fig. A.1c,
your home is at (0,0) and your friend’s home is at (3,1).
Similarly, you can go from your home to your friend’s
home by following first vector B and then vector A, as shown in
Fig. A.1d. This trip will take you through unknown regions, but
you’ll still arrive at the right place. You move east first 2 km and
then 1 km, and you move north first −2 km and then 3 km. In
the end, you’ll be 3 km east and 1 km north of your home, the
position of your friend’s home. Thus the sum of vectors B and
A is still vector C.
As you can see, vectors are useful for specifying physical
quantities in our three-dimensional world. When you encounter
vectors, remember that their directions are just as important as
their magnitudes and that these directions must be taken into
account when you add two vectors together.

Appendix B

Units, Conversion of Units
When you return from a camping trip and begin to describe it to
your friends, there are a number of physical quantities that you
may find useful in your conversation. Distance, weight, temperature, and time are as important in everyday life as they are in
a laboratory. And when you explain to your friends how far you
hiked, how much your backpack weighed, how cold the weather
was, and how long the trip took, you’ll have to relate those quantities to standard units or your friends won’t appreciate just how
difficult the trip was.
Most physical quantities aren’t simple numbers like 7 or
2.9. Instead, they have units like length or time, and are specified
in multiples of widely accepted standard units such as meters or
seconds. When you say a door is 3.0 meters tall, you’re comparing
the door’s height to the meter, a widely accepted standard unit
of length. With this comparison, most people can determine just
how tall the door is, even though they’ve never seen it.
But the meter isn’t familiar to everyone; many people prefer
to measure length in multiples of another standard unit—the
foot. These people might be more comfortable hearing that
the door is 9.8 feet tall. These two quantities, 3.0 meters and
9.8 feet, are the same length.
Determining the door’s height in feet doesn’t require a new
measurement because we can convert the one in meters to one
that’s in feet. To perform this conversion, we need to know how
to express one particular length in both units. Any length will
do. For example, Table B.1 states that 1 foot is the same length
as 0.30480 meters. Because of that equality, we know that the
following equation is true:
1 foot
= 1.
0.30480 maters

462

We can multiply 3.0 meters, the height of the door, by this
version of 1 and obtain the door’s height in feet:
3.0 meters ·

1 foot
= 9.8425 feet.
0.30480 meters

Notice that the original units (meters) cancel and are replaced
by the new units (feet). Since we knew the door’s height only to
2 digits of precision in meters, we can’t report the door’s height
to any more than 2 digits of precision in feet. So, we round the
result to 9.8 feet.
You can change the units of almost any physical quantity
by multiplying that quantity by a version of 1. You should form
this 1 by dividing new units by old units, where the number of
new units in the numerator is equivalent to the number of old
units in the denominator. You can obtain these pairs of equivalent quantities from Table B.1. When you do this multiplication,
the old units will cancel and you’ll be left with the physical
quantity expressed in the new units.
One last note about units: When you use physical quantities
in a calculation, make sure that you keep the units throughout
the process. They’re as important in the calculation as they are
anywhere else. Some of the units may cancel, but in all likelihood the result of the calculation will have some units left, and
these units must be appropriate to the type of result you expect.
If you’re expecting a length, the units of your result should be
meters or feet or another standard unit of length. If the units you
obtain are seconds or kilograms, you’ve made a mistake in the
calculation.

Appendix B

TABLE B.1

463

Conversion of Units

This table lists pairs of equivalent quantities, one in SI units and one in other units. Each pair can be used to convert measurements expressed as multiples of one unit into measurements expressed as multiples of the other unit. These pairs are grouped
according to physical quantity and are given to a precision of 5 digits.
1. Acceleration: (SI unit: 1 meter/second2 or 1 m/s2)

9. Power: (SI unit: 1 watt or 1 W)

= 0.30480 m/s

2

2

1 foot/second

1 Btu/hour
1 horsepower

2. Angle: (SI unit: 1 radian)
= 0.017453 radians

1 degree (1°)
3. Area: (SI unit: 1 meter2 or 1 m2)

= 0.092903 m2
= 6.4516·10−4 m2

1 foot2
1 inch2
3

3

4. Density: (SI unit: 1 kilogram/meter or 1 kg/m )
1 pound/foot3

= 16.018 kg/m3

5. Energy: (SI unit: 1 joule or 1 J)
1
1
1
1
1
1

Btu
calorie, thermochemical
electron-volt (1 eV)
foot-pound
kilocalorie (food Calorie)
kilowatt-hour

=
=
=
=
=
=

1054.7 J
4.1840 J
1.6022·10−19 J
1.3558 J
4,186.8 J
3,600,000 J

6. Force: (SI unit: 1 newton or 1 N)
1 pound-force (1 lbf)

= 4.4482 N

7. Length: (SI unit: 1 meter or 1 m)
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

angstrom (1 Å)
centimeter (1 cm)
fermi (1 fm)
foot
inch
kilometer (1 km)
light year
micron (1 𝜇m)
mil
mile
millimeter (1 mm)
nanometer (1 nm)
picometer (1 pm)

=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=

10−10 m
0.01 m
10−15 m
0.30480 m
0.02540 m
1000 m
9.4606·1015 m
10−6 m
2.5400·10−5 m
1609.3 m
0.001 m
10−9 m
10−12 m

=
=
=
=

0.001 kg
1000 kg
0.45359 kg
14.594 kg

8. Mass: (SI unit: 1 kilogram or 1 kg)
1
1
1
1

gram (1 g)
metric ton
pound-mass (1 lbm)
slug

= 0.29307 W
= 745.70 W

10. Pressure: (SI unit: 1 pascal or 1 Pa)
1 atmosphere
1 millimeter of mercury (1 torr)
1 pound/inch2 (1 psi)

= 101,325 Pa
= 133.32 Pa
= 6894.8 Pa

11. Temperature: (SI units: degree Celsius or °C; kelvin or K)
Because temperature in the three common units, °C, K, and °F
(degree Fahrenheit), aren’t multiples of one another, you must
use special formulas to convert between them:
Temperature in °C = 5/9·(Temperature in °F − 32)
Temperature in °C = Temperature in K − 273.15
Temperature in K = Temperature in °C + 273.15
12. Time: (SI unit: 1 second or 1 s)
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

day
femtosecond (1 fs)
hour
microsecond (1 𝜇s)
millisecond (1 ms)
minute
nanosecond (1 ns)
picosecond (1 ps)

=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=

86,400 s
10−15 s
3600 s
10−6 s
0.001 s
60 s
10−9 s
10−12 s

13. Torque: (SI unit: 1 newton-meter or 1 N·m)
1 inch-pound
1 foot-pound

= 0.11298 N·m
= 1.3558 N·m

14. Velocity: (SI unit: 1 meter/second or 1 m/s)
1
1
1
1

foot/second
kilometer/hour (1 km/h)
knot
mile/hour (1 mph)

=
=
=
=

0.30480
0.27778
0.51444
0.44704

=
=
=
=
=
=
=

2.3659·10−4 m3
2.9574·10−5 m3
0.028317 m3
0.0037854 m3
0.001 m3
10−6 m3
0.00094635 m3

m/s
m/s
m/s
m/s

15. Volume: (SI unit: 1 meter3 or 1 m3)
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

cup
fluid ounce
foot3
gallon
liter (1 l)
milliliter (1 ml)
quart

Glossary
absolute temperature scale A scale for
measuring temperature in which 0 K
corresponds to absolute zero.
absolute zero The temperature at which
all thermal energy has been removed
from an object or system of objects.
Because it’s impossible to find and
remove all the thermal energy from
an object, absolute zero can be approached but is not actually attainable.
acceleration A vector quantity that measures the rate at which an object’s
velocity is changing: the greater the
acceleration, the more the object’s velocity changes each second. It consists
of both the amount of acceleration and
the direction in which the object is accelerating. This direction is identical
to the direction of the force causing
the acceleration. The SI unit of acceleration is the meter per second2.
acceleration due to gravity A physical
constant that specifies how quickly a
freely falling object accelerates and
also relates an object’s weight to its
mass. At Earth’s surface, the acceleration due to gravity is 9.8 m/s2 (or
9.8 N/kg).
activation energy The energy required
to initiate a chemical reaction. This
energy serves to break or weaken
the bonds in the starting chemicals
so that the reaction can proceed to
form the reaction products.
adverse pressure gradient A region of
fluid flow in which the fluid must
flow toward higher pressure. The
fluid’s momentum and kinetic energy carry it through this situation,
although the fluid does slow down.
aerodynamic forces The forces exerted
on an object by the motion of the
air surrounding it. The two types of
aerodynamic forces are lift and drag.
aerodynamics The study of the dynamic
(moving) interactions of air with
objects.

airfoil An aerodynamically engineered
surface designed to obtain particular lift and drag forces from the air
flowing around it.
airspeed An object’s speed relative to
the air through which it moves.
alpha decay A radioactive decay in
which a helium nucleus (two protons
and two neutrons) escapes from a
larger proton-rich nucleus via quantum tunneling.
alternating current (AC) An electric
current that periodically reverses its
direction of flow.
ampere (A) The SI unit of electric current (synonymous with the coulomb
per second). One ampere is defined as the passage of 6.25 × 1018
charged particles per second and is
roughly the current flowing through
a 100-W lightbulb operating on
household electric power.
ampere-meter (A ∙ m) The SI unit of
magnetic pole.
amplifier A device that replicates an input signal as a larger output signal.
amplitude The maximal displacement
of an oscillator away from its equilibrium position.
amplitude modulation (AM) A technique for representing sound or data
by changing the amplitude (strength)
of a wave.
analog representation The representation of numbers directly as continuous values of physical quantities
such as voltage, charge, or pressure.
angle of attack The angle at which an
airfoil is tilted relative to the airflow
around it.
angular acceleration A vector quantity
that measures how quickly an object’s angular velocity is changing;
the greater the angular acceleration,
the more the object’s angular velocity changes each second. It consists

of both the amount of angular acceleration and the direction about which
the angular acceleration occurs. This
direction is identical to the direction
of the torque causing the angular acceleration. The SI unit of angular acceleration is the radian per second2.
angular impulse The mechanical means
for transferring angular momentum.
One object gives an angular impulse
to a second object by exerting a certain torque on the second object for
a certain amount of time. In return,
the second object gives an equal but
oppositely directed angular impulse
to the first object.
angular momentum A conserved vector
quantity that measures an object’s rotational motion. It is that object’s rotational mass times its angular velocity. The SI unit of angular momentum
is the kilogram-meter2 per second.
angular position A quantity that describes an object’s orientation relative to some reference orientation.
angular speed A measure of the angle
through which an object rotates in a
certain amount of time.
angular velocity A vector quantity that
measures how rapidly an object’s
angular position is changing; the
greater the angular velocity, the farther the object turns each second. It
consists of both the object’s angular
speed and the direction about which
the object is rotating. This direction
points along the axis of rotation
in the direction established by the
right-hand rule. The SI unit of angular velocity is the radian per second.
anharmonic oscillator An oscillator
in which the restoring force on an
object is not proportional to its
displacement from a stable equilibrium. The period of an anharmonic
oscillator depends on the amplitude
of its motion.
465

466

Glossary

antimatter Matter resembling normal
matter, but with many of its characteristics such as electric charge reversed.
aperture The diameter or effective
diameter of a lens or opening.
apparent weight The sum of a person’s
weight plus their feeling of acceleration. All three quantities are vectors, so apparent weight can be quite
large if the weight and feeling point
in the same direction or quite small
if they point in opposite directions.
Archimedes’ principle The observation
that an object partially or wholly
immersed in a fluid is acted on by an
upward buoyant force equal to the
weight of the fluid it’s displacing.
atmospheric pressure The pressure of air
in Earth’s atmosphere. Atmospheric
pressure reaches a maximum of about
100,000 Pa near sea level and diminishes with increasing altitude.
atom The smallest portion of a chemical
element that retains the chemical
properties of that element.
atomic number The number of protons
present in an atomic nucleus and
equal to the number of electrons in
a neutral atom.
axis of rotation The straight line in
space about which an object or
group of objects rotates. More specifically, the axis of rotation points
in a particular direction along that
line to reflect the sense of rotation
according to the right-hand rule.
back emf The self-induced electromotive force that develops in an inductor when its current changes or
in the coil of an electromechanical
system such as a motor when its current causes magnets to move.
balanced Experiencing zero
torque due to gravity.

overall

band A group of levels in a solid that
involve similar standing waves and
thus have similar energies.
band gap A range of energies over
which a solid has no levels available.
bandwidth The range of frequencies
involved in a group of electromagnetic waves.
base of support A surface outlined on
the ground by the points at which an
object is supported.

Bernoulli’s equation An equation relating the total energy of an incompressible fluid in steady-state flow
to the sum of its pressure potential
energy, kinetic energy, and gravitational potential energy.

Brewster’s angle The angle at which
no vertically polarized light reflects
from a transparent surface that is
oriented horizontally. The precise
angle depends on the surface’s index
of refraction.

beta decay A radioactive decay in which
the weak force allows a neutron in a
neutron-rich nucleus to disintegrate
into an electron, a proton, and an
antineutrino. The proton remains
in the nucleus, but the electron and
antineutron escape.

buoyant force The upward force exerted
by a fluid on an object immersed
in that fluid. The buoyant force is
actually caused by pressure from the
fluid. That pressure is highest below
the object, so the force exerted
upward on the object’s bottom is
greater than the force exerted downward on the object’s top.

binary The digital representation of
numbers in terms of the powers of
two. The number 6 is represented in
binary as 110, meaning 1 four (22),
1 two (21), and 0 ones (20).
black hole A region of space, normally
spherical, within which the gravitational distortions of space and time
are so severe that not even light can
escape.
blackbody spectrum The distribution
of thermal electromagnetic radiation emitted by a black object. This
distribution is the amount of radiation emitted at each wavelength and
depends only on the temperature of
the black object.
blunt Not streamlined. Fluid flowing
around a blunt object stalls and experiences flow separation and pressure
drag.
boiling Accelerated evaporation that occurs when stable gas-phase bubbles
form and grow inside a material’s
liquid phase.
boiling temperature The threshold
temperature at which gas-phase
bubbles first become stable within a
material’s liquid phase.
Boltzmann constant The constant of
proportionality relating a gas’s pressure to its particle density and temperature. It has a measured value of
1.381 × 10−23 Pa ∙ m3/(particle ∙ K).
boundary layer A thin region of fluid
near a surface that, because of viscous
drag, is not moving at the full speed
of the surrounding airflow.
bremsstrahlung The process in which
a rapidly accelerating charge emits
electromagnetic radiation, usually
an X-ray or gamma-ray photon.

byte Eight binary bits that collectively
can represent a number from 0 to
255. Bytes are often used to represent
letters and other characters, where a
convention associates each character
with a specific number.
calibration The process of comparing a
local reference object to a generally
accepted standard.
capacitance The amount of separated
charge on the plates of a capacitor
divided by the voltage difference
across those plates. The SI unit of
capacitance is the farad.
capacitor An electronic component that
stores separated electric charge on a
pair of plates that are separated by
an insulating layer.
Celsius (°C) A temperature scale in
which 0 °C is defined as the melting
point of water and 100 °C is defined
as the boiling point of water at sea
level. Absolute zero is −273.15 °C.
center of gravity The unique point
about which all of an object’s weight
is evenly distributed and therefore
balanced. Because weight is proportional to mass, the center of mass
is identical to the center of gravity
for objects that are much smaller
than Earth. For larger objects, the
centers of mass and gravity differ
slightly. An object suspended from
its center of gravity will balance and
will experience no net torque due to
gravity. In many situations, you can
accurately predict an object’s behavior by assuming that all the object’s
weight acts at its center of gravity.
center of mass The unique point about
which all the object’s mass is balanced.

Glossary

The center of mass is the natural pivot
point for a free object. In the absence
of outside forces or torques, a rigid
object’s center of mass travels at constant velocity while the object rotates
at constant angular velocity about this
center of mass.
center of percussion The special spot
on a bat or racket where a collision
with a second object will not cause
any acceleration of the bat’s handle.
center of rotation The point around
which all the physical quantities of
rotation are defined.
centripetal acceleration An acceleration that is always directed toward
the center of a circular trajectory.
centripetal force A centrally directed
force on an object. A centripetal
force is not an independent force
but, rather, the sum of other forces
such as gravity acting on the object.
chain reaction A process in which one
event triggers an average of one
or more similar events so that the
process becomes self-sustaining.
chaos Unpredictable behavior in which
minute changes in a system’s initial
arrangement lead to very different
final arrangements. These differences grow more dramatic with each
passing second.
chaotic system A dynamic system that
is exquisitely sensitive to initial conditions. Minute changes in how you
set up a chaotic system can lead to
wildly different final configurations.
characteristic X-ray An X-ray emitted by X-ray fluorescence from an
atom. The energy of the characteristic X-ray is determined by the
atom’s orbital structure.
charges Objects, particularly small
particles, that carry electric charge.
chemical bond An energy deficit that
holds two or more atoms together
to form a molecule and that must be
repaid to separate the atoms. Chemical bonds form when chemical
potential energy is released during a
molecule’s assembly.
chemical potential energy Energy
stored in the chemical forces between
atoms. Those chemical forces are
electromagnetic in origin.

chemical reaction An encounter between
two or more atoms and molecules
that results in a rearrangement of the
atoms to form different atoms and
molecules.
circularly polarized The quality of a
light wave in which the electric and
magnetic fields rotate about the direction in which that wave is heading.
closed circuit A complete electric circuit
through which electric current can
flow continuously.
coast To travel at a steady speed along
a straight-line path in accordance
with inertia and the constant-velocity motion of an object that is experiencing zero net force.
coefficient of restitution The measure
of a ball’s liveliness, determined
by bouncing the ball from a rigid,
immovable surface. It’s the ratio of
the ball’s rebound speed to its collision speed.
coefficient of volume expansion The
fractional change in an object’s
volume caused by a temperature
increase of 1 °C.
coherent light Light consisting of identical photons that together form a
single electromagnetic wave.
collision energy The amount of kinetic
energy removed from two objects as
they collide.
color temperature The temperature at
which a black object will emit thermal
electromagnetic radiation with this
particular distribution of wavelengths.
components The portions of a vector
quantity that lie along particular
directions.
compressible Changing density significantly as the pressure changes. A
gas is compressible, since its density
is proportional to its pressure.
Compton scattering The process in
which a photon bounces off a
charged particle, usually an electron. The photon and charged particle exchange energy and momentum
during the collision.
condensation The phase transformation
in which a gas becomes a liquid.
conduction band The group of quantum
levels in an insulator that lies above
the Fermi level.

467

conduction level A quantum level in an
insulator that requires more energy
than the Fermi level and that is normally unoccupied by electrons.
conserved quantity A physical quantity,
such as energy, that is neither created nor destroyed within an isolated
system when that system undergoes
changes. A conserved quantity may
pass among the objects within an
isolated system, but its total amount
remains constant.
constructive interference Interference
in which two or more waves arrive
at a location in space and time in
phase with one another and produce
a particularly strong effect.
convection The transmission of heat by
the movement of a fluid. Convection
normally entails the natural circulation of the fluid that accompanies
differences in temperatures and
densities.
convection cell A loop of fluid flow that
is propelled by convection. Fluid in
a convection cell normally rises in
a hotter region and descends in a
colder region.
convection current A fluid flow propelled
by convection.
converging lens A lens that bends the
individual light rays passing through
it toward one another so that they
either converge more rapidly than
before or at least diverge less rapidly
from one another. A converging lens
has a positive focal length and often
produces real images.
corona discharge A faintly glowing discharge that surrounds a small, highly
charged object in the presence of a
gas. In the discharge, electric charge
is transferred from the object to the
gas molecules.
coulomb (C) The SI unit of electric charge.
One coulomb is about 1 million times
the charge you acquire by rubbing
your feet across a carpet in winter.
Coulomb constant The fundamental
constant of nature that determines
the electrostatic forces two charges
exert on one another. Its measured
value is 8.988 × 109 N ∙ m2/C2.
Coulomb’s law The magnitudes of the
electrostatic forces between two
objects are equal to the Coulomb

468

Glossary

constant times the product of their
two electric charges, divided by
the square of the distance separating them. If the charges are like,
then the forces are repulsive. If the
charges are opposite, then the forces
are attractive.

depletion region The nonconducting region around a p-n junction in which
all of the valence levels are filled
with electrons and there are no conduction-level electrons.

drag forces The friction-like forces exerted by a fluid and a solid on one
another as the solid moves through
the fluid. These forces act to reduce
the relative velocity between the two.

deposition The phase transformation in
which a gas becomes a solid.

dynamic stability An object’s stability
when it’s in motion.

Coulomb’s law for magnetism The magnitudes of the magnetostatic forces
between two objects are equal to the
permeability of free space times the
product of their two magnetic poles,
divided by 4π times the square of the
distance separating them. If the poles
are like, then the forces are repulsive.
If the poles are opposite, then the
forces are attractive.

destructive interference Interference in
which two or more waves arrive at
a location in space and time out of
phase with one another and produce
a particularly weak effect.

dynamic variation Change in a physical quantity such as pressure that is
caused by motion.

crest A peak positive excursion of an
extended system that is experiencing
a wave.
critical mass A portion of a fissionable
material that is able to sustain a
fission chain reaction. The amount
of material required depends on its
mass, shape, and density.
crystalline Having its atoms arranged in an
orderly pattern that extends for many
atomic spacings in all directions.
current The amount of electric charge
flowing past a point or through a
surface per unit of time. The SI unit
of current is the ampere.
cycle per second (1/s) The SI unit of
frequency (synonymous with hertz).
cyclotron motion The circular or spiral
motion of a charged particle in a magnetic field. The charged particle tends
to loop around the magnetic flux lines.

diffraction A wave phenomenon that
limits the focusability of light and
alters the way in which it travels after passing through an opening.
digital representation The representation of numbers by decomposition
into digits that are then individually
represented by discrete values of
physical quantities such as voltage,
charge, or pressure.
direct current (DC) An electric current
that always flows in one direction.
direction The line or course on which
something is moving, is aimed to
move, or is pointing or facing.
discharge A flow of electric current
through a gas.
dispersion The dependence of light’s
speed through a material on the
frequency of that light.
distance The length between two positions in space. The SI unit of distance
is the meter.

decimal The digital representation of
numbers in terms of the powers of
10. The number 124 is represented in
decimal as 124, meaning 1 hundred
(102), 2 tens (101), and 4 ones (100).

diverging lens A lens that bends the individual light rays passing through it
away from one another so that they
either converge less rapidly than
before or don’t converge at all. A
diverging lens has a negative focal
length and often produces virtual
images.

demagnetized The quality of a material
when its magnetic polarization has
been reduced, typically to zero.

domain wall A boundary surface between
magnetic domains having different
directions of magnetic orientation.

density The mass of an object divided
by its volume. The SI unit of density
is the kilogram per meter3.

doped Modified by adding chemical
impurities that change its physical
properties.

density gradient A gradual change in
density near a given position; a vector quantity that points in the direction of fastest increase in density
and has a magnitude that is the rate
of that increase.

Doppler effect A difference between
the frequency at which a wave is
sent and the frequency at which that
wave is received caused by relative
motion between the sender and receiver.

elastic collision A collision in which all
the kinetic energy present before the
impact is again present as kinetic
energy after the impact.
elastic limit The most extreme distortion
of an object from which it can return
to its original size and shape without
permanent deformation.
elastic potential energy The energy
stored by the forces within a distorted
elastic object.
elastic scattering The process in which
two particles bounce off one another
without losing any of their kinetic
energies.
electric charge An intrinsic property of
matter that gives rise to electrostatic
forces between charged particles.
Electric charge is a conserved physical
quantity. A specific charge can have a
positive amount of electric charge (a
positive charge) or a negative amount
(a negative charge). The SI unit of
electric charge is the coulomb.
electric circuit A complete loop of conductors, loads, and power sources
through which an electric current
can flow continuously.
electric current The movement or flow
of electric charge.
electric field An attribute of each point in
space that exerts forces on electrically
charged particles. An electric field has
a magnitude and direction proportional to the force it would exert on a
unit of positive charge at that location.
While electric fields are often created
by nearby charges, they can also be
created by other electromagnetic phenomena. The SI unit of electric field is
the volt per meter or, equivalently, the
newton per coulomb.
electric polarization A distribution of
electric charge that is nonuniform
so that the object has a region of

Glossary

positive charge and a region of negative charge.

to that of a perfectly black object at
the same temperature.

electrical conductor A material that
allows electric charge to move
through it.

energy The capacity to do work. Each
object has a precise quantity of
energy, which determines exactly
how much work that object can do
in an ideal situation. The SI unit of
energy is the joule.

electrical insulator A material that
prevents any net movement of electric charge through it.
electrical resistance The measure of
how much an object impedes the
flow of electric current. The SI unit
of electrical resistance is the ohm.
electromagnet A coil of wire, with or
without an iron core, that becomes
a magnet when an electric current
flows through the coil.
electromagnetic spectrum The entire
range of possible frequencies and
wavelengths of electromagnetic
waves.
electromagnetic waves Waves consisting of electric and magnetic fields
that travel through empty space
at the speed of light. These waves
carry energy and momentum and
are emitted and absorbed as particles called photons. Radio waves;
microwaves; infrared, visible, and
ultraviolet light; X-rays; and gamma
rays are examples of electromagnetic waves.
electron volt (eV) A unit of energy
equal to the energy obtained by an
elementary charge (electron or proton) as it moves through a voltage
difference of 1 V. One electron volt
is equal to about 1.602 × 10−19 J.
electron-positron pair production The
formation of an electron and a positron during an energetic collision.
electrons The tiny negatively charged particles that make up the outer portions
of atoms and that are the main carriers of electricity and heat in metals.
electrostatic force The force experienced by a charged particle in the
presence of other charged particles.
electrostatic potential energy Energy
stored in the forces between electric
charges.
elementary unit of electric charge The
basic quantum of electric charge,
equal to about 1.6 × 10−19 C.
emissivity A surface’s capacity to emit
or absorb thermal radiation relative

English system of units An assortment
of antiquated units that were used
throughout the English colonies and
remain in common use in the United
States today. Units in this system include feet, ounces, and miles per hour.
entropy The physical quantity measuring the amount of disorder in a system. The system’s entropy would be
zero at absolute zero.
equilibrium The state of an object in
which zero net force (or zero net
torque) acts on it. An object that is
stationary or in uniform motion is in
equilibrium.

469

farad (F) The SI unit of electric capacitance. A 1-farad capacitor will have a
voltage difference between its plates
of 1 volt when storing 1 coulomb
each of separated positive and negative charge.
feedback The process of using information about a system’s current situation to control changes you are making in that system.
feeling of acceleration A person undergoing acceleration experiences a
weightlike sensation in the direction
exactly opposite the direction of acceleration. The amount of this feeling of acceleration is proportional to
the amount of the acceleration.
Fermi energy The energy of an electron
in the Fermi level.
Fermi level A hypothetical level located
halfway between the highest occupied level and the lowest unoccupied level in a solid.

equilibrium length The natural length
of a spring or springlike object
when it is free of external forces and
motionless.

Fermi particles A class of fundamental particles that includes electrons,
protons, and neutrons and that obeys
the Pauli exclusion principle.

equilibrium position The point at which
an object experiences zero net force
and doesn’t accelerate.

ferromagnetic Composed of magnetic
atoms that all have the same magnetic orientation within a magnetic
domain.

escape velocity The speed a spacecraft
needs to follow a parabolic orbital
path and escape forever from a
particular celestial object.
evaporation The phase transformation
in which a liquid becomes a gas.
excited state A configuration of a system having excess energy; its electrons (or other particles) are in an arrangement of quantum waves (e.g.,
orbitals or levels) that has more than
the least possible energy.
exhaust velocity The velocity of exhaust
gas relative to the rocket engine from
which it emerged.

field A structure that associates a physical quantity with each point in space
and time.
firm Having a large spring constant and
thus experiencing large restoring
forces in response to small distortions.
first law of thermodynamics The law
of conservation of energy.
fissionable Able to undergo induced
fission.
fluid A substance that has mass but
no fixed shape. A fluid can flow
to match its container. Gases and
liquids are both fluids.

explosive chain reaction A chain reaction in which each fission induces
an average of much more than one
subsequent fission and the fission
rate skyrockets.

fluorescence An emission of light that
immediately follows an absorption
of light.

Fahrenheit (°F) A temperature scale in
which 32 °F is defined as the melting
point of water and 212 °F is defined
as the boiling point of water at sea
level. Absolute zero is −459.67 °F.

focal length The distance after a converging lens at which the real image
of a distant object forms. The focal
length of a diverging lens is negative
and is the distance before the lens at

f-number The ratio of a lens’s focal
length to its effective aperture.

470

Glossary

which the virtual image of a distant
object forms.
forward biased A p-n junction in which
the voltage of the p-type semiconductor has been raised relative to the
voltage of the n-type semiconductor.
freezing The phase transformation in
which a liquid becomes a solid.
frequency The number of cycles completed by an oscillating system in a
certain amount of time. The SI unit
of frequency is the hertz.
frequency modulation (FM) A technique for representing sound or data
by changing the exact frequency of
a wave.
friction The force that resists relative
motion between two surfaces in
contact. Frictional forces are exerted
parallel to the surfaces in the directions opposing their relative motion.
fundamental forces The four basic
forces that act between objects in
the universe: the gravitational force,
the electromagnetic force, the strong
force, and the weak force.
fundamental vibrational mode The
slowest and often broadest vibration
that an extended object can support.
gamma rays Extremely high-energy
photons of electromagnetic radiation, often produced during radioactive decays.
gas A form of matter consisting of tiny
individual particles (atoms or molecules) that travel around independently. A gas takes on the shape and
volume of its container.
gaseous In a gas phase.
general theory of relativity The physical rules governing all motion, even
motion involving speeds comparable
to the speed of light and occurring in
the presence of massive objects.
gradient A gradual change in some physical quantity near a given position;
a vector quantity that points in the
direction of fastest increase in that
physical quantity and has a magnitude that is the rate of that increase.
gravitational constant The fundamental constant of nature that determines the gravitational forces two
masses exert on one another. Its
value is 6.6720 × 10−11 N ∙ m2/kg2.

gravitational mass The mass associated
with the gravitational attraction between objects.
gravitational potential energy The
potential energy stored in the gravitational forces between objects.
gravity The gravitational attraction of
the mass of Earth, the moon, or a
planet for bodies at or relatively near
its surface. All objects exert gravitational forces on all other objects.
greenhouse effect An increase in surface temperature that occurs when a
material impedes radiative heat loss
by that surface or its environment.
ground state The lowest energy configuration of a system; its electrons (or other
particles) are in the arrangement of
quantum waves (e.g., orbitals or levels) that has the least possible energy.
half-life The time needed for half the
nuclei of a particular radioactive isotope to undergo radioactive decay.
hard magnetic material A material
that is relatively difficult to magnetize and that retains its magnetization once the magnetizing field is
removed. Hard magnetic materials
are suitable for permanent magnets.
harmonic An integer multiple of the
fundamental frequency of oscillation for a system. The second harmonic is twice the frequency of the
fundamental, and the third harmonic
is three times the frequency of the
fundamental. In principle, harmonics can continue forever.
harmonic oscillator An oscillator in
which the restoring force on an object
is proportional to its displacement
from a stable equilibrium. The period
of a harmonic oscillator doesn’t depend on the amplitude of its motion.
heat The energy that flows from one object to another as a result of a difference in temperature between those
two objects.
heat capacity The amount of heat that
must be added to an object to cause
its temperature to rise by 1 unit.
heat engine A device that converts thermal energy into work as heat flows
from a hot object to a cold object.
heat exchanger A device that allows heat
to flow naturally from a hotter ma-

terial to a colder material without any
actual exchange of those materials.
heat pump A device that pumps heat
against its natural direction of flow,
transferring it from a cold object to a
hot object. To satisfy the second law
of thermodynamics, a heat pump
normally converts some ordered
energy into thermal energy.
Heisenberg uncertainty principle A
quantum physical law that states
that an object’s position (a particle
characteristic) and momentum (a
wave characteristic) can’t be sharply
defined at the same time. This
principle gives objects with small
masses a fuzzy character.
henry (H) The SI unit of inductance. A
1-henry inductor will experience a
1-ampere change in the current flowing through it each second when subjected to a 1-volt voltage drop.
hertz (Hz) The SI unit of frequency (synonymous with cycle per second).
higher-order vibrational mode A
vibrational mode that is more complicated than the fundamental mode
and in which different parts of the
extended system move in opposite
directions.
Hooke’s law The general law covering
spring and elastic behavior. Hooke’s
law states that a spring exerts a
restoring force that is proportional
to the distance the spring is distorted
from its equilibrium length.
horizontal polarization An electromagnetic wave in which the electric field
always points left or right (horizontally). The magnetic field always
points vertically.
ideal gas law The law relating the pressure, temperature, and particle density of an ideal gas. An ideal gas is
one that is composed of perfectly
independent particles. The particles
don’t stick, and they bounce perfectly
from one another.
image distance The distance between
the lens and the image that the lens
creates. Real images form at positive
image distances, while virtual images
form at negative image distances.
impedance A measure of a system’s
opposition to the passage of a current or a wave.

Glossary

impedance mismatch An abrupt change
in the opposition to a wave’s passage,
typically accompanied by reflections.
impulse The mechanical means for
transferring momentum. One object
gives an impulse to a second object
by exerting a certain force on the
second object for a certain amount
of time. In return, the second object gives an equal but oppositely
directed impulse to the first object.
in phase The relationship between two
waves in which they complete the
same portions of their oscillatory
cycles at the same time and place.
incandescence The emission of thermal
radiation from a hot object.
incoherent light Light consisting of
individual photons, each its own independent electromagnetic wave.
incompressible A substance that doesn’t
change density significantly as its
pressure changes. Liquids and solids are incompressible, since their
densities change very little as their
pressures change dramatically.
index of refraction The factor by which the
speed of light in a material is reduced
from its speed in empty space, equal
to the speed of light in empty space
divided by light’s speed in the material.
induced drag The drag force that occurs
when a wing deflects the stream of
air passing across it to obtain lift.
induced emf (electromotive force) An
overall voltage difference between
the ends of a coil produced by a
changing magnetic field in that coil
and the resulting electric field.
induced fission A fission event that’s
caused by a collision, usually with
a neutron.
inductance The voltage drop across
an inductor divided by the rate at
which current through that inductor
is changing with time. The SI unit of
inductance is the henry.
inductor An electronic component that
stores magnetic energy in a coil of
wire and opposes changes in current
in that wire.
inelastic collision A collision in which
some of the kinetic energy present
before the impact is no longer present as kinetic energy after the impact.

inert gas A gas consisting of atoms that
are chemically inactive and rarely
bond permanently with other atoms
or molecules. Inert gases include
helium, neon, argon, krypton, and
xenon.
inertia A property of matter by which it
remains at rest or in uniform motion
in the same straight line unless acted
on by some outside force.
inertial Moving because of inertia alone
and therefore not accelerating.
inertial frame of reference A frame of
reference that is not accelerating
and is thus either stationary or traveling at constant velocity. The laws
of motion accurately describe any
situation that is observed from an
inertial frame of reference.
inertial mass The mass associated with
an object’s inertia, its resistance to
acceleration.
infrared light Invisible light having
wavelengths longer than about 750
nanometers.
insulator A solid in which the Fermi
level falls within a band gap.
interference A wave phenomenon in
which waves passing through the
same location from different directions reinforce or oppose one another.
interference pattern A pattern of intensity variations in time and space that
occurs when two or more waves are
superposed and experience constructive and destructive interferences.
internal energy The sum of an object’s
thermal energy and any additional
potential energy stored entirely
within the object.
internal kinetic energy The portion of
an object’s kinetic energy that involves only the relative motion of
particles within the object and that
excludes the object’s overall translation or rotation.
internal potential energy The portion
of an object’s potential energy that
involves only forces between particles within the object and that
excludes the object’s interactions
with its surroundings.
isotopes Chemically indistinguishable
atoms containing nuclei that differ
only in their numbers of neutrons.

471

joule (J) The SI unit of energy and work
(synonymous with newton-meter).
Lifting 1 liter of water upward 10
centimeters near Earth’s surface
requires about 1 joule of work.
joule per kilogram-kelvin (J/kg ∙ K) The
SI unit of specific heat.
joule per second (J/s) The SI unit of
power (synonymous with watt).
Kelvin (K) The SI scale of absolute temperature, in which 0 K is defined as
absolute zero. The spacing between
units is the same as that used in the
Celsius scale.
Kepler’s first law All planets move in
elliptical orbits, with the sun at one
focus of the ellipse.
Kepler’s second law A line stretching
from the sun to a planet sweeps out
equal areas in equal times.
Kepler’s third law The square of a planet’s orbital period is proportional to
the cube of that planet’s mean distance from the sun.
kilogram (kg) The SI unit of mass. (The
standard kilogram is a platinum–
iridium cylinder kept at the International Bureau of Weights and Measures near Paris.) A liter of water has
a mass of about 1 kilogram.
kilogram per meter3 (kg/m3) The SI
unit of density. One kilogram per
meter3 is about the density of air
at 2000 m (about 1 mile) above sea
level.
kilogram-meter per second (kg ∙ m/s)
The SI unit of momentum. One kilogram-meter per second is about the
momentum in a baseball traveling
25 km/h (16 mph).
kilogram-meter per second2 (kg ∙ m/s2)
The SI unit of force (synonymous
with newton).
kilogram-meter2 (kg ∙ m2) The SI unit
of rotational mass. One kilogrammeter2 is roughly the rotational mass
of your forearm as it pivots about
your elbow.
kilogram-meter2 per second (kg ∙ m2/s)
The SI unit of angular momentum.
One kilogram-meter2 per second is
about the angular momentum of a
7.3 kg (16 lbm) bowling ball spinning 34 times/second as it rolls
down the lane.

472

Glossary

kinetic energy The form of energy contained in an object’s translational
and rotational motion.

lens A transparent optical device that
uses refraction to bend light, often
to form images.

laminar flow Smooth, predictable fluid
flow in which nearby portions of the
fluid remain nearby as they travel
along.

lens equation The equation relating a
lens’s focal length to the object and
image distances.

laser amplifier A device that amplifies
weak incoming light to produce
brighter outgoing light. The outgoing light is a brighter copy of the
incoming light.
laser medium An assembly of excited
atoms or other quantum systems
that is capable of amplifying passing
light through stimulated emission.
laser oscillator A laser amplifier that is
surrounded by mirrors so that it can
amplify one or more spontaneously
emitted photons to form an intense
beam of coherent light.
latent heat of evaporation The heat required to transform a unit mass of
material from liquid to gas without
changing its temperature.
latent heat of fusion Latent heat of
melting.
latent heat of melting The heat required
to transform a unit mass of material
from solid to liquid without changing its temperature.
latent heat of vaporization Latent heat
of evaporation.
law of conservation of energy The
change in a stationary object’s internal energy is equal to the heat transferred into that object minus the work
that object does on its surroundings.
This first law of thermodynamics is
a restatement of energy conservation.
law of entropy The entropy of a thermally
isolated system of objects never decreases. This second law of thermodynamics recognizes that creating disorder is easy; restoring order is hard.
law of thermal equilibrium Two objects that are each in thermal equilibrium with a third object are also
in thermal equilibrium with one another. This zeroth law of thermodynamics is the basis for a meaningful
system of temperatures.
laws of thermodynamics The four laws
that govern the movement of heat
between objects.

Lenz’s law When a changing magnetic
field induces a current in a conductor, the magnetic field from that
current opposes the change that induced it.
lever arm The directed distance from
the pivot or axis of rotation to the
point at which the force is exerted.
lift forces Forces exerted by a fluid on a
solid that are at right angles to the
fluid flow around that solid.
light Short-wavelength electromagnetic
waves, including visible, infrared,
and ultraviolet light.
linear momentum A conserved vector
quantity that measures an object’s
motion. It is the object’s mass times
its velocity. The SI unit of linear
momentum is the kilogram-meter
per second.
liquid A form of matter consisting of
particles (atoms or molecules) that
are touching one another but are free
to move relative to one another. A
liquid has a fixed volume but takes
the shape of its container.
longitudinal wave A wave in which the
underlying oscillation is parallel to
the wave itself.
Lorentz force The force experienced
by a charged particle when it moves
through a magnetic field.
lumen A common unit of total radiated
light as perceived by a human eye.
luminescence The emission of light by any
means other than thermal radiation.
magnetic dipole A pair of equal but opposite poles separated by a distance.
magnetic domains Regions of uniform
alignment within a magnetic material.
magnetic field An attribute of each point
in space that exerts forces on magnetic poles. A magnetic field has a
magnitude and direction proportional to the force it would exert on
a unit of north magnetic pole at that
location. The SI unit of magnetic
field is the tesla.

magnetic flux lines Abstract strands
following along the local magnetic
field direction and having a density
proportional to that local field. Flux
lines can only begin at north poles
and end at south poles.
magnetic induction The process whereby
a time-changing magnetic field initiates or influences an electric current.
magnetic monopole An isolated magnetic pole, either north or south.
None has ever been observed.
magnetic polarization A distribution of
magnetic poles that is nonuniform so
that the object has a region of north
pole and a region of south pole.
magnetic pole A property of nature that
gives rise to magnetostatic forces
between magnetic poles. A specific
pole can have a positive amount
of magnetic pole (a north pole) or
a negative amount (a south pole).
The SI unit of magnetic pole is the
ampere-meter.
magnetized When a material’s magnetic
polarization is nonzero.
magnetostatic force The force experienced by a magnetic pole in the
presence of other magnetic poles.
magnitude The amount of some physical quantity.
Magnus force A lift force experienced by
a spinning object as it moves through
a fluid. The Magnus force points
toward the side of the ball moving
away from the onrushing airstream.
mass The property of a body that is a
measure of its inertia or resistance to
acceleration, that is commonly taken
as a measure of the amount of material it contains, and that causes it to
have weight in a gravitational field.
The SI unit of mass is the kilogram.
mechanical advantage The process
whereby a mechanical device
redistributes the amounts of force
and distance that go into performing
a particular amount of mechanical
work.
mechanical wave A natural and often
rhythmic motion of an extended
object about its stable equilibrium
shape or situation.
melting The phase transformation in
which a solid becomes a liquid.

Glossary

melting temperature The temperature at which a material’s solid and
liquid phases can coexist in stable
equilibrium.
metal A solid in which the Fermi level
falls within a band of levels.
meter (m) The SI unit of length or distance. (One meter is formally defined
as the distance light travels through
empty space in 1/299,792,458 of a
second.) One meter is about the length
of a long stride, or about 3.28 feet.
meter per second (m/s) The SI unit of
velocity or speed. One meter per
second is a typical walking pace, or
about 2.2 mph.
meter per second2 (m/s2) The SI unit of
acceleration. One meter per second2
is about the acceleration of an elevator as it first begins to move upward.
meter2 (m2) The SI unit of area. One
square meter is about twice the area
of an opened newspaper.
meter3 (m3) The SI unit of volume. One
cubic meter is about the volume of a
four-drawer file cabinet.
microwaves Electromagnetic waves with
wavelengths between about 1 meter
and 1 millimeter.
mode A basic pattern of distortion or
oscillation.
molecule A particle formed from two
or more atoms. A molecule is the
smallest portion of a chemical compound that retains the chemical
properties of that compound.

charges decrease it. Net charge can
be negative.
net force The sum of all forces acting on
an object, considering both the magnitude of each individual force and
its direction. The magnitude of the
net force is often less than the sum
of the magnitudes of the individual
forces, since they often oppose one
another in direction.
net magnetic pole The sum of all poles
on an object, both north and south.
Since there are no isolated magnetic
poles, an object’s net magnetic pole
is always zero.
net torque The sum of all torques acting
on an object, considering both the
magnitude of each individual torque
and its direction. The magnitude of
the net torque is less than the sum
of the magnitudes of the individual
torques, since they often oppose one
another in direction.
neutral Having zero net electric charge.
neutral equilibrium A state of equilibrium to which the object has no tendency to return or not return if it’s
disturbed. At equilibrium, the object
is free of net force or torque. If the
object is moved away from a neutral
equilibrium, it will still be in equilibrium.
neutrinos Chargeless and nearly massless particles created during radioactive decays and other nuclear events.
They rarely interact with matter.

momentum Linear momentum.

neutrons The electrically neutral subatomic particles that, together with
protons, make up atomic nuclei.

MOSFET A transistor in which the
electric charge on a surface affects
the electrical resistance of a channel
for electric current. An abbreviation of metal-oxide-semiconductor
field-effect transistor.

newton (N) The SI unit of force (synonymous with the kilogram-meter
per second2). The weight of 18 U.S.
quarters is equal to about 1 newton.
The common English unit of force,
the pound, is about 4.45 newtons.

natural resonance A mechanical process in which an isolated object’s
energy causes it to perform a certain
motion over and over again. The
rate at which this motion occurs is
determined by the physical characteristics of the object.

newton per ampere-meter (N/A ∙ m)
The SI unit of magnetic field (synonymous with tesla).

net electric charge The sum of all
charges on an object, both positive
and negative. Positive charges increase the net charge and negative

newton per meter2 (N/m2) The SI unit of
pressure (synonymous with pascal).

moment of inertia Rotational mass.

newton per coulomb (N/C) The SI unit
of electric field (synonymous with
volt per meter).

newton-meter (N ∙ m) The SI unit of
energy and work (synonymous with

473

the joule). Also the SI unit of torque,
exerted by a 1-newton force located
1 meter from the axis of rotation.
One newton-meter is about the
torque exerted on your shoulder by
the weight of a baseball held in your
outstretched arm.
Newton’s first law of motion An object
that is free from all outside forces
travels at a constant velocity, covering equal distances in equal times
along a straight-line path.
Newton’s first law of rotational motion An object that is not wobbling
and is free from all outside torques
rotates with constant angular velocity,
spinning steadily about a fixed axis.
Newton’s second law of motion An object’s acceleration is equal to the force
exerted on that object divided by the
object’s mass. This equality can be
manipulated algebraically to state
that the force on the object is equal to
the product of the object’s mass times
its acceleration (Eq. 1.1.2).
Newton’s second law of rotational motion An object’s angular acceleration is equal to the torque exerted on
that object divided by the object’s
rotational mass. This equality can be
manipulated algebraically to state
that the torque on the object is equal
to the object’s rotational mass times
its angular acceleration (Eq. 2.1.2).
The law doesn’t apply to nonrigid or
wobbling objects.
Newton’s third law of motion For every
force that one object exerts on a second object, there is an equal but oppositely directed force that the second object exerts on the first object.
Newton’s third law of rotational motion
For every torque that one object
exerts on a second object, there is an
equal but oppositely directed torque
that the second object exerts on the
first object.
normal Directed exactly away from
(perpendicular to) a surface. A line
that is normal to a surface meets that
surface at a right angle.
normal force Support force.
n-type semiconductor A semiconductor such as silicon that contains
impurity atoms such as phosphorus,
arsenic, antimony, or bismuth that

474

Glossary

place electrons in the semiconductor’s conduction level.
nuclear fission The shattering of a
heavy nucleus into smaller fragments. During fission, the positively
charged fragments repel one another
and release energy.
nuclear force An attractive force that
binds nucleons together once they
touch one another.
nuclear fusion The merging of two small
nuclei to form a larger nucleus. During fusion, the nuclear force binds
the nucleons together and releases
energy.
nucleation The formation of an initial
seed of one material phase in the
midst of another material phase.

oscillation A repetitive and rhythmic
movement or process that usually
takes place about an equilibrium
situation.
out of phase The relationship between
two waves in which they complete
opposite portions of their oscillatory
cycles at the same time and place.
parallel circuit (wiring arrangement)
An arrangement in which the current reaching two or more electric
devices divides into separate parts
to flow through those devices and
then joins back together as it leaves
them. Current experiences the same
change in voltage in each device.

nucleon A general name given to the
particles that make up atomic nuclei:
protons and neutrons.

pascal (Pa) The SI unit of pressure (synonymous with newton per meter2).
Atmospheric pressure at sea level is
about 100,000 pascals. A 1-millimeter-high water droplet exerts a pressure of about 10 pascals on your hand.

nucleus The positively charged central
component of an atom, containing
most of the atom’s mass and about
which the electrons are arranged.
Plural is nuclei.

Pascal’s principle A change in the pressure of an enclosed incompressible
fluid is conveyed undiminished to
every part of the fluid and to the
surfaces of its container.

object distance The distance between the
lens and the object that it is imaging.

Pauli exclusion principle An observed
property of nature that indistinguishable Fermi particles must each have
their own unique quantum wave.

ohm (Ω) The SI unit of electrical resistance. A 1-ohm resistor exhibits a
voltage drop of 1 volt when 1 ampere
of current flows through it.

becomes an electrical conductor
when exposed to light of the correct
wavelength.
photodiode A diode that permits current to flow backward across the
p-n junction when exposed to light.
Light provides the energy needed to
move charges across the junction’s
depletion region in the wrong direction. The current flowing in the reverse direction through a photodiode
is proportional to the light intensity.
photoelectric effect The process in
which an atom absorbs a photon in a
radiative transition that ejects one of
the electrons from the atom.
photon A particle or quantum of light
having energy and momentum but
no mass.
pitch The frequency of a sound.
Planck constant The fundamental constant of quantum physics, equal to
the energy of an object divided by
the frequency of its quantum wave.
It is about 6.626 × 10−34 J ∙ s.
plane polarized The quality of a light
wave in which the electric field (and
the magnetic field) fluctuates back
and forth in a plane as the light travels through space.

ohmic Exhibiting a voltage drop that’s
proportional to current, consistent
with Ohm’s law.

permanent magnet An object that can
be magnetized and that retains that
magnetization for a long time.

plasma A gaslike phase of matter consisting of electrically charged particles, such as ions and electrons. The
strong electromagnetic interactions
between its particles distinguish a
plasma from a gas.

Ohm’s law The observation that the voltage drop across an ordinary electrical
conductor is proportional to both the
electric current passing through it
and to its electrical resistance.

permeability of free space The defined
constant that relates two poles and
the magnetostatic forces they exert
on one another. Its value is 4π ×
10−7 N/A2.

p-n junction The interface between an
n-type semiconductor and a p-type
semiconductor that gives the diode
its unidirectional characteristic for
electrons.

open circuit An incomplete electric circuit where a gap in the electrical conductors stops electric current from
flowing.

phase A form of matter—notably solid,
liquid, gas, and plasma.

Poiseuille’s law The volume of fluid
flowing through a pipe each second
is equal to π/128 times the pressure
difference across that pipe times the
pipe’s diameter to the fourth power,
divided by the pipe’s length times
the fluid’s viscosity.

orbit The path an object takes as it moves
in the presence of a centripetal force.
orbital An electron standing wave in
an atom, one of the basic electron
wave modes allowed in an atom by
quantum physics.

period The time required to complete
one full cycle of a repetitive motion.

phase equilibrium A situation in which
two material phases coexist stably,
neither one growing at the expense
of the other.
phase transition A transformation from
one material phase to another.

poles Objects that carry a magnetic pole.

orbital period The time required to
complete one full orbit.

phosphor A solid that luminesces (emits
light) when energy is transferred to
it by light or by a collision with a
particle.

population inversion A nonequilibrium
population of quantum systems in
which more are in a higher energy
state than in a lower energy state.

ordered energy Energy that can easily
be used to do work.

photoconductor A solid that is an electrical insulator in the dark but that

position A vector quantity that specifies
the location of an object relative to

Glossary

some reference point. It consists of
both the length and the direction from
the reference point to the object.
positron The antimatter counterpart of
the electron. The positron is positively charged.
potential energy The stored form of
energy that can produce motion.
Potential energy is stored in the
forces between or within objects.
potential gradient The rate at which
an object’s potential energy would
increase if it were to move toward
increasing potential energy along
the steepest slope.
precession The change in orientation of
a spinning object’s rotational axis
that occurs when it’s subject to an
outside torque.
pressure The average amount of force that
a fluid exerts on a certain region of surface area. Pressure is reported as the
amount of force divided by the surface
area over which that force is exerted.
The SI unit of pressure is the pascal.
pressure drag The drag force that
results from higher pressures at the
front of an object than at its rear.
pressure gradient A distribution of pressures that varies continuously with
position.
pressure potential energy A fluid’s
volume times its pressure. However,
this energy isn’t really stored in the
fluid. Instead, it’s energy that’s provided by a pump (or other source)
when the fluid is delivered.
primary colors of light The three colors of light (red, green, and blue)
that are sensed by the three types
of color-sensitive cone cells in our
eyes. Mixtures of these three colors
of light can make our eyes perceive
any possible color.
primary colors of pigment The three
colors of pigment (cyan, magenta,
and yellow) that absorb the three
primary colors of light (red, green,
and blue, respectively). Mixtures of
these three pigments can be applied
to a white surface to make it reflect
any possible mixture of the three primary colors of light and thus to make
our eyes perceive any possible color.
principle of equivalence The principle
that gravitational mass and inertial

mass are truly identical and therefore that no experiment you can perform in a small region of space can
distinguish between free fall and the
absence of gravity.
protons The positively charged subatomic
particles found in atomic nuclei.
p-type semiconductor A semiconductor
such as silicon that contains impurity atoms such as boron, aluminum,
gallium, indium, or tellurium that
remove electrons from the semiconductor’s valence levels.
quanta The fundamental, discrete units in
which an item is emitted, absorbed,
or otherwise observed, reflecting the
particulate character of that item.
quantized Existing only in discrete units
or quanta. Quantized physical quantities are observed only in integer
multiples of the elementary quantum.
radian The natural unit in which angles
are measured. There are 2π radians
in a full circle, so 1 radian is 180/π
degrees or approximately 57.3°.
radian per second (1/s) The SI unit of
angular velocity or angular speed.
An object turning at 1 radian per
second completes a full revolution
in just less than 6.3 seconds.
radian per second2 (1/s2) The SI unit of
angular acceleration.
radiation The transmission of heat
through the passage of electromagnetic radiation between objects.
radiation trapping The phenomenon
in which a particular wavelength
of light has trouble propagating
through a material that eagerly absorbs and emits it. The light passes
from one atom or atomlike system
to the next and makes little headway.
radiative transition The shift of an
atom or atomlike system from one
state to another through the emission or absorption of an electromagnetic wave.
radio waves Electromagnetic waves,
usually with wavelengths longer than
about 1 m.

475

real image A pattern of light, projected
in space, that exactly reproduces the
pattern of light at the surface of the
original object. A real image forms
after the lens that creates it and can
be projected onto a surface.
rebound energy The amount of kinetic
energy returned to two objects as
they push apart following a collision.
reflection The redirection of all or part
of a wave so that it returns from a
boundary between media.
refraction The bending of a wave’s path
that occurs when the wave crosses a
boundary between media and experiences a change in speed.
relative humidity The actual humidity
as a percentage of the humidity required to achieve phase equilibrium
between liquid and gaseous water.
relative motion The movement of one
object from the perspective of another object. Two objects that are
moving relative to one another have
different velocities.
relativistic energy An object’s energy
according to the relativistic laws of
motion and including its rest energy.
relativistic laws of motion The laws of
motion in the special theory of relativity. They correct deficiencies in
the Newtonian laws of motion that
appear primarily at speeds comparable to the speed of light.
relativistic momentum An object’s
momentum according to the relativistic laws of motion.
resistor An electronic component that
impedes the flow of electric current,
converting some of its energy into heat.
resonant cavity A simple resonant circuit consisting of a carefully shaped
conducting strip or shell and equivalent to a capacitor and an inductor. Energy flows back and forth
between the cavity’s electric and
magnetic fields.

radioactive decay The spontaneous
decay of a nucleus into fragments.

resonant energy transfer The gradual
transfer of energy to or from a natural resonance caused by small forces
timed to coincide with a particular
part of each oscillatory cycle.

Rayleigh scattering The redirection of
light due to its interaction with small
particles of matter.

restoring force A force that acts to return
an object to its equilibrium shape. A
restoring force is directed toward

476

GLOSSARY

the position the object occupies
when it’s in its equilibrium shape.
reverse biased A p-n junction in which
the voltage of the p-type semiconductor has been lowered relative to the
voltage of the n-type semiconductor.
Reynolds number A dimensionless
number that characterizes fluid flow
through a system. At low Reynolds
numbers, a fluid’s viscosity dominates the flow, while at high Reynolds
numbers, a fluid’s inertia dominates.
right-hand rule The convention that
establishes the specific direction
of an object’s angular velocity. According to this rule, if the fingers of
your right hand are curled to point in
the direction of the object’s rotation,
your thumb will point in the direction of the angular velocity.
root mean square (RMS) voltage A
measure of AC voltage defined as
the DC voltage that would cause the
same average power consumption in
an ohmic device.
rotational equilibrium The state of an
object in which zero net torque acts
on it. An object that has constant
angular momentum is in rotational
equilibrium.
rotational inertia A property of matter
by which it remains at rest or in
steady rotation about the same rotational axis unless acted on by some
outside torque.
rotational mass The property of a body
that is a measure of its rotational
inertia. An object’s rotational mass
is determined by its mass and by
how far that mass is from the axis
of rotation. The SI unit of rotational
mass is the kilogram-meter2.
rotational motion Motion in which an
object rotates about an axis. The orientation of an object undergoing only
rotational motion will change, but its
position will remain unchanged.
saturated In phase equilibrium with another material phase. The gaseous
phase of a material is saturated when
it is in phase equilibrium with that
material’s liquid and/or solid phase.
scalar quantity A quantity, characterizing some aspect of a physical system, that consists only of a magnitude. It has no direction in space.

second (s) The SI unit of time. (One second is formally defined as the duration of 9,192,631,770 periods of the
radiation corresponding to the transition between two hyperfine levels
of the ground state of the cesium
133 atom.)
second law of thermodynamics The
law of entropy.
semiconductor An insulator with a small
band gap, so only a modest amount
of energy is needed to shift an electron from an occupied valence level
to an unoccupied conduction level.
series circuit (wiring arrangement) An arrangement in which the current reaching two or more electric devices flows
sequentially through one device after
the next before leaving them. Current
may experience different changes in
voltage in the different devices.
shell A group of atomic orbitals having
similar energies.
shock wave A narrow region of high
pressure and temperature that forms
when the speed of an object through
a medium exceeds the speed at
which sound, waves, or other vibrations travel in that medium.
short circuit A defect in a circuit that
allows current to bypass the load it’s
supposed to operate.
SI

units (Systéme Internationale
d’Unités) A system of units that
carefully defines related units according to powers of 10. SI units are now
used almost exclusively throughout
most of the world, with the notable
exception of the United States.

signal An electrical or optical representation of information.
simple harmonic motion The regular,
repetitive motion of a harmonic
oscillator. The period of simple
harmonic motion doesn’t depend on
the amplitude of oscillation.
sliding friction The forces that resist
relative motion as two touching
surfaces slide across one another.
soft Having a small spring constant and
thus experiencing small restoring
forces in response to large distortions.
soft magnetic material A material that
is relatively easy to magnetize and
that loses its magnetization once the

magnetizing field is removed. Soft
magnetic materials are suitable for
electromagnets.
solid A form of matter consisting of
particles (atoms or molecules) that
touch and that are not free to move
relative to one another. A solid has a
fixed volume and shape.
sound In air, sound consists of density
waves, patterns of compressions and
rarefactions that travel outward from
their source at the speed of sound.
space The three spatial dimensions in
our universe that separate events
from one another according to distances and directions.
special theory of relativity The physical rules governing all motion, even
motion involving speeds comparable to the speed of light.
specific heat The amount of heat that
must be added to a 1-unit mass of a
material to cause a 1-unit rise in its
temperature. The SI unit of specific
heat is the joule per kilogram-kelvin.
speed A measure of the distance an object travels in a certain amount of
time. The SI unit of speed is the meter per second.
speed of light The speed with which
an electromagnetic wave travels
through space. In empty space, a
vacuum, the speed of light is exactly
299,792,458 m/s.
speed of sound The speed at which
sound’s compressions and rarefactions
travel in a medium such as air or water.
spontaneous emission of radiation
Light emission that occurs when
an excited atom or atomlike system
releases stored energy randomly
through a radiative transition. The
photon that results is independent
and unique.
spring constant A measure of the stiffness of an elastic object; the spring
constant relates the object’s distortion to the restoring force it exerts.
The larger the spring constant, the
stiffer the spring.
springlike force A force that is proportional to displacement, consistent
with Hooke’s law.
sputtering Ejection of atoms from a
surface caused by the impact of

Glossary

energetic ions, atoms, or other tiny
projectiles.
stable equilibrium A state of equilibrium
to which an object will tend to return
if it’s disturbed. At equilibrium, the
object is free of net force or torque.
If the object is moved away from its
stable equilibrium state, however,
the net force or torque that will then
act on it will tend to return it to that
equilibrium state.
stall Condition in which a fluid flow
stops and spoils steady-state flow.
In the aerodynamic flow around an
airfoil, stalling refers to airflow separation triggered by a stall in the
flow near the airfoil’s surface.
standard units Agreed-on amounts
of various physical quantities that
define a system in which those
quantities are subsequently measured.
standing wave A wave in which all the
nodes and antinodes remain in place.
state A possible arrangement of electrons (or other particles) in a quantum system.
static friction The forces that resist relative motion as outside forces try to
make two touching surfaces begin to
slide across one another.
static stability An object’s stability
when it’s not in motion.
static variation Change in a physical
quantity such as pressure that is not
caused by motion.
steady-state flow A situation in a fluid
where the characteristics of the fluid
at any fixed point in space don’t
change with time.
Stefan–Boltzmann constant The constant of proportionality relating
a surface’s radiated power to its
emissivity, temperature, and surface
area. It has a measured value of 5.67
× 10−8 J/(s ∙ m2 ∙ K4).
Stefan–Boltzmann law The equation
relating a surface’s radiated power
to its emissivity, temperature, and
surface area.
stiffness A measure of how rapidly a
restoring force increases as the system exerting that force is distorted.
stimulated emission of radiation Light
emission that occurs when an excited
atom or atomlike system releases

stored energy through a radiative
transition by duplicating a photon
passing through that system.
streamline The path followed by a particular portion of a flowing fluid.
streamlined Carefully tapered so that
the fluid flowing around it doesn’t
stall and doesn’t experience flow
separation or pressure drag.
strong force The fundamental force that
gives structure to nuclei and nucleons
and is the basis for the nuclear force.
subatomic particles The fundamental building blocks of the universe,
from among which atoms and matter are constructed.
subcritical mass A portion of fissionable material that is too small to sustain a chain reaction.
sublimation The process by which atoms or molecules go directly from
a solid to a gas.
superconductor An electrical conductor
that permits electrons to flow without losing any of their kinetic energy
to thermal energy. Electrons will
continue to flow in a superconductor indefinitely. Materials become
superconducting only at extremely
low temperatures.
supercritical mass A portion of fissionable material that is well in excess of
a critical mass so that it undergoes
an explosive chain reaction.
superheated Above the temperature
at which a phase transition should
have occurred. Superheating results
from a failure to nucleate the new
phase.
superposition The overlapping of two
or more waves so that their amplitudes add together and they form a
combined wave.
support force A force that is exerted
when two objects come into contact. Each object exerts a force on
the other object to keep the two
from passing through one another.
Support forces are always normal,
or perpendicular, to the surfaces of
objects.
surface area The extent of a two-dimensional surface bounded by a particular border. The SI unit of surface
area is the meter2.

477

surface waves Disturbances in the stable equilibrium shape of a surface.
sympathetic vibration The transfer of
energy between two natural resonances that share a common frequency of oscillation.
tank circuit A simple resonant circuit consisting of a capacitor and an inductor.
Energy flows back and forth between
these two devices repetitively.
temperature A measure of the average
internal kinetic energy per particle
in a material. In a gas, temperature
measures the average kinetic energy
of each atom or molecule.
tension Outward forces on an object that
tend to stretch it.
terminal velocity The velocity at which
an object moving through a fluid
experiences enough drag force to
balance the other forces on it and
keep it from accelerating.
tesla (T) The SI unit of magnetic field
(synonymous with newton per
ampere-meter).
test charge An idealized positive charge
that has no electric field of its own and
thus no influence on its surroundings.
thermal conductivity The measure of a
material’s capacity to transport heat
by conduction from its hotter end to
its colder end.
thermal energy A disordered form of
energy contained in the kinetic and
potential energies of the individual
atoms and molecules that make up
a substance. Because of its random
distribution, this disordered energy
can’t be converted directly into useful
work. Other names for thermal energy include internal energy and heat.
thermal equilibrium A situation in
which no heat flows in a system
because all the objects in the system
are at the same temperature.
thermal motion The random motions of
individual particles in a material due
to the internal or thermal energy of
that material.
thrust A forward, propulsive force obtained when a rocket pushes stored
fuel backward; a forward propulsive
force obtained when a propeller, jet
engine, or other device pushes surrounding fluid or material backward.

478

GLOSSARY

tidal forces The differences between
one celestial object’s gravity at particular locations on the surface of
a second object and the average of
that gravity for the entire second object. Tidal forces tend to stretch the
second object into an egg shape.

tunneling The quantum process in
which small objects (which, because of the Heisenberg uncertainty
principle, have somewhat ill-defined
positions)
occasionally
move
through energy barriers to places
they can’t reach classically.

timbre The mixture of tones in an instrument’s sound that are characteristic of that instrument.

turbulence The unpredictable swirls
and eddies of turbulent fluid flow.

torque An influence that if exerted on
a free body results chiefly in an
angular acceleration of the body. A
torque is a vector quantity, consisting of both the amount of torque and
its direction. The SI unit of torque is
the newton-meter.
total internal reflection Complete reflection of a light wave that occurs when
that wave tries unsuccessfully to
leave a material with a large refractive
index for a material with a small refractive index at too shallow an angle.
traction The largest frictional force that
an object can obtain in its present
situation.
trajectory The path taken by an object
as it moves.
transformer A device that uses magnetic fields to transfer electric power
from one circuit to another circuit.
The two circuits are electrically
isolated since no charges actually
travel between the two circuits.

turbulent flow Irregular, fluctuating,
unpredictable fluid flow in which
nearby portions of the fluid quickly
become widely separated.
ultraviolet light Invisible light having
wavelengths shorter than about 400
nanometers.
uniform circular motion Motion at a
constant speed around a circular trajectory. An object undergoing uniform circular motion is accelerating
toward the center of the circle.
unstable equilibrium A state of equilibrium to which the object will
tend not to return if it’s disturbed.
At equilibrium, the object is free of
net force or torque. If the object is
moved away from its unstable equilibrium state, however, the net force
or torque that will then act on it will
tend to accelerate it further away
from that equilibrium state.
valence band The group of quantum
levels in an insulator that lies below
the Fermi level.

transistor An electronic component that
allows a tiny amount of electric charge,
either moving or stationary, to control
the flow of a large electric current.

valence level A quantum level in an
insulator that requires less energy
than the Fermi level and that is normally occupied by electrons.

translational motion Motion in which
an object moves as a whole along a
straight or curved line.

vector field A structure that associates
a vector quantity with each point in
space and time.

transmutation of elements Changing the atoms of one element into
another via nuclear processes that
alter the numbers of protons in their
nuclei.

vector quantity A quantity, characterizing some aspect of a physical
system, that consists of both a magnitude and a direction in space.

transverse wave A wave in which the
underlying oscillation is perpendicular to the wave itself.
traveling wave A wave that moves
steadily through space in a particular direction.
trough A peak negative excursion of an
extended system that is experiencing a wave.

velocity A vector quantity that measures
the rate at which an object’s position
is changing: the greater the velocity,
the farther the object travels each second. It consists of both the object’s
speed and the direction in which the
object is traveling. The SI unit of
velocity is the meter per second.
vertical polarization An electromagnetic wave in which the electric

field always points up or down (vertically). The magnetic field always
points horizontally.
vibration A spontaneous repetitive and
rhythmic movement about an equilibrium position.
vibrational antinode A region of a vibrating object that is experiencing maximal motion.
vibrational node A region of a vibrating
object that is not moving at all.
virtual image A pattern of light that
appears to come from a particular region of space and reproduces
the pattern of light at the surface of
the original object. A virtual image
forms before the lens that creates it
and can’t be projected onto a surface.
viscosity The measure of a fluid’s resistance to relative motion within that
fluid.
viscous drag A drag force that results
from viscous forces on a moving
surface immersed in a fluid.
viscous forces The forces exerted within
a fluid that oppose relative motion.
Layers of fluid that are moving
across one another exert viscous
forces on each other.
visible light Light having wavelengths
between about 400 nanometers (violet) and 750 nanometers (red). This
small portion of the electromagnetic
spectrum is all that we are able to
detect with our eyes.
volt (V) The SI unit of voltage (synonymous with joule per coulomb). The
voltage on the positive terminal of a
common battery is about 1.5 volts
above that on its negative terminal.
volt per meter (V/m) The SI unit of
electric field (synonymous with
newton per coulomb).
voltage drop The amount of electrostatic potential energy that each
coulomb of positive charge loses in
passing through a device. It’s equal
to the voltage of the charges entering the device minus the voltage of
the charges leaving that device.
voltage gradient A gradual slope in the
voltage across a region of space. A
voltage gradient is an electric field.
voltage rise The amount of electrostatic
potential energy that each coulomb

Glossary

of positive charge receives in passing through a device. It’s equal to
the voltage of the charges leaving
the device minus the voltage of the
charges entering that device.
volume The extent of a three-dimensional region of space bounded by a
particular enclosure. The SI unit of
volume is the meter3.
vortex A whirling region of fluid that is
moving in a circle above a central
cavity.
wake The trail left behind by an object
as it moves through a fluid.
wake deflection force A lift force experienced by a spinning ball when it deflects its turbulent wake to one side.
The wake deflection force points
toward the side of the ball moving
away from the onrushing airstream.
water hammer The impact of a moving
mass of water that is suddenly
stopped.

watt (W) The SI unit of power, equal to
the transfer of 1 joule per second.
One watt is the power used by the
bulb of a typical flashlight.
wave velocity The speed and direction
of the moving crests of a wave.
wavelength A structural characteristic of
a wave, corresponding to the distance
separating adjacent crests or troughs.
wave-particle duality The observation
that everything in nature has both
particle and wave characteristics. An
item is primarily particle-like when
it is emitted, absorbed, or otherwise
observed and primarily wavelike as
it travels through time and space.
weak force The fundamental force that
allows electrons and neutrinos to
interact and that’s responsible for
beta decay.
weight (near Earth’s surface) The downward force exerted on an object due
to its gravitational interaction with

479

Earth. An object’s weight is equal
to that object’s mass times the acceleration due to gravity. The direction
of the weight is always toward the
center of Earth.
work The mechanical means of transferring energy. Work is defined as the
force exerted on an object times the
distance that object travels in the direction of the force. A large force exerted for a short distance or a small
force exerted for a long distance can
perform the same amount of work.
The SI unit of work is the joule.
X-ray fluorescence The process in
which an electron in one of the outer
orbitals of an atom undergoes a radiative transition to an empty inner
orbital, emitting an X-ray photon.
X-rays Very high-energy photons of
electromagnetic radiation.
zeroth law of thermodynamics The
law of thermal equilibrium.

Index
A
Absolute temperature scales, 123
Absolute zero, 123
Acceleration
angular, 40
carousels and, 86–88
centripetal, 87
deceleration and, 6
defined, 5, 8
due to gravity, 13
examples, 6
experience of, 89–90
feeling of, 90
magnitude, 5
net force and, 8
in Newton’s second law of motion, 7
potential energy and, 69
roller coaster, 91
SI unit of, 11
Access ramps, 31
Achromat, 399
Action and reaction, 23
Activation energy, 178
Active learning experiments
Cartesian diver, 119–120, 140–141
disc in microwave oven, 332–333, 351
fog in a bottle, 208, 228
high-flying balls, 96, 117
magnifying glass camera, 392–393,
422–423
moving water without touching,
266–267, 300
nail and wire electromagnet,
302–303, 330
radiation-damaged paper, 425, 458
removing a tablecloth from a table,
1–2, 31
ruler thermometer, 173, 206
singing wineglass, 230–231, 263–264
spinning pie dish, 33, 70
splitting colors of sunlight, 353–354,
390–391
swinging water overhead, 72, 94
vortex cannon, 142–143, 171
Adverse pressure gradient, 155
Aerodynamic forces, 153
Aerodynamics, 153
Aiming high, 21
Air
circulating, 169
as compressible, 121
as gas, 121
heat moving with, 180
sound in, 250–252
thermal motion, 121

vibrating, 247–248
volumes, 121
Air conditioners
chlorofluorocarbons, 219
compressor and condenser coils, 218
cooling of indoor air, 216–217
experiments, 209
how they work summary, 228–229
ideal efficiency and, 215
overview, 209
pumping heat against it’s natural flow,
214–215
thermodynamics and, 209–212
warming of outdoor air, 217–219
window, in middle of room, 219
Air ducts, 146
Air guitar, 253
Airfoil, 161
Airplanes
experiments, 161
how they work summary, 172
jet engines, 169–171
lift production, 162–165
overview, 161
propellers, 167–169
stalling a wing, 165–167
streamlined wing, 161–162
stunt flying, 166
wings, 161–165
Airspeed, 154
Alpha decay, 433
Alternating current
coil of wire and, 17–18
defined, 315
electric motors, 328–329
generators, 326, 328–329
outlets, 316
power distribution, 325–327
power reversals, 316
Aluminum, X-rays and, 452
Ampere, 289
Ampère, André-Marie, 312
Amplifiers
audio, 419–422
defined, 420
feedback, 420
input wires, 421
MOSFET-based, 422
rating, 421
voltage, 421
Amplitude, harmonic oscillator, 234
Amplitude modulation (AM), 340, 342
Analog representation, 404
AND gates, 419
Angle of attack, 164–165

Angular acceleration, 40
Angular impulses
angular momentum and, 66
defined, 65, 66
equation, 65
Angular momentum
angular impulse and, 66
defined, 64, 66
illustrated, 65
SI unit, 64
Angular position, 36
Angular speed, 36
Angular velocity, 36
Anharmonic oscillator, 237
Anode, 384
Antennas
halfwave dipole, 339
quarter-wave monopole, 339
receiver, 337–338
straight, 338
transmitter, 337, 339
Antimatter, 453
Antireflection coating, 399
Aperture, 396
Apogee, 110
Apparent weight, 90
Aquarium, 412
Archimedes’ principle, 126
Aristotle, 3
Atkinson cycle engine, 224
Atmosphere, Earth’s, 124–125
Atmospheric pressure, 125
Atomic bomb, 427
Atomic number, 369
Atoms
assembling, 369–370
collision, 176
defined, 121
electron standing waves in, 367–368
electrons, 269, 368
forces between, 175–176
neutrons, 269
nucleus, 269, 428, 430
protons, 269
Audio players
audio amplifier, 419–422
computer, 418–419
digital sound information storage,
416–417
experiments, 413–414
how they work summary, 423–424
overview, 413
transistors, 414–415
Audio signals, 419
Audio speakers, 350
481

482

Index

Automobiles
batteries, 291, 293
diesel engines, 226
electric defrosters, 298
engine efficiency, 223–224
engine efficiency, improving, 224–225
experiments, 220
heat engines, 220–221
how they work summary, 229
internal combustion engine, 222–223
multicylinder engines, 227–228
overview, 219
power, cutting, 289
Axis of rotation, 37

B
Back emf, 319
Balance clocks, 237–239
Balanced forces, 25
Balanced objects, 44
Balanced seesaw, 44–45
Ball sports (air)
curveballs and knuckleballs and, 159–160
experiments, 153
fast moving ball, 155–157
golf ball dimples and, 157–159
how they work summary, 171–172
overview, 153
slow moving ball, 153–155
Ballooning weather, 128
Balloons
air/air pressure and, 121–122
experiments, 120
helium, 129–130
hot-air, 127–128
how they work summary, 141
lifting force on, 125–127
overview of, 120
what not to put in, 130
Balls
bouncing, 79
energy ratios, 81
falling, 12–21
golf, 157–159
high-flying, 96, 117
kinetic energy, 82
positively charged, 271
speed ratios, 81, 82
thrown, movement of, 19
tossing upward, 18–19
Band gaps, 379
Bandwidth, 341
Banked curves, 88
Banneker, Benjamin, 239
Bardeen, John, 414
Base of support, 99
Bathroom scales, 74, 78–79
Batteries
alkaline, 291
car, 291, 293
flashlight, 290–291
perspectives on, 290
radio, 294

Beam waist, 410
Becquerel, Antoine-Henri, 431
Bell, Jocelyn, 233
Bernoulli, Daniel, 135
Bernoulli’s equation, 135, 138, 152
Beta decay, 431, 454
Bicycle pedaling, 57
Bicycles
dynamic stability and, 100–101
exercise, 212, 329
experiments, 97
how they work summary, 117
leaning while turning, 101–102
overview, 97
pedaling, 102–104
slicing through air, 162
tricycles and, 97–99
Binary, 404–405
Black holes, 116
Blackbody spectrum, 197
Blacksmith, 199
Blending cold water, 211
Blu-ray players, 408–410
Boats, shifting cargo, 45
Boiling
defined, 190
temperature, 190
temperature, changing, 190–191
water, 189–191
Boltzmann constant, 130
Bottle, blowing across, 248, 249
Bouncing balls
bats and, 85–86
coefficient of restitution, 82
elastic/inelastic collisions, 81
experiments, 79
how they work summary, 95
lively, 81
moving surface and, 83
overview, 79
shape, 79
surface and, 82–83
Boundary layer, 153–155
Bowing strings, 245–246
Bowling balls, 9
Brahe, Tycho, 111
Brattain, Walter, 414
Breath, seeing, 189
Bremsstrahlung, 449
Brewster’s angle, 362–363
Bricks, 195
Bulbs, flashlight
choosing, 295–297
filament, 292–293
filament and current flow, 296
voltage drop, 295
Bumper cars
conserved quantities, 67
exchanging momentum in collisions,
62–63
experiments, 59–60
glancing blows, 65–66
how they work summary, 71
linear momentum, 60–61

overview of, 59
spinning in circles, 64–65
Bungee jumping, 18
Buoyant force, 125–126
Burning rubber, 53

C
Calculus, 17
Calibration, spring scales, 77–78
Cameras
depth of focus, 396
experiments, 393
eyes and, 402–403
f-number, 398
focal length, 396–397
focusing, 395–396
how they work summary, 423
image sensors, 401–402
lens quality, 399
lenses and real images, 394–395
overview, 393
sunny versus overcast days and, 398
viewfinder, 399–401
Candlelight, 355
Canoeing, 156
Capacitance, 287
Capacitors, 421
Capillary waves, 256
Carbohydrates, 178
Carbon, 430
Cardboard, cutting up, 43
Carlson, Chester F., 277
Carousels, 86–89, 95
Carrier frequency, 341
Cartesian diver, 119–120, 140–141
Cathode, 384
Cavendish, Henry, 108
CDs
aluminum layer, 407
density measurements, 405
encoding schemes, 406
player optical system, 408–410
Celsius, 123, 177
Center of gravity, 44, 45
Center of mass, 38, 45
Center of percussion, 85
Center of rotation, 38
Centripetal acceleration, 87
Centripetal force, 87, 88
Chadwick James, 431
Chain reactions, 432–433
Chandelier oscillation, 239
Chaotic system, 152
Characteristic X-ray, 449–450
Charge
on conducting object, 282
defined, 268
electric fields and, 283
elementary unit of, 269
net, 269
quantized, 269
separated, 287
SI unit, 268

Index
transferring, 271–272
voltage gradients and, 283
Chemical bonds, 121, 175–176
Chemical potential energy, 175–176, 271
Chemical reactions, 178
Chernobyl reactor, 444–445
Chlorofluorocarbons, 219
Chromatic aberration, 399
Circular motion, 87
Circularly polarized, 409
Classified physics, 426
Cleaning house, 150
Clocks
balance, 237–239
egg-timer, 233
electronic, 239–240
experiments, 231
how they work summary, 264
natural resonance, 232–233
overview, 231
pendulum, 233–237
time and, 232
Closed circuits, 288
CMOS NAND gate and inverter, 418–419
Coasting, 2, 3–4
Coaxial cable, 342
Coefficient of restitution, 82
Coefficient of volume expansion, 204
Coffee mug shape, 99
Coherent light, 387
Coin toss, 19
Collision energy, 80
Collisions
of atoms, 176
elastic, 81
exchanging momentum in, 62–63
inelastic, 81
speed, 84
Color temperature, 198
Colors
eye recognition of, 364–365
firework production of, 372
mixture of, 365
primary additive, 364–365
primary subtractive, 364–365
Compasses, 309–310
Components
defined, 19
forward, 19, 20
upward, 19–20
Compressible, 121
Compton scattering, 451, 453
Computed tomography (CT) scanner,
451–452
Condensation, 187
Conduction
defined, 179
electrical, 275
thermal, 193–195
Conduction band, 380
Conduction level, 380
Cone cells, 364
Conserved quantities
angular momentum, 67

defined, 25
energy, 67
momentum, 62, 63, 67
Constructive interference, 263, 360
Convection
defined, 180
staying warm by impeding, 195–196
Convection cell, 180
Convection current, 180
Converging lens, 394
Conveyor belts, 276
Cooling, 216–217
Cordless telephones, 339
Corona discharge, 278–279, 284–285
Coulomb, 268
Coulomb constant, 270, 334
Coulomb’s law, 270
Coulomb’s law for magnetic poles, 305
Credit cards, 311
Critical mass, 433
Crocodile floating, 127
Crystalline, 184
Curie, Marie, 431
Curie, Pierre, 431
Current
alternating, 315–316
defined, 288, 289
direct, 314–315
direction, 289
eddy, 325
in flashlights, 289–290, 293–294
load, 321–322
magnetizing, 320–321
secondary, 323
SI unit, 289
Curveballs, 159–160
Cycle per second, 240
Cyclotron motion, 350

D
Davisson, Clinton Joseph, 367
de Cisternay du Fay, Charles-François, 268
de Coulomb, Charles-Augustin, 269
de Laval, Carl Gustaf, 106
de Laval nozzle, 106
Deceleration, 5
Decimal, 404
Degree of freedom, 182
Demagnetization, 308
Density
air pressure and, 122
particle, 129
SI unit, 123
Density gradients, 125
Depletion region, 382
Deposition, 189
Depth of focus, 396
Destructive interference, 263
Deuterium, 446
Diesel, Rudolph Christian Karl, 226
Diesel engines, 226–227
Diffraction, 409, 410
Digital representation, 404

Digital-to-analog converter (DAC), 419
Diodes
defined, 381
forward biased, 384
laser, 389–390
light-emitting, 384–385
photodiodes, 401–402
reverse biased, 384
Direct current (DC), 314–315
Direction, 3
Disc in microwave oven, 332–333, 351
Discharge lamps
defined, 365–366
experiments, 364
fluorescent, 373–375
high-pressure, 375–377
how they work summary, 391
mercury, metal-halide, and sodium,
375–377
neon, 371–372
overview, 363
plasma, 375
radiation trapping, 375
Discharges
corona, 278–279, 284–285
defined, 279
gas, 365–366
Dispersion
defined, 259, 263
refraction and, 359
Distance, 3
Diverging lens, 403
Domain walls, 308
Doppler effect, 252
Drag
induced, 163
pressure, 155, 156
propeller, 168
viscous, 154
Drag forces, 153
Drinking fountains, 218
Drop tower, 91
Drums, 249–250, 252–253
DVDs
encoding schemes, 406
layers, 407
player optical system, 408–410
structure of, 407–408
technology, 405–406
Dynamic memory, 417
Dynamic pressure variations, 147–148
Dynamic stability, 100
Dynamic variation, 132

E
Earth
atmosphere, 124–125
greenhouse effect, 205
magnetic poles, 309–310
moon distance measurement, 232
orbiting, 108–111
sunlight passage to, 356–357
temperature, 204–205
tidal forces, 254–255

483

484

Index

Eddy currents, 325
Eiffel, Gustave, 156
Einstein, Albert, 114, 116, 386, 427
Elastic collisions, 81
Elastic limit, 76
Elastic potential energy, 76
Elastic scattering, 451
Electric charge. See Charge
Electric circuits
closed, 288
current, 289
defined, 288
open, 288
parallel, 298, 300
short, 288
Electric current. See Current
Electric defrosters, 298
Electric doorbell, 311–313
Electric fields
in conducting object, 282
defined, 279
flashlight light, 387
fluorescent lamp, 283
microwave, 344
in microwave oven, 346
of motionless positive charge, 280
SI unit, 280, 283
sources of, 334
Electric phonographs, 317
Electric polarization, 270
Electric power distribution
AC electric generators and motors,
328–329
alternating current, 315–316,
325–327
alternating current and coil of wire,
318–319
direct current, 314–315
experiments, 313
how it works summary, 330
magnetic induction, 317
overview, 313
transformers, 320–325
Electrical conductors, 275
Electrical insulators, 275
Electrical resistance
defined, 288
filament, 296
SI unit, 296
skin, 297
Electricity, 266–301
high voltages, 272–273
magnetism and, 334
static, 267–276
Electrochemical emf, 318
Electromagnetic spectrum, 197
Electromagnetic waves
defined, 180, 335
impedance mismatch, 358
propagation, 342
spectrum of, 342
sunlight and, 354–355
superposition of, 360
types of, 181

undulations and, 338
wavelengths, 197, 343–344
Electromagnets, 312
Electron standing waves, 367–368
Electron volt, 384
Electronic clocks, 239–240
Electron-positron pair production, 451, 453
Electrons
adding to floating gate, 417
arrangement in atoms, 370
defined, 179
electric charge and, 269
Fermi sea of, 378
medical, 281
migration, 382
as orbital, 368
in solids, 378–379
transfer of, 272
Electrostatic forces, 268, 270
Electrostatic potential energy, 272–273
Elementary unit of electric charge, 269
Elevator, 25
Energy
activation, 178
collision, 80
as conserved, 25, 27
defined, 25, 27
Fermi, 378
friction and, 52–53
gravitational potential, 26, 28–29
internal, 53
jet engines and, 171
kinetic, 26, 27, 57–58
law of conservation of, 210–211
magnetic fields and, 319
ordered, 51
potential. See potential energy
pressure and, 134–136
rebound, 80
relativistic, 115
thermal, 51–52, 174–175
Energy ratios, 81–82
Engines. See also Automobiles
Atkinson cycle, 224
cold, starting, 294
compression stroke, 223
diesel, 226–227
efficiency, 223–224
efficiency, improving, 264–265
four-stroke, 222
fuel-injected, 222
heat, 220–221
ignition temperatures for grades of
gasoline, 225
intercoolers, 226
internal combustion, 222–223
multicylinder, 227–228
power stroke, 223, 224
premium fuel and, 225
steam, 222
supercharged, 226
turbocharged, 226
warm, starting, 295
English system of units, 10–12

Enhanced radiation bomb, 435–436
Enriched uranium, 440–442
Entropy
defined, 212
disorder and, 212–213
law of, 213
redistribution, 214
time and, 232
Equilibrium
defined, 75
motionlessness and, 79
neutral, 99
phase, 186–187
position, 75
rotational, 98–99
shape, 80
stable, 75, 98–99
thermal, 176–177
unstable, 99
Erbium-doped fiber amplifiers (EDFAs),
412–413
Escape velocity, 111
Evaporation, 187
Excited state, 371
Exercise bicycles, 212, 329
Exhaust velocity, 106
Explosive chain reaction, 433
Exponential decay, 429
Eyeglasses, 402–403
Eyes, 402

F
Fahrenheit, 123, 177
Falling balls
acceleration, 13
experiments, 12
how they work summary, 32
overview, 12
position of, 16–17
projectile motion, 19–21
tossing ball upward and, 18–19
velocity of, 15–16
weight and gravity and, 13–14
Farad, 287
Faraday, Michael, 317
Fast fission reactors, 443
Feeling of acceleration, 90
Fermi, Enrico, 431, 441
Fermi energy, 378
Fermi level
defined, 378
empty, 379
in insulators, 380
in metals, 379
Fermi particles, 369
Ferromagnetic material, 307
Field-effect transistor, 414, 415
Fields, 279. See also Electric fields
File cabinet, moving, 49–50
Fingers in electrical outlet, 316
Fireworks, 372
Firm springs, 76
First law of thermodynamics, 210–211

Index
Fission, nuclear, 431
Fission bomb, 432–435
Fission reactors
Chernobyl, 444–445
fast, 443
Fukushima Daiichi, 445
nuclear, 438–439
safety and accidents, 443
thermal, 440–442
Three Mile Island, 444
Windscale, 444
Fissionable, 432
Flash memory, 417
Flashlights
batteries, 290–291
bulbs, 292–293, 295–297
current, 293–294
electric circuit, 288
electric current, 288, 289–290
electric field, 387
electricity and, 287–289
experiments, 287
how they work summary, 301
LED, 297–299
metal strips, 293
overview, 287
power, 293–294
voltage, 293–294
Flow
in bent hose, 147–149
heat, 194, 214
laminar, 150, 151, 153–155
smooth, in a stream, 155
in straight hose, 145–147
through nozzle, 149–150
turbulent, 150, 151, 155–157
Fluids
analysis of, 119
defined, 125
Earth’s atmosphere as, 125
motion and, 142–172
speed and pressure in, 149
steady-state flow, 135
viscosities of, 144
Fluorescence, 373
Fluorescent lamps
defined, 373
early, 373–374
phosphor blends, 374
plasma, 375
practical issues, 374–375
sputtering, 375
Flux lines, magnetic, 311, 312
F-numbers, 398
Focal lengths, 396–397
Focusing, 395–396
Fog in a bottle, 208, 228
Foil wrapping, 201
Food labeling, 74
Forces
aerodynamic, 153
affect on skaters, 7–8
between atoms, 175–176
balanced, 25

buoyant, 125–126
centripetal, 87, 88
defined, 4
drag, 153
electrostatic, 268, 270
equal, 8
frictional, 50
fundamental, 454
impact, 62
lift, 153
Lorentz, 349–350, 447
magnetostatic, 304, 309
Magnus, 159
momentum and, 63
net, 7
normal, 24
nuclear, 428–429
potential gradients and, 69
restoring, 75
SI unit of, 11
springlike, 242
strong, 454
support, 23–24
thrust, 105, 167
tidal, 254–255
torques and, 42–43
viscous, 144, 145, 147
wake, 159
weak, 454
Forward biased, 384
Four-stroke engines, 222
Frames of reference, 9–10
Franklin,, Benjamin, 268
Free space, permeability of, 305
Freezing, 186
Frequency
defined, 240
SI unit, 240
of sound, 241
of waves, 258
Frequency modulation (FM), 340–341
Friction
defined, 49
energy and, 52–53
microscopic view of, 50
sliding, 51
static, 51
traction and, 51
weight and, 51
Frictional forces, 50
Frisch, Otto, 431
Frozen fingers, 177
Fuel-injected engines, 222
Fukushima Daiichi reactor, 445
Fundamental forces, 454
Fusion
latent heat of, 186
nuclear, 431
Fusion bomb, 435–436

G
Galilei, Galileo, 3
Gamma rays, 453–454

Garden watering
dynamic pressure variations, 147–148
experiments, 143–144
flow in bent hose, 147–149
flow in straight hose, 145–147
flow through nozzle, 149–150
how it works summary, 171
overview, 143
turbulence and, 150–152
Gas discharges, 365–366
Gaseous, 184
Gases
defined, 121
helium, 130
ideal gas law, 130
inert, 121
pressure of, 130
General theory of relativity, 116
Geostationary satellites, 110
Germain, Sophie, 249
Golf balls, dimples on, 157–158
Gradients
defined, 68
density, 125
potential, 68–69
pressure, 125
voltage, 282–283
Gravitational constant, 109
Gravitational mass, 116
Gravitational potential energy
defined, 26
equation, 28
in water distribution, 138
Gravity
acceleration due to, 13
center of, 44–45
defined, 13
mass and, 14
moving water and, 138–140
pendulums and, 236
thermal energy and, 205
water pressure and, 136–138
Gravity waves, 256
Greenhouse effect, 205
Ground state, 371

H
Hahn, Otto, 431, 432
Half a fall, 15, 17
Half-life, 429
Halfwave dipole antenna, 339
Hanging grocery scales, 77–78
Hard disks, 417
Hard magnetic material, 308
Hard to turn, 42
Harmonic oscillators
amplitude, 234
balance clocks, 238
defined, 234, 235
importance of, 78
pendulum, 235–236
period, 234
stiffness, 234
violin strings as, 242

485

486

Index

Harmonics, 245
Harrison, John, 239
Heat
defined, 177
flow, 194, 214
latent, 186
metal tray and cookies, 183
movement from fire to room, 178
moving as light, 180–182
moving it around, 209–211
moving through metal, 179
moving with air, 180
pumping against natural flow, 214–215
SI unit, 182
specific, 182–183
steam, 227
temperature and, 176–177
wind and, 180
Heat capacity, 182
Heat engines, 220–221
Heat exchanger, 178
Heat packs, 179
Heat pumps
in appliances, 218–219
in cold weather, 215
defined, 219
diagram, 214
energy consumption, 216
heat engines and, 221
Heisenberg uncertainty principle, 429
Helium balloons, 129–130, 252
Henry, 336
Hertz, 240
Hertz, Heinrich Rudolph, 240
High dive, 16, 39
Higher-order vibrational modes, 244
High-flying balls, 96, 117
High-voltage wires, 328
Hooke, Robert, 75
Hooke’s law, 75, 76
Horizontal polarization, 337
Hot potatoes, 194
Hot-air balloons, 128–129
Humphry, Davy, 317
Hurricane kinetic energy, 59
Hydrogen, 227
Hydrogen bomb, 435–436
Hydrogen bond, 344

I
Ice. See also Water
as crystalline, 185
formation, 185
melting, 185
as solid, 184
stuck on, 61
subliming, 189
turning on, 48
Ice water, 187
Ideal gas law, 130
Image distance, 397
Image sensors, 401
Impedance, 358, 359

Impedance mismatch, 358, 359
Impulses
angular, 65–66
defined, 62, 63
equation, 62
Incandescence, 371
Incoherent light, 386
Incompressible, 133
Index of refraction, 356
Induced drag, 163
Induced emf, 318
Induced fission, 431
Inductance, 336
Inductors, 318, 324
Inelastic collisions, 81
Inertia, 3, 36
Inertial frame of reference, 9
Inertial mass, 116
Infrared light, 355
Infrared sensors, 199
Insert gases, 121
Insulation. See also Warmth
electrical, 275
glass wool, 202–203
house, 202–203
how it works summary, 206–207
importance of, 192–193
materials, 202
windows, 203–204
Insulators, 380, 381
Interference
constructive, 263, 360
defined, 262, 263
destructive, 263, 360
pattern, 263–264
wave, 262–263
Internal combustion engines, 222–223
Internal energy, 53
Internal kinetic energy, 123
Internal potential energy, 123
Iron filings, 311
Isolation transformers, 323
Isotopes, 432

J
Jet engines. See also Airplanes
energy and, 171
ramjet, 170
turbofan, 170
turbojet, 169
Jewel movements, 56
Jones, David, 100
Joule, 28
Joule per kilogram-kelvin, 182
Joule per second, 56
Jump rope, 245

K
Kelvin scale, 123, 177
Kepler, Johannes, 111
Kepler’s first law, 111–112
Kepler’s second law, 112–113

Kepler’s third law, 113
Kilogram per meter3, 123
Kilogram-meter per second, 60
Kilogram-meter per second2, 11
Kilogram-meter2, 39
Kilogram-meter2 per second, 64
Kilograms, 11
Kinetic energy. See also Energy
balls, 82
calculating, 57–58
defined, 26, 27
equation, 58
internal, 123
of rotational motion, 58
thermal, 204
Kneading energy, 57
Knuckleballs, 159–160
Kutta, M Wilhelm, 163

L
Laminar flow, 150, 151, 153–155
Laser amplifier, 387, 388
Laser diodes, 389–390
Laser oscillator, 387, 388
Lasers
beam, 387–388
how they work summary, 391
ideal system, 388
laser light and, 386–387
medium, 387, 388–390
overview and experiments, 377
population inversion, 389
pumping, 389
warning, 377
Latent heat
of evaporation, 187
of fusion, 186
of melting, 186
of vaporization, 187
Latimer, Lewis Howard, 314
Law of conservation of energy, 210–211
Law of entropy, 213
Law of thermal equilibrium, 210
Law of universal gravitation, 109
Laws of thermodynamics, 210
LEDs
colors of, 384
defined, 384
flashlights, 297–299
how they work summary, 391
overview and experiments, 377
series, 385
as solid-state device, 378
wavelengths, 385
Lens equation, 397
Lenses. See also Cameras
antireflection coated, 399
aperture, 396
collimated, 409–410
converging, 394
defined, 394
diameter, 395–396
diverging, 403

Index
f-number, 398
focal length, 396–397
quality, improving, 399
real images and, 394–395
zoom, 399
Lenz’s law, 318
Lever arm, 43
Levers, 46
Lift
limits of, 165–167
wing production of, 162–165
Lift forces, 153
Light, 353–391
black objects and, 181
candlelight, 355
coherent, 387
cool, 204
heat moving as, 180–182
how we see, 364–365
incoherent, 386
index of refraction and, 356
infrared, 355
laser, 386–387
in optical fiber, 412, 413
primary colors of, 364–365
speed of, 114, 115–116
spontaneous, 386
stimulated, 386
sunlight, 354–363
travel, 356
ultraviolet, 355
visible, 354
wavelengths of, 364
Lightning, 273, 283, 286–287, 334
Lightning rods, 285, 286
Linear accelerator, 455–456
Linear momentum, 60. See also Momentum
Lint, 281
Liquids, 184, 185
Load current, 321–322
Longitudinal wave, 248
Loop-the-loops, roller coaster, 91–94
Lorentz, Hendrik Antoon, 349
Lorentz force
in audio speakers, 350
cyclotron motion, 350
defined, 349
equation, 349
nuclear fusion reactors and, 447
Love, William T., 315
Lumen, 365
Luminescence, 371

M
Magnetic confinement fusion reactors, 447
Magnetic cores, 325
Magnetic dipoles, 304
Magnetic domains, 307
Magnetic fields
defined, 309
energy and, 319
SI unit, 309
sources of, 334

Magnetic flux lines, 311, 312
Magnetic induction, 316
Magnetic monopoles, 304
Magnetic polarization, 306
Magnetic poles
Coulomb’s law for, 305
defined, 304
net, 304
SI unit, 305
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
defined, 456
functioning of, 456–457
illustrated, 457
magnetic field, 313, 320
protons and, 457–458
spatial variation, 458
Magnetism
Coulomb’s law for, 305
defined, 304
electricity and, 334
Magnetizing current, 320–321
Magnetostatic force, 304, 309
Magnetron
creating microwaves with, 347–348
large, behavior of, 348
magnet, 348
powering, 348–349
Magnets
compasses and, 309–310
dropping, 319
electric doorbell, 311–313
experiments, 303–304
how they work summary, 330
iron filings and, 311
as limited energy sources
misconception, 319
magnetron, 348
north pole, 309
overview, 303
permanent, 308
plastic sheet, 308
refrigerator, 304–305
two halves, 306
Magnifying glass, 395, 399, 401
Magnifying glass camera, 392–393, 422–423
Magnitude, 3, 5
Magnus force, 159
Manhattan Project, 433–434
Marbles, 82, 83, 84, 85
Mass
acceleration and, 8
center of, 38
critical, 433
defined, 5
gravitational, 116
gravity and, 14
inertial, 116
marbles and, 85
in Newton’s second law of motion, 7
rotational, 39
subcritical, 434–435
supercritical, 433
Mechanical advantage, 30, 46
Medical imaging and radiation

487

experiments, 448
gamma rays, 453–454
how it works summary, 459
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),
456–458
overview, 448
particle accelerators, 455–456
X-rays, 448–453
Medical linear accelerator, 281
Meitner, Lise, 431, 432
Melting
defined, 185
latent heat of, 186
in microwave oven, 345
temperature, 185
Mercury lamps, 375–377
Merry-go-round, 42, 59, 67
Metal
Fermi level, 379
heat moving through, 179
in microwave oven, 346–347
rod, as harmonic oscillator, 240
small low-temperature emissivities, 201
Metal strips, flashlight, 293
Metal-halide lamps, 375–377
Metal-oxide semiconductor, 415
Meter per second, 11
Meter per second squared, 11
Meter2, 122
Meter3, 123
Meters, 11
Microwave ovens
disc in, 332–333, 351
electric fields in, 346
experiments, 343
how they work summary, 351–352
ice melting in, 345
magnetron, 347–350
metal in, 346–347
overview, 343
uneven cooking, 347
Microwave popcorn, 345
Microwaves
creating with magnetron, 347–348
defined, 344
electric field, 344
food and, 343–345
Moderator, 440
Momentum
angular, 64–65
conservation of, 62, 63
defined, 60, 63
force and, 63
relativistic, 114
SI unit, 60
zero, 60
Moon, 14, 232
MOSFETs
conductivity, 417
flow of charge control, 416
n-channel, 414–416, 418
p-channel, 418–419
presence or absence of charge, 417
Mothballs, 189

488

Index

Motion
circular, 87
of dangling seesaw, 36–37
fluids and, 142–172
relative, 49
relativistic laws of, 114
rotational, 35, 37, 56–57
simple harmonic, 234
thermal, 121
translational, 35
Motors, electric, 328–329
Mountain biking, 29
Mountain travel, 125
Moving water
gravity and, 138–140
pressure and energy and, 134–136
without touching, 266–267, 300
Multicylinder engines, 227–228
Music, 241–242
Musical instruments
drum, 249–250
experiments, 241
how they work summary, 264
organ pipe, 247–249
overview, 241
piano strings, 263
sound and, 241–242
sound in air, 250–252
turning vibrations into sound, 252–253
vibrations from, 246
violin string, 242–246

N
Nail and wire electromagnet, 302–303, 330
NAND gates, 418–419
Natural resonance, 232–233
n-channel MOSFET, 414–416, 418
Neon, 371–372
Net electric charge, 269
Net force, 7, 75
Net magnetic pole, 304
Net torque, 40, 41
Neutral equilibrium, 99
Neutrinos, 454
Neutron bomb, 435–436
Neutrons, 269
Newton, 11
Newton, Sir Isaac, 4, 17
Newton per ampere-meter, 309
Newton per meter2, 122
Newton-meter, 28, 39
Newton’s first law of motion, 4
Newton’s first law of rotational motion, 37
Newton’s second law of motion, 7–8
Newton’s second law of rotational motion, 41
Newton’s third law of motion
balanced forces and, 25
defined, 22
universality of, 23
Newton’s third law of rotational motion,
47–48
Normal forces, 24
Nozzle, flow through, 149–150

n-type semiconductors, 381
Nuclear candles, 442
Nuclear fission, 431
Nuclear fission reactors, 438–439
Nuclear force, 428–429
Nuclear fusion, 431
Nuclear fusion reactors, 446–447
Nuclear reactors
experiments, 438
fast fission reactors, 443
how they work summary, 459
nuclear fission reactors, 438–439
nuclear fusion reactors, 446–447
overview, 438
safety and accidents, 443–445
thermal fission reactors, 440–442
Nuclear weapons
atomic bomb, 427
background, 426–427
chain reactions and fission bomb,
432–435
E = mc2 and, 427
experiments, 426
fission and fusion and, 430–431
fission bomb, 432–435
heat, radiation, fallout and, 437
how they work summary, 459
hydrogen bomb, 435–436
Manhattan Project, 433–434
overview, 426
radioactive decay and, 429
transmutation of elements, 437
Nucleation, 191
Nucleons, 428
Nucleus, atoms, 269, 428, 430

O
Object distance, 397
Octaves, 242
Oersted, Hans Christian, 312
Ohm, 296
Ohm, Georg Simon, 296
Ohmic, 296
Ohm’s law, 296–297
Oil slick, 362
Open circuits, 288
Open fires, 178
Opera, 242
Optical fiber
communication with, 412–413
core, 412
defined, 411
light in, 412, 413
technology, 410–412
total internal reflection, 411
Optical technology
CDs, DVDs, Blu-rays, 407–408
communication, 412–413
digital recording, 405–406
digital representation, 404
experiments, 403
fibers, 410–412
how it works summary, 423

overview, 403
player optical system, 408–410
Orbital area, 112–113
Orbital period, 108, 112
Orbitals. See also Atoms
defined, 367
electrons, 368, 369
identification of, 370
shells, 369–370
Orbits
defined, 108
Earth, 108–111
elliptical, 111–112
geosynchronous, 110
Kepler’s first law and, 111–112
lunar, 111
sun, 111–113
Ordered energy, 51
Organ pipe. See also Musical instruments
playing, 248–249
turning vibrations into sound, 253
vibrating air, 247–248
Oscillation, 233

P
Parallel circuits, 298, 300
Particle accelerators, 455–456
Particle density, 129
Pascal, 122
Pascal’s principle, 133–134
Pauli exclusion principle, 369
p-channel MOSFET, 418–419
Pedaling bicycles, 102–104
Pendulum clocks, 236–237
Pendulums
gravity and, 236
as harmonic oscillator, 235
motion illustration, 234, 235
as natural resonance, 233
oscillation, 233
period, 235–236
Perigee, 110
Period
harmonic oscillator, 234
pendulum, 235–236
Periodic table of elements, 370
Permanent magnets, 308
Permeability of free space, 305
Phase equilibrium, 186–187
Phase transition, 185
Phases of matter, 184–185
Phosphors, 373
Photoconductors, 276–277, 278, 381
Photodiodes, 401–402
Photoelectric effect, 451
Photoemission, 451
Photons, 371, 387, 388, 453
Piano
energy and, 25–26
lifting, 26–27
lifting with ramp, 29–31
on the sidewalk, 22–23
strings, 263

Index
Piezoelectric material, 240
Pitch, 241
Pitching, 27
Planck, Max, 372
Planck constant, 371–372
Plane polarized, 409
Plasma, 374
Plastic sheet magnets, 308
Plucking strings, 246
Plumbing, old, 147
p-n junction, 382, 384, 385
Poiseuille’s law, 145–146
Polarization
circular, 409
electric, 270
horizontal, 337
magnetic, 306
plane, 409
reflection and, 362–363
vertical, 337
Polarization beam splitter, 409
Polarizing sunglasses, 362–363
Poles, 304
Population inversion, 389
Position
angular, 36
defined, 3
equilibrium, 75
of falling ball, 16–17
initial, 16
present, 16, 17
Positrons, 453
Pot handles, hot and cool, 180
Potential energy
acceleration and, 69
chemical, 175–176, 271
defined, 26, 27
elastic, 76
electrostatic, 272–273
examples of, 52
forms of, 52
gravitational, 26, 28–29, 138
internal, 123
pressure, 134
stable equilibrium and, 99
storage, 69
unstable equilibrium and, 99
Potential gradients, 68, 69
Power
equations, 57
in flashlights, 293–294
rotational work and, 56–57
SI unit, 56–57
water, 139
Prandtl, Ludwig, 155
Precession, 100
Pressure
atmospheric, 125
defined, 122
density and, 122
dynamic variation in, 132
energy and, 134–136
equation, 122
in fluids, 149

of gases, 130
inside hot-air balloons, 128
SI unit, 122
static variation in, 132
water, 131–134, 136–138
Pressure drag, 154, 156
Pressure gradient, 125, 155
Pressure potential energy, 134
Primary colors of light, 364–365
Primary colors of pigment, 365
Principle of equivalence, 116
Product code scanning, 346
Projectile motion, 19–21
Propellers, 167–169
Protons, 269, 457–458
p-type semiconductors, 381
Pulling nails, 47
Pumping, laser, 389
Pumpkin chucking, 69
Pythagoras, 242

Q
Quanta, 371
Quantum physics, 366–367, 429
Quantum theory, 427
Quantum tunneling, 417
Quarter-wave monopole antennas, 339
Quarter-wave plate, 409
Quartz crystals, 240
Quartz oscillator, 239–240

R
Racing cars
airborne, 94
banked turns, 88
tight turns, 90
Radian per second, 36
Radian per second2, 40
Radians, 36
Radiation
defined, 181
forms of, 449
nuclear, 437
synchrotron, 450
thermal, 196–201
X-rays, 448–453
Radiation trapping, 375
Radiation-damaged paper, 425
Radiative transition, 371
Radio
AM, 340, 342
antennas, 335–337, 338–339
broadcasts, 343
experiments, 333
FM, 340–341
how it work summary, 351
overview, 333
reception, 339
transmitter, 337
volume control, 341
Radio waves
best reception and, 339
carrier frequency, 341

circularly polarized, 339
defined, 335, 343
high-frequency, 342
horizontal polarization, 337
particles in, 372
prelude to, 337–339
vertical polarization, 337
Radioactive decay, 429
Rainbows, 357–360
Raindrops, 359–360
Ramps
access, 31
benefit of, 30
defined, 22
devices, 30–31
experiments, 22
how they work summary, 32
lifting piano with, 29–31
mechanical advantage, 30
overview, 21
Rayleigh scattering, 356–357
Reactors. See Nuclear reactors
Rebound energy, 80
Reflecting pool, 363
Reflection
defined, 260, 263, 358
polarization and, 362–363
total internal, 411
Refraction
defined, 260, 263, 358
dispersion and, 359
Refrigerators, 218
Relative humidity and, 188
Relative motion, 49
Relativistic energy, 115
Relativistic laws of motion, 114
Relativistic momentum, 114
Research accelerators, 456
Resistive heating, 347
Resistors, 296
Resonant cavities, 348
Resonant energy transfer, 246
Restoring force, 75
Reverse biased, 384
Reynolds number, 150, 157
Right-hand rule, 37
Rockets. See also Spacecraft
action and reaction in, 107
de Laval nozzle, 106
exhaust velocity, 106
how they work summary, 117
propulsion, 105–107
thrust, 105–107
Rod cells, 364
Roller coasters
acceleration, 91
experiments, 86
free fall, 91
how they work summary, 95
loop-the-loops, 91–94
with multiple cars, 93–94
overview, 86
tracks, 93
Rollers, 54, 55

489

490

Index

Rolling coins, 101
Root mean square (RMS) voltage, 316
Rotation, center of, 38
Rotational equilibrium, 98–99
Rotational inertia, 36
Rotational mass, 39
Rotational motion
center of rotation, 38
defined, 35
kinetic energy of, 58
Newton’s first law, 37
Newton’s second law, 41
Newton’s third law, 47–48
physical quantities of, 42
power and, 56–57
Rubbing, 272
Ruler thermometer, 173, 206
Rutherford, Ernest, 431

S
Sails, 165
Sandglass, 233
Satellites, 64, 65, 67, 110
Scalar quantity, 5
Screws, removing, 44
Sea
experiments, 254
how it works summary, 264–265
overview, 254
rhythm of the surf, 262–263
tidal resonances, 255–256
tides, 254–255
traveling waves, 257–258
water wave structure, 258–260
waves at shore, 260
Second harmonic mode, 245
Second law of thermodynamics, 213
Secondary current, 323
Seconds, 11
Seesaws
angular position, 36
angular velocity, 42–43
axis of rotation, 37
balancing and unbalancing, 44–45
center of mass, 38
dangling, motion of, 36–37
experiments, 34
heavy child-light child problem, 35
how they work summary, 70
lever arm, 43
levers and mechanical advantage and, 46
overview, 34
rotational motion, 35
torques and, 39–42
Seiches, 256
Semiconductors, 381
Separated charge, 287
Shells, 369
Shock waves, 169
Shockley, William, 414
Short circuits, 288
SI units
acceleration, 11
angular acceleration, 40

angular momentum, 64
angular position, 36
angular velocity, 36
capacitance, 287
current, 289
defined, 10–11
density, 123
electric charge, 268
electric field, 280, 283
electrical resistance, 296
English units conversion, 12
English units versus, 11
force, 11
frequency, 240
heat, 182
inductance, 336
magnetic field, 309
magnetic pole, 305
momentum, 60
power, 56
pressure, 122
surface area, 122
velocity, 11
voltage, 273
volume, 123
Signals, 419
Simple harmonic motion, 234
Singing wineglass, 230–231, 263–264
Skating
acceleration, 5–6
coasting, 2, 3–4
experiments, 2
forces affecting, 7–9
frames of reference, 9–10
gliding forward, 3–4
how it works summary, 31
overview, 2
Skidding, 52
Skiing, 102
Skin, electrical resistance, 297
Sliding friction
charge transfer and, 271–272
defined, 51
static friction versus, 51
Smoke jumpers, 201
Soap bubbles, 360–361
Sodium lamps, 375–377
Soft magnetic material, 308
Soft springs, 76
Solids, 184
Sound
in air, 250–252
defined, 241
envelope, 246
frequency of, 241
speed of, 251
turning vibrations into, 252–253
underwater, 252
Spacecraft
experiments, 104
orbiting Earth, 108–111
overview, 104
rocket propulsion, 105–107
space shuttle, 108

thrust, 105
travel to the starts, 114–116
ultimate speed of, 107–108
Special theory of relativity, 114
Specific heat, 182–183
Speed
angular, 36
collision, 84
defined, 3–4
in fluids, 149
of light, 114, 115–116
ratios, 81, 82
spacecraft, 107–108
water pressure and, 149
Speed of sound, 169, 251
Spencer, Percy Lebaron, 344
Spinning
basketball, 38
in circles, 64–65
marbles, 41
merry-go-round, 40, 67
pie dish, 33, 70
satellites, 64, 65, 67
Splitting colors of sunlight, 353–354,
390–391
Spontaneous emission of radiation, 386
Spontaneous light, 386
Sports car design, 159
Spray paint, 205
Spring constant, 75–76
Spring scales
bathroom, 74, 78–79
calibration, 77–78
experiments, 73–74
hanging, 77–78
how they work summary, 95
overview, 73
standing still on, 74
stretching springs and, 74–76
Springlike forces, 242
Springs, 76
Sputtering, 375
Stability
dynamic, 100–101
static, 97
Stable equilibrium, 75, 98–99
Stall, 155
Standard units, 10
Standing waves, 257, 258
States, 371
Static charge on car, 283
Static cling, Coulomb’s law and,
269–271
Static electricity
accumulating huge static charges and,
274–275
controlling, 275–276
defined, 268
electric charge, 268–269
experiments, 267
how it works summary, 301
overview, 267
separating clothes and, 272–273
shock, avoiding, 285

Index
sliding friction, 271–272
static cling, 269–271
Static friction
defined, 51
sliding friction versus, 51
wheels, 54, 55
Static stability
defined, 97
rotational, 97–98
translational, 97
Static variation, 132
Steady-state flow, 135, 148
Steam. See also Water
bubbles of, 190
condensing, 187–188
depositing, 189
as gaseous, 184
heat, 227
heat release, 188
saturated, 190
Steam engines, 222
Steel, magnetized, 307
Stefan-Boltzmann constant, 199
Stefan-Boltzmann law, 199, 200
Stellar tugboats, 115
Step-down transformers, 323, 324
Step-up transformers, 323, 324
Sticky tape, 272
Stiffness, 234
Stimulated emission of radiation, 386
Stimulated light, 386
Strassmann, Fritz, 431, 432
Streamline, 135
Strong force, 454
Stunt flying, 166
Subcritical mass, 434–435
Sublimation, 189
Suction, 122
Sun, orbiting, 111–113
Sunlight. See also Light
bending of, 358
electromagnetic waves and,
354–355
experiments, 354
how it works summary, 391
oil or gasoline and, 362–363
overview, 354
passage to Earth, 356–357
polarizing sunglasses and, 362–363
rainbows and, 357–360
simulation of, 366
sky blue color and, 357
soap bubbles and, 360–361
splitting colors of, 353–354,
390–391
wavelengths, 361
Superchargers, 226
Superconductors, 315
Supercritical mass, 433
Superheated, 191
Supernova, 433
Superposition, 245, 360
Support forces, 23–24
Surf, rhythm of, 262–263

Surface
bouncing, twisting, and bending, 85–86
bouncing balls and, 82–83
moving, bouncing balls and, 83–84
traveling waves on, 257–258
Surface area, 122
Surface waves. See also Sea; Waves
defined, 256
depth, 259
traveling, 257–258
Swing set, 236, 237
Swinging, 23
Swinging water overhead, 72, 94
Swings, 69
Sympathetic vibration, 246
Synchrotron radiation, 450

T
Tablecloth, removing from table, 1–2, 31
Tacoma Narrows Bridge, 246
Tank circuits, 336
Tea kettle, 188
Temperature
boiling, 190–191
color, 198
defined, 123
Earth, 204–205
emissivity and, 201
heat and, 176–177
ignition, grades of gasoline, 225
melting, 185
room, warming to, 124
Tennis, topspin lob, 160
Tension, 242, 244
Terminal velocity, 158
Tesla, 309
Test charges, 279–280
Thales of Miletus, 275–276
Theories, 427
Theory of relativity, 427
Thermal conductivity
defined, 179
different, 193
of materials, 194
staying warm by limiting, 193–195
Thermal energy
defined, 51–52
gravity and, 205
heat engines, 220–221
woodstove production of, 174–175
work and, 51
Thermal equilibrium, 176–177
Thermal fission reactors, 440–442
Thermal kinetic energy, 204
Thermal motion, 121
Thermal radiation
electromagnetic waves, 197
in front of fire, 196
staying warm by controlling, 200–201
Thermodynamics, 208–229
first law of, 210–211
laws of, 210
second law of, 213
zeroth law of, 210

Thompson, Benjamin, 177
Three Mile Island reactor, 444
Throwing fastballs, 59
Thrust, 105, 167
Tidal forces, 254–255
Tidal resonances, 255–256
Tides. See also Waves
defined, 254
giant, 256
variation, 255
Timbre, 245, 258
Time, 232
Torques
angular impulse and, 65–66
bicycles and, 101
defined, 37
equation, 43
forces and, 42–43
impact, 66
net, 40, 41
seesaw response to, 39–42
SI unit of, 39
Tossing ball upward, 18–19
Total internal reflection, 411
Traction, 51
Trains, 6, 61
Trajectory, 20
Trampolines, 250
Transformers. See also Electric power
distribution
cooling fins, 325
defined, 317
illustrated, 326, 327
isolation, 323, 324
load current, 321–322
magnetizing current, 320–321
real, 324–325
secondary circuit, 327
step-down, 323, 324
step-up, 323, 324
as two coils together, 320–322
voltages, changing, 322–324
Transistors, 414–415
Translational motion, 35
Translational velocity, 40
Traveling waves
defined, 251
on surface of water, 257–258
Tricycles, 97–99, 102–103
Tritium, 435–436, 446
Troughs, 251
Tsunamis, 259
Tunneling, 429
Turbochargers, 226
Turbulence
defined, 150
onset of, 150–152
Turbulent flow
chaos, 152
defined, 150
determination, 151
pressure drag, 155
vortex, 152
Turning on ice, 48

491

492

Index

U
Ultraviolet light, 355
Underwater sound, 252
Uniform circular motion, 87
Unstable equilibrium, 99
Uranium (U), 432–434, 440–442, 443
235
uranium (U), 432–434, 439, 440, 443
238
uranium (U), 432–433, 443

V
Valence band, 380
Valence level, 380
Van de Graaff generator, 274
Vaporization, 187
Vector field, 279
Vector quantity, 3, 43
Velocity
angular, 36
average, 16
defined, 3–4, 8
escape, 111
exhaust, 106
of falling ball, 15–16
forward, 21
initial, 15, 19
present, 15
SI unit of, 11
terminal, 158
translational, 40
wave, 251
Vertical polarization, 337
Vibrational nodes, 85
Vibrations
defined, 239
drum, 249–250, 252–253
organ pipe, 247–248
overtone, 249
sympathetic, 246
turning into sound, 252–253
violin string, 242–246
Viewfinders, 399–401
Views, 10
Violin bridge, 253
Violin strings. See also Musical instruments
bowing and plucking, 245–246
harmonics, 244–245
perpendicular oscillation, 243
tension, 242
turning vibrations into sound, 253
Virtual images, 400, 401
Viscosity
defined, 144
effect of, 145–146
of fluids, 144
water, 144
Viscous drag, 154
Viscous forces, 144, 145, 147
Visible light, 354
Volt, 273
Voltage
amplifier, 421
battery, 290
on conducting object, 282

defined, 273
drop, 293
equation, 273
in flashlights, 293–294
lightening, 273
rise, 294
root mean square (RMS), 316
SI unit, 273
transformer, changing, 322–324
Voltage gradients, 282–283
Voltage per meter, 283
Volume
air, 121
SI unit, 123
Vortex, 152, 166
Vortex cannon, 142–143, 171

W
Wake, 153
Wake force, 159
Walking, 12
Warmth. See also Insulation
by controlling thermal radiation, 200–201
by impeding convection, 195–196
by limiting thermal conduction, 193–195
on a windy day, 145
Warm-up pitches, 175
Water. See also Ice; Steam
boiling, 189–191
evaporating, 187–188
experiments, 184
freezing, 186
how it works summary, 206
as incompressible, 133
as liquid, 184, 185
moving, 134–136, 138–140
moving without touching, 266–267, 300
overview, 184
phases of, 184–185
relative humidity and, 188
steady-state flow, 135
streamline, 135
in strong electric field, 344
superheated, 191
viscosity, 144
Water distribution
experiments, 131
gravity and, 136–140
how it works summary, 141
moving water and, 134–136
overview, 131
pressure and, 131–134
requirements, 131
Water hammer, 152
Water power, 139
Water pressure
in bent house, 147, 148
dynamic variation in, 132
energy and, 134–136
in the garden, 132
gravity and, 136–138
speed and, 149
static variation in, 132

up or out, 140
in water distribution, 131–132
with water pumps, 133–134
Water pumps, 133–134
Watts, 56
Watts, William, 17
Wave velocity, 251
Wavelengths, 197, 251
Wave-particle duality, 366
Waves. See also Tides
beneath, 259
breaking, 261
capillary, 256
dispersion, 259, 263
electron standing, 367–368
frequency of, 258
gravity, 256
interference, 263
out of phase, 263
in phase, 263
phenomena summary, 263
reflection, 260, 263
refraction, 260, 263
seiches, 256
at shore, 260–262
slope of sea bottom and, 261
standing, 257, 258
structure of, 258–259
surface, 256
tsunamis, 259
Weak force, 454
Weight
apparent, 90
feeling of, 90
friction and, 51
gravity and, 13
“Weightlessness,” 111
Wheels
experiments, 49
filing cabinet movement and, 53–55
friction and, 49–53
how they work summary, 70–71
overview, 48
power and, 56–57
rollers, 54, 55
sliding friction, 54
static friction, 54, 55
Wind
heat and, 180
heat loss and, 196
on open road, 152
urban, 152
Windows, insulating, 203–204
Windscale reactor, 444
Wings, airplane
airfoil, 161
angle of attack, 164–165
blunt, 165
leading edge, 161
lift production, 162–165
stalling, 165–167
streamlined wing, 162
trailing edge, 161
vortex, 166

Index
Woodstoves
burning log, 174–175
conduction, 179
convection, 180
experiments, 174
how they work summary, 206
open fires and, 178
overview, 174
radiation, 180–182
thermal energy, 174–175
warming the room, 182–183
Work
calculating, 26–27, 28
defined, 25, 27
equation, 26
thermal energy and, 51
Wrapper, negatively charged,
271

Wrench magnetism, 310
Wright, Orville and Wilber, 168

X
Xerographic copiers
capacitors, 286–287
charging by induction, 285–286
corona discharge, 278–279,
284–285
electric fields, 279–280
experiments, 276
getting ready to use, 285–286
how they work summary, 301
overview, 276
photoconductors, 276–277, 278
precharging, 277
sticky copies, 278

test charges, 279–280
xerography, 276–278
X-ray fluorescence, 449
X-rays. See also Medical imaging and
radiation
aluminum and, 452
characteristic, 449–450
defined, 449
for imaging, 451–452
making, 449–450
overview, 448–449
for therapy, 452–453

Z
Zero net force, 75
Zeroth law of thermodynamics, 210
Zoom lenses, 399

493

