mountains and marshes

David Rains Wallace turns his attention to one of the most distinctive corners of California: the San Francisco Bay Area. Weaving a complex and engaging story of the Bay
Area from personal, historical, and environmental threads, Wallace’s exploration of the
natural world takes readers on a fascinating tour through the region: from Point Reyes
National Seashore, where an abandoned campfire and an invasion of Douglas fir trees
combusted into a dangerous wildfire, to Oakland’s Lake Merritt, a surprising site amid
skyscrapers for some of the best local bird-watching; from the majestic Diablo Range
near San Jose, where conservationists fight against land developers to preserve species
like mountain lions and golden eagles, to the Golden Gate itself, the iconic bridge
that—geologically speaking—leads not to gold but to serpentine. Each essay explores
a different place throughout the four corners of the Bay Area, uncovering the flora and
fauna that make each so extraordinary.
With a naturalist’s eye, a penchant for local history, and an obvious passion for the
subject, Wallace’s new collection is among the first nature writing dedicated entirely
to the Bay Area. Informative, engrossing, and exquisitely described, Mountains and
Marshes affords unexpected yet familiar views of a beloved region that, even amidst
centuries of growth and change, is as dynamic as it is timeless.
Praise for David Rains Wallace
“A writer in the tradition of Henry David Thoreau, John Muir,
and other self-educated seers.” —San Francisco Chronicle

j

“As a stylist and a thinker Wallace is in a select class of writers who
make science into literature.” —Ernest Callenbach, author of Ecotopia

j
DAvID RAINS WALLACE is the author of more than sixteen books on conservation and natural history, including The Monkey’s Bridge (a 1997 New York Times Notable
Book) and The Klamath Knot. He has written articles for the National Geographic Society, The Nature Conservancy, the Sierra Club, and other groups. Wallace’s work also has
appeared in Harper’s Magazine and The New York Times. Wallace lives in Berkeley, CA.
COUNTERPOINT
www.counterpointpress.com
Distributed by Publishers Group West
Jacket by Kelly Winton
Cover Art: San Francisco Bay Area, 1899.
Earth Sciences and Map Library, U.C. Berkeley

NATURE

$16.95

ISBN: 978-1-61902-596-7

51695

9 781619 025967

David Rains Wallace

“Wallace is among the very best of our nature writers, one whose work
is marked by grace, feeling and a deep desire to know the natural world
in all its moods.” —Harry Middleton, Philadelphia Inquirer

mountains
and marshes
exploring
the bay area’s
natural history
j
D av i d R ai n s Wal l ace

mountains
and marshes

j

mountains
and marshes
exploring the bay area’s
natural history

j
David Rains Wallace

CO UN T E R P O IN T

|

B E R K E L E Y, C A L IF OR NI A

Copyright © 2015 David Rains Wallace
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions.
No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever without
written permission from the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations
embodied in critical articles and reviews.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Is Available
Cover design by Kelly Winton
Interior design by Elyse Strongin, Neuwirth & Associates, Inc.
Illustrations by Lucy Conklin
Map © David Rumsey Map Collection, www.davidrumsey.com
ISBN 978-1-61902-596-7
Counterpoint Press
2560 Ninth Street, Suite 318
Berkeley, CA 94710
www.counterpointpress.com
Printed in the United States of America
Distributed by Publishers Group West
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

e-book ISBN 978-1-61902-673-5

contents

introduction—the serpentine gate

the bay west
harbor seals

9

11

pelicans and pantyhose

15

the living, dying bay

19

the crowded desert islands
a stop on the flyway

37

the north bay
the raven roost

47
49

the mount vision fire

55

the ghost of crystal lakes

61

yellowstone west

67

the east bay

73

grasslands

31

75

life in the cemetery

81

the peak of unexpectedness
beavers and boutiques

85

103

1

the south bay

111

sunol falcon watch

113

puddles

121

a walk on the ridge lands

125

the mountains of running away

129

cultures and creatures

141

starlings

143

the fifth season
gardening

149

153

leapers and creepers

161

megafauna by the bay
first impressions
oaklands

169

183

191

dance of the webspinners
salamander land

203

197

It is, I find, in zoology as it is in botany:
all nature is so full, that that district produces
the most variety that is most examined.
—gilbert white
The Natural History of Selborne

mountains
and marshes

j

in t ro d u c t io n—

the serpentine gate

Like other large bodies of water, San Francisco Bay takes on every color
at some time, from black at midnight to white at noon. To me, the most
characteristic one is a milky bluish green that I see on summer evenings
when I cross the Richmond Bridge going east. There is a sense of celestial depth about it, paradoxical as that might be. It seems very alive after
the baked brown of the inland hills.
It is the color of serpentine, which is appropriate. Serpentine is a
common rock around the Bay Area, but a strange one. It comes from
earth’s mantle, a hot layer of heavy metals many miles beneath the surface, and it reaches the sunlight only after millions of years of geological
processes that would be cataclysmic if they weren’t so slow.
Huge plates that form the planet’s crust collide and slide against each
other, dragging slabs of the underlying mantle along. When one plate
rides over another in the tectonic process called subduction, mantle
material scrapes onto earth’s surface, forming an igneous rock called
peridotite, which weathers to red or black. But some mantle material
mixes with water during subduction, forming a metamorphic rock that
weathers a slick, milky bluish green at the surface. It is called serpentine
because its color and texture seem snakelike.
Some serpentine further metamorphoses into jade, a semiprecious
stone thought to have magical properties. Serpentine has its own magical property. Because of its heavy metal chemistry, its soil resists the
weedy exotic vegetation that has preempted much of the Bay Area,
allowing many beautiful native plants and the animals that depend on
them to survive. For plants that have been evolving here for millions
1

mountains and marshes

of years to persist on rock that has been forming for an estimated
200 million years seems to embody the evolutionary nature of this
place. And for that rock to be associated with the serpent, the creature
that—more than most—connects with the depths of earth and time,
seems to embody the Bay Area’s mythic nature. It’s easy to imagine
some sinuous ridgetop of slick blue-green rock as a coil of a snake, so
big and old that its movements are too slow for human perception—a
World Serpent.
The Golden Gate is a misnomer in geological terms. The only natural
gold I know of in the Bay Area is the residue of Mother Lode mining
scraps that rivers have washed into the Bay. It’s really the Serpentine
Gate.
Of course, the Chamber of Commerce wouldn’t like calling it that.
Prejudice against serpents and anything associated them has been endemic to Western civilization since Genesis. Prejudice persists even in
these “green” times. The illustrator of my book The Klamath Knot made
a wonderful jacket design of a World Serpent coiled around the Klamath
Mountains. But market research at Sierra Club Books rejected it for a
less inspiring one of an anthropomorphic myth, the giant Bigfoot.
The prejudice is recent. Most cultures, including Western ones, have
revered snakes because of their associations with depths and origins.
The ancient Greek oracles and Eleusinian mysteries centered on snakes.
The greatest prophetess, the Delphic oracle, was the Pythoness. Many
learned volumes have been written about snake mythology. But the most
interesting way into snake lore is through the snakes themselves, preferably the local ones.
The Bay Area isn’t the snake capital of the world. It doesn’t, for one
thing, have green snakes, the color that people archetypically associate
with them. (Children usually color snakes green.) The local rattlesnake’s
scientific name used to be Crotalus viridis, the green rattler, and although there are greenish rattlers in the West, Bay Area ones I’ve seen
are brownish or reddish. The only remotely green snake here is the racer,
which can be olive drab when it’s not plain brown.
Archetypes aren’t everything, however, and the Bay Area may be
the snake capital of the West Coast. Species from all over converge on
our convenient location and salubrious climate, about equally divided
among ones with northern, eastern, and southern affinities. Roughly
two dozen species live here, although it’s hard to be sure because snakes
2

the serpentine gate

are such cryptic, supple creatures. Legless crawlers may seem primitive,
but fossils show that snakes are the most recently evolved of major vertebrate groups, appearing about 100 million years ago, after mammals
and birds. Evolution often diversifies by simplifying: snakes have traded
legs for a versatile niche in the interstices of things. And they can be hard
to find there. In five decades of hiking around the Bay Area, I haven’t
seen all the species thought to live here.
Only one species is really commonplace, like deer or quail. That is
the gopher snake, the medium-sized tan-and-brown-mottled species that
stretches lazily across paths even in the Berkeley Hills. It is an easygoing
snake when mature, although little ones can be bratty, striking and vibrating their tails at passersby. I suppose one reason gopher snakes are
so common and good-natured is that they are well fed: they eat an abundant variety of small mammals, including gophers.
Garter snakes are North America’s most common snakes, but there
are so many species that it’s hard to know which you’re seeing. The Bay
Area has three, but there are several subspecies and an impossible tangle
of common names. Most garter snakes have yellow stripes, but two species here also have other colors. One of these, Thamnophis sirtalis, has
red stripes or blotches—and often a blue belly. It is common in terrestrial habitats, although a subspecies, the San Francisco garter snake,
is endangered. Another common species, T. elegans, has red stripes or
blotches—rarely a blue belly—and lives in similar places. The other
Bay Area species, T. atratus, has only yellow stripes and is common in
aquatic habitats. The two terrestrial species may frequent water too,
however. Garter snake identification is just a mess, although stripe color
sometimes helps. Happening once on a garter snake eating tadpoles of
the endangered red-legged frog, I knew it wasn’t one endangered species
eating another because it had only yellow stripes.
Bay Area garter snakes, at least some of them, have one uncommon
talent. Snakes are of course notorious for injecting poison with hypodermic fangs, although most don’t have poison or hypodermic fangs.
But garter snakes here are famous for their ability to digest the virulently
poisonous bodies of two local salamander species, the California and
rough-skinned newts, which can contain enough toxins in their skins
to kill multiple humans. Bay Area newts are the most poisonous on the
West Coast, and they may have become so in an “arms race” with Bay
Area garter snakes.
3

mountains and marshes

The Pacific rattlesnake is the only other species I’ve seen here very
often. In protected areas like Mount Diablo, rattlesnakes can be almost
as visible as gopher snakes, and they have similar lazy dispositions in my
experience, although I’ve never deliberately gotten close enough to test
this. (Rattlesnake venom seldom kills humans, but an envenomed bite is
very painful and may cause lasting damage to tissue.) I’ve accidentally
walked within a foot or two of some and gotten no response. I’ve never
even provoked a rattle here. The snakes just crawl away. I’ve used a pole
to coax rattlers off roads a few times, and they don’t coil or strike, just
feint irritably at the pole before departing.
Perhaps Bay Area rattlesnakes are phlegmatic because, like gopher
snakes, they have plentiful food sources, especially California ground
squirrels. Rattlesnakes live on such close terms with the squirrels—in
their tunnels—that adults may be immune to rattlesnake venom, having
survived a bite or two. Rattlers mainly eat young squirrels, although
adults defend their babies by kicking sand or waving their tails at them.
Females rub shed snake’s skins on themselves and their babies, thus confusing the rattlers’ sensory organs.
Maybe some rattlesnakes here have just given up bothering about
people because there are so many of us wandering around. Once, unwisely climbing a steep grassy slope off-trail, I came face to face with
a rattler in a squirrel hole under a rock overhang, and it didn’t blink
(figuratively speaking, that is—snakes don’t have eyelids). It didn’t even
flick out its tongue, the serpentine version of curiosity. If a snake could
have an expression, I would say it looked resigned.
The only rattlesnake bite recipient of my acquaintance was a scientist
with a captive specimen. Still, it’s hard to convince people that rattlers
are statistically far below bathtubs on the danger scale. Their Genesis
voltage remains high enough to boil the brains of a cool customer like
Joan Didion as she muses on her Sacramento Valley family cemetery in
Where I Was From:
When I was in high school and college and later I would
sometimes drive out there, park the car and sit on the fender
and read, but after the day I noticed, as I was turning off the
ignition, a rattlesnake slide from a broken stone into the dry
grass. I never again got out of the car. . . .
I had seen the rattlesnake but I had failed to get out of the car
4

the serpentine gate

and kill it, thereby violating, in full awareness that I was so doing,
what my grandfather had told me was “the code of the West.”

The most disturbing snake experience I’ve had in the Bay Area wasn’t
with a rattlesnake but with a common king snake, which, because it
preys higher on the food chain than gopher snakes and rattlesnakes
(in fact, on gopher snakes and rattlesnakes), is less numerous. I was
at a stable getting manure for a garden when the bottom of the hole I
was digging suddenly turned into a big black-and-white-banded snake.
It didn’t do anything except crawl deeper into the dung heap, but the
surprise was dizzying. There’s something powerfully chthonic about
a black-and-white-banded snake, and I’ve always felt a frisson about
seeing king snakes emerge from the ground, which is how I’ve usually—
albeit infrequently—seen them.
Ted Hughes, English poet laureate from 1984 to 1998, evokes this in
a poem about a 1959 trip across America:
we came to a stone
Beside a lake flung open before dawn
By the laugh of a loon. The signs good.
I turned the stone over. The timeless one,
Head perfect, eyes waiting—there he lay
Banded black,
White, black, white, coiled. I said
“Just like the coils on the great New Grange lintel.”
One thing to find a guide.
Another to follow him . . .
—“The Badlands”

King snakes’ rattler diet certainly gives them cachet. And they are
beautiful snakes. I think the other king snake species that occurs in the
Bay Area, the mountain king snake, is the most beautiful snake in the
West. It is banded black, white, black, red, black, white—as Ted Hughes
might have described it. But I haven’t seen it here.
I’ve seen ring-necked snakes here about as often as common king
snakes, although that’s not necessarily proof of rarity. One study estimated a population of nine hundred ring-necked snakes in an area the
5

mountains and marshes

size of a football field. They are pretty little snakes, maximum length
about three feet, with orange or yellow neck rings and bluish bodies. A
smaller local snake may be even more numerous, although it’s hard to
tell because it’s even less visible. The sharp-tailed snake is the smallest
I’ve seen here, eighteen inches maximum, and it spends most of its sedentary life underground, emerging at night to eat slugs.
The strangest snake I’ve encountered in the Bay Area is the rubber
boa, which, as its name implies, belongs to the group that includes pythons, anacondas, and boa constrictors, the ultimate World Serpents.
Rubber boas are even more archetypical than giant pythons because
they are a relict of the late dinosaur age—long before gopher snakes
and rattlesnakes. They are as efficient at constricting their prey as their
big relatives: Harry Greene, a snake expert formerly at UC–Berkeley,
recorded one individual that had just eaten three moles. Their maximum
length is thirty inches, however, so they tend to be overlooked. I thought
a foot-long one that I encountered on the Coast Trail at Point Reyes
National Seashore was a piece of brown-and-yellow bungee cord until
I picked it up. Then it coiled and gripped my finger with a pair of little
legs on its rear end. Boas show their evolutionary age by being the only
snakes with such vestigial legs, which they use not to get around but to
grip sexual partners.
I once dreamt of digging up a rubber boa so big that it curled all
the way around a backyard garden. At least, its head was at one end
and its tail at the other: I couldn’t see how much more of it there
was, and I couldn’t decide whether to dig up more of it or to start
burying it again. There was a sense of danger in this, but also of exhilaration and, somehow, reassurance. This had to do with a series of
brilliantly marked birds that landed on a bare sapling in mid-garden
and then zoomed away again—a crimson-black-and-white sapsucker,
a scarlet-yellow-and-black western tanager, and a black-and-white
poorwill. Since poorwills are actually grayish-brown, nocturnal birds
that perch on the ground, the latter seemed particularly significant for
some reason.
There is a group that I’m not sure about because they are so fast.
I may have seen a racer or a striped racer, but all I could see was sinuous bodies slipping through chaparral or grass. I could be pretty sure it
wasn’t an Alameda striped racer, a subspecies of the latter, since it is endangered. I did have an impressive sighting of another possible Bay Area
6

the serpentine gate

member of this group—a big purplish snake called the coachwhip—but
not here. It appeared so suddenly before my car at a freeway overpass
south of Joshua Tree National Park that there seemed no way not to hit
it, but when I stopped and looked, it had disappeared. Harry Greene
observed that coachwhips “almost defy the laws of physics at times.”
The snakes I’m sure I haven’t seen are those specializing in the dry habitats of the eastern Bay Area. That is the remotest and most trashed part,
between agribusiness, wind and solar farms, and hazardous research or
industrial facilities. The best-known arid reptile habitat, Corral Hollow,
is the site of a state vehicular recreation area, and then there was the
Altamont Speedway from 1966 until it closed in 2008. Having endured
the 1968 Rolling Stones concert there, I can testify to its ecological grimness. Even in protected areas like Round Valley Regional Preserve near
Brentwood—actually one of the most beautiful landscapes here—local
snakes are elusive because arid land species largely live to beat the heat,
emerging at night.
There are four such species known here. The California night snake,
the size of a garter snake, is the Bay Area’s other poisonous snake, subduing its frog or lizard prey with venom from enlarged teeth on the back
of its upper jaw. It’s not dangerous to humans, so it doesn’t have a rattlesnake’s charisma. The California black-headed snake is smaller than
the sharp-tailed snake and stays underground more. The glossy snake is
a smaller, paler relative of the gopher snake. The long-nosed snake is a
drabber relative of the mountain king snake.
If this was PBS Nature, I’d proceed to lecture about how all snakes
are threatened everywhere. And it’s true enough in the megalopolis.
Even in parks, mountain bicyclists who insist on illegally riding foot and
horse trails kill snakes—I’ve found the bodies. Some people deliberately
kill snakes just because they don’t like them, which humans probably
always have done, reverence or not. Apollo, god of arts and sciences,
slew the primordial Great Python, although the corpse just came apart
and crawled away to become the local ones of rites and oracles.
. . . a gigantic serpent.
Python by name, whom the new people dreaded,
A huge bulk on the mountain side. Apollo,
God of the glittering bow, took a long time
To bring him down . . .
7

mountains and marshes

In memory of this, the sacred games
Called Pythian, were established . . .
—Ovid, Metamorphoses

There are interesting questions as to why snakes are threatened.
Much native wildlife has adapted to urban living—mostly birds and
mammals but some “herptiles” too. Salamanders abound in gardens;
frogs and turtles survive around creeks and ponds; I’ve seen a native
fence lizard in my North Berkeley neighborhood. But I’ve never seen a
snake—not even the most common or most secretive kind. (Given their
slug diet, little sharp-tailed snakes should be welcome garden residents
and may persist in some suburban backyards, but not mine.) Cats, rats,
and cars must have a lot to do with this. Sun-warmed roads are narcotic
for night-roaming snakes. Still, it’s puzzling that a group that succeeds in
so many other hostile environments should fail in this one.
Maybe they just need time to adapt. Snakes are slow, comparatively
speaking, but so is evolution. Another interesting aspect of Bay Area
snakes is that competitive exotic species and diseases don’t seem to have
impacted them. Introduced mammals, birds, plants, turtles, and frogs
have run riot, but I know of nothing here like the situation with escaped
Burmese pythons in Florida, although pet owners must release or lose
many exotic snakes here every year. I’ve never seen a feral exotic snake
here, anyway. Maybe, where they do survive, native snakes have filled
the ecological niches so efficiently that intruders can’t get in.
Civilization certainly has changed the Bay Area in the past two centuries with its wonders like the Golden Gate Bridge. Some say that it has
“transformed” the place and proclaim an “end of nature.” That is nonsense. According to probability math, what has lasted longest will last
longest. So it’s 100 million years of snakes against five thousand years of
bridges. And of course the World Serpent of our blue-green ridges is not
always imperceptibly slow in its movements.
Vita longia, ars brevis.

8

the bay west

harbor seals

It is a windy December day: the water beneath the rowboat looks excessively cold and briny. With a lonesome awareness of my dependence on
land, I turn to see how far I am from it. But I’m not alone: a harbor seal
is watching me. On its kelp-colored face is a look of concern; for what,
I don’t know, but it is an anxious look of concern. It catches my eye and
slips out of sight.
That’s about as much as I see of harbor seals on this excursion. Their
distant relatives, California sea lions, are more visible. A herd advertises
itself with much barking and waving of flippers. I can row to within a
few feet of them, close enough to smell their fishy breath, before they
take notice of me, roll their eyes, and dive. Harbor seals usually see me
first, surfacing suddenly, and when I get too close, they don’t dive—they
just duck.
Not that much is known about harbor seals, although they inhabit
coasts from Baja California to Japan and from New Jersey to Portugal.
Without particular economic significance, they’ve been left alone compared to other marine “resources” like whales, sea otters, or fur seals.
Enough inhabit the oceans to populate a medium-sized city, if the concept applied to them.
The Bay Area has one of the world’s densest harbor seal populations, including a major breeding site, so one might think spying
on them would be easy here, as with sea lions. But everything about
harbor seals seems to work against that. Sea lions’ glossy fur makes
them glitter conspicuously in the water. Harbor seals’ mottled grayand-tan hair camouflages them. Sea lions are organized: huge crested
11

mountains and marshes

males dominate females and young on breeding beaches. Harbor seals
look alike, and although they are more social than they let on, they
are discreet about it. Breeding congregations tend to be cryptic, and
the seals seem to do little more than lie around together. Competition among males for females is not conspicuous, although individual
squabbling is common enough.
Sizable harbor seal groups often bask on islands in the Bay, but it
is not easy to distinguish them from rocks and sand because they lie
around in a disorganized way. Sea lions usually bask with their heads
toward the top of a reef, but harbor seals may be content to bask head
down. It is easier to slip back into the water that way.
Much harbor seal private life goes on in the water and at night. Unlike
sea lions, they can mate and give birth in the water. Somewhat paradoxically, considering how they love basking ashore, they can sleep in the
water, surfacing to breath every ten minutes or so without awakening.
They are generally more adapted to marine life than sea lions, which
depend on their fur to keep warm, lacking the blubber layer that harbor
seals have in common with whales. Sea lions move about fairly quickly
on land because their hind legs turn forward and push them along. Seals
have lost that ability.
All this suggests that seals’ ancestors were in the sea longer than sea
lions,’ but the fossil record is inconclusive. Recognized sea lion ancestors
have inhabited North America’s Pacific coast for about 30 million years,
whereas harbor seal ancestors may have appeared here much later. Their
ancestors may have evolved elsewhere: there are fossils of harbor seal
ancestors from the Atlantic, although they aren’t older than the Pacific’s
sea lion ancestors. Paleontologists have found fossils of sea lion ancestors
in the Bay Area, at Drakes Bay on Point Reyes, but they haven’t found
any such harbor seal fossils. Anyway, both the living genera probably are
only a few million years old, not much older than the genus Homo.
Reference to human evolution, of course, brings up the question of
intelligence, but harbor seals are no more confiding about this than
about other parts of their lives. California sea lions clown in circuses
and aquariums as “performing seals,” but harbor seals are not so inclined. When researchers gave intelligence tests to both species, the
results were strikingly divergent. Sea lions ran up impressive performance records, while harbor seal records were skimpy. Researchers
complained of erratic response, of indifference to the rewards and
12

harbor seals

deprivations that usually stimulate performance. From a behaviorist
standpoint, such indifference might not suggest high intelligence. Still,
the harbor seals did perform at times, so the researchers concluded
that they were at least capable of learning—and very alert, since they
spent a lot of time glancing around nervously.
A harbor seal’s brain is larger and more convoluted than a dog’s.
Then why is it a bad student? Is intelligence a capacity to learn, or
to be taught? Sea lion mothers nurture and instruct their land-born
pups until they are ready to enter the water, and teaching continues
within the herd at sea. Young sea lions congregate in “schools.” Harbor
seal mothers more or less abandon their pups after a three- to sixweek nursing period, and the weaned pup gets no special treatment.
The mother leaves it with a mantle of milk-fat, on which it lives until
it starts to catch fish. Attrition of harbor seal pups is fairly high in the
Bay Area’s realm of great white sharks.
Still, there are plenty of seals: their range is expanding where humans
don’t persecute them. They seem to be born with survival skills, which
would help explain a captive seal’s indifference to a man with a stale
herring in one hand and a clipboard in the other. It also might explain
their lack of organization: seals don’t seem to need each other as much
as other brainy species do. Rich Schopen, a biologist at the Steinhart
Aquarium in San Francisco who hand-raised two harbor seal pups, told
me that a dolphin or orca would die if kept in a tank alone, but a harbor
seal wouldn’t.
One might conclude that harbor seals are poor company. On the contrary, individuals have become greatly attached to humans on occasion.
In her book Seal Morning, Rowena Farr describes raising a harbor seal
on the isolated Scottish coast. The seal, a female named Lora, preferred
to sleep in the author’s bed and developed a passion for musical instruments, including a harmonica, a xylophone, and a toy trumpet, on
which she practiced every day and learned several tunes. Farr doesn’t
say she taught Lora any of this.
The environmental barriers between the human mind and that of
marine mammals like harbor seals are profound. Seals inhabit a world
that continually liberates tremendous amounts of energy. Boulders shake
as waves pounds them; surf rips through tidal channels. Seals duck under
beach breakers like human swimmers but move with ease in currents no
human could withstand, the same currents that bring them their food.
13

mountains and marshes

They lead a double life between land, which may seem strangely ethereal
to them, and sea, which must be unimaginably sensual. Bay Area seals
inhabit the giant kelp forest, a match for tropical rain forest in its diversity of sights, smells, and sounds—especially sounds.
Harbor seals’ apparent taciturnity is another of their equivocal qualities. Water carries aural vibrations much better than air, so seals’ underwater hearing and vocalizations are complex. Rowena Farr writes:
“Seals have perhaps the largest vocal range among mammals. Their repertoire includes grunts, snorts, barks, peculiar mewing hisses, and a wail
which often rises from a deep base to a treble.” Under water, they use a
special range of clicking sounds that may allow them to echolocate, to
“see” by hearing echoes as bats and whales do. They probably can hear
tremendous distances, perhaps listening for the sounds of salmon and
lampreys moving up rivers, or of orcas communicating with each other
far out to sea.
Harbor seals’ visual world may resemble humans’ more than their
aural one, but again it’s hard to say. I got a close look at harbor seal
eyes when Rich Schopen introduced me to his protégés at the Steinhart
Aquarium, and they are strangely beautiful. The iris is an intricate zigzag
pattern of gold, amber, and brown—like an abstract Rembrandt—and
the pupil is an indescribable shape. It is hard to imagine how such eyes
function, although they are set well forward in the head, suggesting
good depth and distance perception. Their environment provides them
with a lot to see anyway—in both air and water, day and night, vast
sandy bottoms and intricate kelp forests.
Henry Wood Elliott, a nineteenth-century seal expert, wrote: “There
are few eyes in the orbits of men and women which suggest more pleasantly the ancient thoughts of their being windows of the soul.” Humans
living near harbor seals have often associated them with passage into a
spirit world. Some believed that seals could come ashore, take off their
skins, and live for some time as humans. But that seems anthropocentric to me. With all the unfathomable qualities they have evolved, why
would harbor seals want to do that?
—Clear Creek, May 1971

14

pelicans and pantyhose

Driving around Oakland’s Lake Merritt is misleading. The lake seems
raggedly artificial, a run-down vestige of genteel Victorian landscaping.
The lake does have an artificial side. It originated in the 1860s when
Samuel Merritt—an early land developer—dammed a polluted tidal
inlet to make a setting for mansions like one he was building. Highrises and apartment houses of a certain Raymond Chandler ambience
replaced the mansions, although the city turned part of the north shore
into a park. Yet a walk around the lake will show that it is not just urban
decoration. It is still a working part of San Francisco Bay’s ecosystem,
connected by a tidal channel to the San Leandro estuary. Bay waters still
ebb and flow in it, albeit controlled by floodgates.
As I write, the first winter storms are passing through, bringing two
phenomena that embody Lake Merritt’s connection to the Bay. First,
storm sewers drain the summer’s accumulation of litter and grime into
the lake, an extraordinary welter of plastic, paper, dead cats, torn underwear—everything imaginable—all filmed with an iridescent engine oil
slick that swirls on the lake’s surface. Tides flush some of this out into the
Bay and ultimately into the ocean, although the city has to clean much
of it. Second, the storms bring flocks of migratory and/or marine birds
to the lake, where they feed and shelter for the winter: ducks, grebes,
phalaropes, gulls, pelicans, coots, egrets, and cormorants, among others.
But what do the birds eat in this welter of garbage and muck? They
eat the products of a rich, functioning ecosystem, albeit a dirty one.
A look into the lake reveals the basic elements. Mingled with Styrofoam cups and Big Mac containers are sheets and strands of algae, the
15

mountains and marshes

photosynthetic producers at the food pyramid’s base. During the warm
seasons, algal blooms fill the lake, breeding disagreeable smells but also
many small shrimp and other invertebrates. These feed small fish—
mainly smelt and gobies—and they all reach astronomical numbers by
October. A look into the lakeshore then will reveal smelt schools that
shadow every inch of the bottom with their nervously darting bodies.
Algae, small invertebrates, and bacteria also feed large numbers of
clams and mussels, and aquatic worms that live in white, limy cases and
filter food from the water with bushy green gills. These organisms hide
in the muck or attach to the lake’s stone margins, beer cans, or any other
convenient substrate. Dead ones’ cases and shells cover the lake bottom.
In the fall, lowered temperatures and chemical changes in the water
kill most of the algae, bringing famine and panic to swollen fish populations. Droves of small fish flee from larger ones into the shallows, where
both become vulnerable to arriving birds. Sometimes schools suddenly
die off, the bodies attracting large flocks of ring-billed and California
gulls, which, lacking the skills of cormorants or diving ducks, ordinarily
have to fish from the sidelines or rob other birds.
Lake Merritt’s odd mix of urbanity and biotic productivity make it a
good place to watch fishing birds. Gulls and egrets are so used to joggers
and roller skaters that they ignore them whizzing past, although they fly
away if I walk too near them. But if I’m discreet I can often watch the
birds stalking and catching fish from a few feet away.
The bird assemblage this fall was spectacular. A flock of brown pelicans—a dozen adults and half again as many juveniles—fed in the
inlet between Kaiser Center and Lakeside Park. They sat in the water
with their beaks tucked against their breasts, then somehow knew that
a fish school was nearby and took off together, an ungainly flapping
that quickly turned to graceful soaring just above the surface. Spotting
fish, they dived into the water and opened their bill pouches, so they
seemed to have veined balloons attached to their chests, thus trapping
many small victims to be swallowed once the pouch was raised out of
the water.
I doubt that the pelicans located the fish schools themselves. They
were just the most conspicuous predators on them. Bonaparte’s gulls
and Forster’s terns seemed more likely fish-finders, since they fly higher
and dive nimbly to catch fish in their sharp beaks. I saw a Bonaparte’s
gull dive into a foot of water below where I stood on the sidewalk and
16

p e l i c a n s a n d pa n t y h o s e

fly away with a several-inch-long goby I hadn’t noticed. Or perhaps
the cormorants, with their underwater swimming skills, were the fishfinders that the other birds watched.
Whatever its workings, the birds’ feeding was definitely coordinated.
When the pelicans, Bonaparte’s gulls, and terns left one part of the inlet
for another, they were soon followed by the snowy and common egrets
and the California and ring-billed gulls that had loitered in the shallows
hoping to catch something scared by them. They were like spectators
in tennis whites following a water polo game from one end of a swimming pool to another, with the splashing and shrieking of a country club
crowd.
Fall is the most active time on the lake. In winter, rafts of ducks stay
on the sheltered east side, but they’re quieter than the fall birds. They
rest on the water with their beaks tucked under their wings. Equally idle
cormorants often line the log boom that divides the ducks from the main
part of the lake. But there’s still a lot going on. When the floodgates at
the lake’s west end open to let in the tide, large fish appear in the current
under the bridge. It’s hard to identify them, but they include sharks and
striped bass.
In spring most of the birds leave for cleaner spots. Some try to nest on
little wooded islands offshore from the Rotary Nature Center at Lakeside Park, but a colony of night herons that also nests there makes this
difficult. The water clears and gets less littered after the rains taper off
and before the algal bloom gets under way. This is a good time to watch
the lake’s underwater doings, which can be as interesting as the birds’
fishing, if less spectacular.
I was walking beside the lake one bright warm day last spring when
I noticed small fish darting individually among the algal clots that were
starting to form. They weren’t smelt or gobies, so I stopped for a closer
look and saw that some were a bright metallic blue, with ruby red bellies. They hovered over certain algae patches and chased away similar
fish that approached. Sometimes they made quivering motions above
the algae patches or burrowed into them.
I realized that they were male sticklebacks defending nest territories.
Ethologists and biology teachers like sticklebacks because of their curious breeding habits. A male makes a nest in an algae patch by burrowing a tunnel. Then he lures cruising egg-laden females into it with a
zigzag courtship dance. Once a female’s in the nest, he encourages her
17

mountains and marshes

with nudging motions to lay her eggs, fertilizes them, and then chases
her away. He repairs the nest and starts dancing to attract females again
until he has a satisfactory egg collection, which he incubates by standing
on his head in front of the nest and fanning oxygenated water into the
tunnel with his pectoral fins. When they hatch, he anxiously guards the
tiny fry, keeping them in a tight school. If one wanders away, he darts
after it, catches it in his mouth, and carefully spits it back into his school.
I’d never seen wild sticklebacks, and I hadn’t expected to see them in
downtown Oakland. Proceeding along the lakeshore, I saw bright blue
males guarding algae patches every few feet—it was a stickleback city. I
couldn’t stand and watch the whole breeding process since joggers and
roller skaters would have knocked me into the lake if I had tried, but I
was able to see the progress of the nests over the next few weeks. By the
end of June, the algae clots teemed with thousands of tiny sticklebacks
that were well protected in their filmy green chambers. One such school
hovered over an open copy of Basic Math, which some liberated student had flung into the lake. I imagined the tiny fish doing their sums,
instructed by a small whitish crab that sidled over the mussel shells on
which the textbook rested.
—Berkeley Monthly, February 1980

18

the living, dying bay

adjectives for a superorga nism
Crossing San Francisco Bay in an inflatable boat is surprising when
you’re used to crossing on bridges. It isn’t simply that you see more of
the Bay that way. You have to see more. Otherwise, the Bay will bounce
you around. You learn to watch for waves that can fling loose objects
skyward; in fact, you learn what it is to be such an object as your shoes
say good-bye to the deck and your binoculars wind themselves around
your neck. You find that the Bay is more than a stretch of water for
building bridges over, that it has palpable rhythms and moods that make
it (as far as you in your inflatable boat are concerned) alive.
I discovered these things one May morning as the guest of an excursion company, San Francisco Bay Adventures. We set out from Sausalito
and ran up Richardson Bay off Marin County to the Audubon sanctuary there. Michael Herz, a senior research scientist at Tiburon’s Center
for Environmental Studies, wanted to look at a harbor seal gathering
spot nearby. But new building apparently had scared off the seals, so we
turned around and headed toward the Golden Gate. I wasn’t too impressed with the Bay up to that point. Walled with condominiums and
houseboats, it seemed inert and opaque.
The Bay corrected my impression south of Sausalito. Within a few
yards, air and water changed from smoggy suburban to sparkling
marine as we approached the Gate. The boat jounced through a line of
waves that had me holding on to my notebook with my toes, then broke
into a simmering turbulence like a gigantic whirlpool bath. Terns and
19

mountains and marshes

pelicans didn’t just fly over, they sailed. Looking eastward, I saw a broad
stretch of white water, as though a school of fish or a rocky shoal were
breaking the surface. Michael Herz said that the incoming and outgoing
tides were meeting there, and he pointed out veins of foam that showed
interfaces of salt- and freshwater. During winter floods, he added, river
water roaring out of the Gate can move the interface with ocean water
as far offshore as the Farallon Islands.
Even during normal outgoing tides, several times more water flows
through the Golden Gate than through the Mississippi’s mouth. The
Bay’s power and exuberance reminded me of gray whales I’d seen
spouting at Half Moon Bay. In a sense, I was watching the Bay spout—
breathe—as I watched the tides swirl past, because tides and rivers are
what keep the Bay alive just as air keeps whales alive. Yet I still felt confused about the Bay’s functioning. Big as whales are, they are easier to
comprehend than a 435-square-mile bay. I didn’t understand the sudden
intensity of the change from Richardson Bay to the Golden Gate.
When I stopped at the Army Corps of Engineers’ Bay Model in Sausalito on the way home, I began to understand. With its gray concrete surface and computerized voice ticking off the lunar days, the thirty-year-old
model gives little sense of the Bay’s vitality. It does give a very graphic
sense of the contrast between most of the Bay’s flat, shallow bottom and
the huge underwater canyon that tides and floods have carved through
the Golden Gate. Even in the model, where the canyon is three feet deep,
its bottom is invisible. I was surprised to realize what an abyss I’d been
floating, or rather bouncing, over.
Likening the Golden Gate to a gray whale’s spout may seem farfetched, but many other analogies between the Bay and a living organism
are possible. Like a gray whale, the Bay has a life span, an anatomy, and
a physiology. It’s just that they are so extended in time and space that we
have trouble perceiving them.

the aging, renewing bay
San Francisco Bay has existed for at least ten thousand years, since
melting ice sheets flooded its basin by raising ocean levels. Because
the basin has existed much longer, as sideways movements of the Pacific and North American tectonic plates cracked and tilted California
20

t h e l i v i n g , dy i n g bay

into mountains and valleys, the Bay has had ancestors at various times
during the past few million years. A new bay would form when ocean
levels were high during interglacial periods, then gradually silt in and
revert to land when ocean waters receded.
The rise of California’s mountains did more than form the Bay’s basin.
The barrier of the Coast Range forced most of the state’s main rivers to
drain into the Pacific through the single outlet of the Golden Gate. Thus
the Bay became not only an inland arm of the Pacific but a maritime
extension of the Sacramento and San Joaquin river systems—a great
estuary where most of the runoff from the Sierra Nevada and southern
Cascades meets the ocean. Someday, the rivers will end this Bay’s natural
life span by filling it with silt and sand eroded from the mountains. It
may already be half full of sediments. They lie three hundred feet deep
in places, and average water depth is only twenty feet.
Ocean and rivers shape the Bay’s anatomy. Sea level determines its
extent, while rivers deposit marshy flats of silt and sand that divide
open water from land. Tidal flows carve sloughs that carry water into
brackish and salt marshes, while rivers and creeks cut deltaic channels
and backwaters lined with freshwater marshes and riparian woodlands.
Tides and streams together cut deep underwater channels that circulate
throughout the Bay and converge eventually on the Gate.
Ocean and rivers regulate the Bay’s physiology. Tides that move water
in and out of marshes and mudflats twice a day bring food and oxygen
to organisms and carry off waste. Rivers transport vast amounts of mineral and organic nutrients into the Bay to be cycled through wetlands,
mudflats, and open waters. Storms can increase rivers’ winter and spring
flows sixfold. The Bay could no more stay alive without these circulating
fluids than a gray whale could live without its blood. Fresh nutrients
and water must continually replenish the Bay or it will be starved and
poisoned. When upriver water users say that freshwater allowed to run
through the Bay to the ocean is wasted, it makes as much biological
sense as saying that a whale’s blood is wasted in the whale.
Estuarine wetlands such as the Bay’s are earth’s most productive habitats, fabricating four times as much green plant matter from the raw
materials of sunlight, water, and silt as agribusiness cornfields. Warm
waters swarming with bacterial action quickly transfer nutrients from
silt to photosynthetic cells, and burgeoning algae and marsh plants
form primary links in thousands of food chains. Reduced by bacteria
21

mountains and marshes

to protein-rich detritus, they nourish vast swarms of tiny animals that
drift in and out of marshes with the tide, including the young of many
larger species—crabs, shrimps, fish, worms, oysters, and clams. The
small drifters feed masses of other slightly larger predators that inhabit
the Bay or pass through it at some stage in their lives, as with salmon
and striped bass. From there, food chains ramify in myriad directions
that lead eventually to egrets, cormorants, pelicans, grebes, and diving
ducks; to six Bay shark species, one of which may grow to over fifteen
feet in length; to hundreds of other fish species; to harbor seals, sea lions,
and gray whales.
The Bay is like an enormous turbine, spinning and generating energy
as organisms feed, are fed upon, and pass their nutrients along. Far
from dissipating this energy, the Bay recycles it with endless ingenuity.
A carbon atom carried into the delta by the Sacramento or San Joaquin
might make hundreds of passages through the turbine before escaping
through the Gate. At first, the atom would ride above the tides flowing
in through Carquinez Strait, since freshwater is lighter than salt. It might
get pushed up a slough that feeds a delta marsh, enter the roots of a tule
sedge, become part of a leaf’s photosynthetic factory, then drift downstream to San Pablo Bay as detritus. There, a bay shrimp might ingest it
or the tide might push it up another slough, into a salt marsh, where it
would undergo the process of incorporation and decay in a pickleweed.
Mixed with the Bay’s saltier waters, it then might sink to the bottom to
be consumed by a worm, then by a sand dab. It might stay on the sand
through generations of bottom organisms and their predators before
tidal flows move it again, and when they do, they might push it back
up Suisun Bay instead of pulling it down the final rocky chute of the
Golden Gate. Or it might stay in the Bay sediments, an organic speck in
the silica matrix of future sandstone.
Understanding the Bay system’s intricacies might require a brain as
big as the Bay. But there is a more intuitive way of perceiving its vitality.
Like a gray whale, the Bay is beautiful, and while this quality can’t be
experienced whole, except perhaps from an orbiting satellite, it can be in
hundreds of parts: on a fall afternoon at China Camp State Park, when
wooded islands float in a haze above salt marshes and thousands of
blackbirds flock on the horizon . . . on a winter evening at San Pablo Bay
National Wildlife Refuge, when hundreds of shorebirds rest on mudflats
the color of the setting sun . . . on a spring morning at San Francisco Bay
22

t h e l i v i n g , dy i n g bay

National Wildlife Refuge, when orange parasitic plants called dodder
growing on pickleweed glow like fire in the green matrix.
The Bay is beautiful—that is, where it is reasonably healthy, which
raises another characteristic of living organisms. They can die from
injury or disease as well as old age. San Francisco Bay has suffered more
than its share of injury in the past two centuries, as silt from Mother
Lode mining has smothered its bottom and landfill for urban growth
has obliterated more than a third of its original acreage. Indeed, various
growth schemes would have filled most of it if the Save the Bay movement hadn’t begun in the 1960s. Jack Foster succeeded in dumping 1.5
million truckloads of rubble into the Bay to make Foster City in 1962.
A decade later, David Rockefeller failed to cut off the top of San Bruno
Mountain to make a Manhattan-sized Bay island.
Unfortunately, stopping the Bay’s physical obliteration is not enough
to save it. Growth has diseased as well as injured it by destroying more
than 90 percent of its wetlands, diverting more than 60 percent of its
river flows, decimating its biota, and contaminating waters, wetlands,
and wildlife with sewage, refinery wastes, pesticide residues, and many
other things—an alphabet soup of toxic elements, from arsenic to zinc.
None of the professional Bay-watchers (a research scientist, an environmentalist, a Coast Guard licensed operator, and a boating entrepreneur) who went with me on the inflatable excursion to the Golden
Gate doubted for a minute that the Bay was sick and getting sicker.
The licensed operator, salty-looking Captain Joshua Mills, saw some
improvement in water quality from past decades, when “the water was
so black in places you could drop a ham sandwich in it and even a gull
wouldn’t touch it.” But he expressed amazement that the Bay had lasted
as long as it had, given the pressures on it.
“Improved water quality won’t help the Bay in the long run if all the
habitat is lost to development,” said environmentalist John Amodio of
the Bay-Delta Preservation Trust.
“Cleaning up sewage and factory discharges won’t even improve
water quality if agribusiness keeps diverting more water,” said scientist
Michael Herz. “I wouldn’t eat a striped bass out of the Bay now, even if
the population wasn’t down 80 percent from the 1960s.”
“I’m afraid the Bay is finished as a commercial fishery,” said recreation entrepreneur Jerry Cadagan, president of San Francisco Bay Adventures. “The San Joaquin River has become a toxic drain. And what’s
23

mountains and marshes

so frustrating about this is that further water diversion for irrigation
isn’t even going to help agribusiness in the long run. It’s just letting them
grow crops that are already in surplus while they poison their soil with
salt and selenium.”
“The Bay Area is supposed to be environmentally enlightened,” said
Amodio, “but there hasn’t been a concerted effort to manage the Bay as
an integrated ecosystem. Government bodies have concentrated on their
own little fiefdoms, and the conservation community has been trapped
responding to political fragmentation. They’re doing better back east
in places like Chesapeake Bay. They had a Year of the Bay there. When
have we ever had a Year of the Bay? It’s embarrassing.”
“It’s truly awesome just how much has been wrecked,” said Joshua
Mills. There wasn’t much to say after that. We finished our sandwiches
in the hot sun of a Sausalito deck restaurant and went home.

the enda ngered, eter nal bay
The Bay-watchers’ words had the ring to truth, but, coming from four
directions, they caused something of the confusion I’d felt at the Golden
Gate. Threats to the Bay are numbingly diverse. I wondered if it might
clarify things to consult some kind of human Bay Model, one individual
with official authority, scientific knowledge, environmental concern, and
practical day-to-day experience on the Bay. It sounded a little like Superman, but I headed to San Francisco Bay National Wildlife Refuge’s
new visitor center in Fremont to see what I could find.
I began to think I’d come to the right place when wildlife biologist
Tom Harvey listed the things he dealt with on his job. I managed to
scribble “water quality, salt ponds, seasonal wetlands, endangered species, diving ducks, colonial nesting birds, the Army Corps of Engineers,
the Coast Guard, developers, conservation groups, the Leslie Salt Company, oil spills, wildlife disease epidemics” in my notebook, but others
got past me.
“We’re spread kind of thin here,” said Harvey, a thirty-three-year-old
with outdoorsy good looks. He’d had the job for five years but has lived
near the Bay all his life. “My parents had a house on the estuary at Alameda,” he said, “so the Bay was in the backyard. I remember as a kid
being turned on by the richness of life just on a piling or under a rock.”
24

t h e l i v i n g , dy i n g bay

When I asked him if he thought of the Bay as a living organism,
Harvey hesitated, apparently a little surprised by the question. It did
sound like deep ecology woo-woo philosophizing in the mundane context of the refuge headquarters’ meeting room, with regulations manuals and memos on the bulletin board, and people in tan uniforms busy
at desks next door.
“Yeah, I think I do,” he finally said. “Particularly in the sense of trying
to maintain it in a state of health. You have to consider the whole thing
to do that.
“I didn’t really start out seeing it that way. My degree is in ornithology, so originally I was just studying birds. When I got this job,
there were so many outside influences on the Bay that I had to develop
a sense of the whole. We can’t just worry about what’s inside the refuge
boundaries or we’ll lose that too, eventually.”
I asked him if he thought the Bay was getting sicker. His response was
unhesitating. “Absolutely. I’ve seen it become a less vital place just in my
lifetime. The water quality picture is bleak, especially in the South Bay
here. There just isn’t enough water coming in to flush out the increasing
contaminant levels from all the new development. It isn’t just sewage
and factory wastes. A lot of it is grease and oil washing off roads into
storm drains.
“We’re still losing habitat that refuge wildlife needs. When it was
established in the early 1970s, the planners concentrated on saving
the mudflats, salt marshes, and salt ponds because those were considered the sensitive areas, the ones the waterfowl, shorebirds, shellfish, and endangered species needed. Now we’re finding that seasonal
marshes inshore from the tidal areas are important too. We used to
think the salt marsh harvest mouse [a federally endangered species]
was mostly in the tidal marshes, but we’ve discovered that the largest
populations are in the seasonal marshes, and the seasonal marshes are
going under to development. We’re protecting one part of the Bay and
letting another deteriorate. It’s like somebody quitting smoking but
taking snuff.”
I knew what Harvey meant by growth pressures. When I’d started
going to places like Coyote Hills Regional Park in the early 1970s,
much of the South Bay had been in open fields inhabited by ring-necked
pheasants and burrowing owls. Driving to my interview with Harvey,
I’d passed exactly two open spaces, one with a big Realtor’s sign on it,
25

mountains and marshes

the other part of the Ardenwood Technology Park, which proclaimed
its presence with an outdoor fountain and floral display. The fountain
seemed ironic in light of Harvey’s talk of water scarcity, throwing gallons into the air beside a freeway where gridlocked commuters were
unlikely to enjoy it.
“The freshwater input from the delta is really critical,” Harvey continued, “particularly down here where the pollution concentrates. If we
lose more of that . . . It’s hard not to pessimistic.”
Harvey hesitated again when I asked him if he thought the Bay
would survive. It’s the kind of anthropomorphic question that scientists, especially government ones, may not like, but Harvey did his best
to answer it.
“There’ll be some kind of bay here. In fact, the Bay will probably
grow in the next century because the greenhouse effect is expected to
raise ocean levels. It will flood a lot of the present wetlands, so if we
don’t save more open space around the Bay now, there may not be any
wetlands in the future, just open water next to houses and factories.
That will mean even less wildlife. If river inflow keeps decreasing, the
Bay will become more of a marine environment—that is, if increased
contamination doesn’t cause some truly awesome disaster.
“The threats to the refuge are so diverse that there’s a temptation to
get cynical, to say, ‘This place is dying: who cares. I’ll go to Alaska or
Oregon.’ But then you go out in the field and see something that reminds
you why you keep wading through the paperwork and the meetings.
A while ago I was in Richmond looking for California clapper rails
[another endangered species]. After three days, I finally found a nest
in an area that stank of oil refineries, was covered with landfills and
junkyards, and had packs of dogs roaming around. All signs of the high
value we’ve placed on wetlands. But then there was this beautiful bird
nesting in the middle of this stuff. I was struck by the tenacity. It was
sad. But it was a testimonial to something.”
I walked around the visitor center’s nature trail after talking to
Harvey. Salt ponds separated the trail from the Bay, and it seemed another irony that we consider them wildlife habitat now, since they replaced natural marshes and were used to produce industrial chemicals.
Still, there was wildlife. Black-necked stilts waded daintily in the brine,
probing with their slightly upturned bills and complaining raucously as
I approached. Swallows skimmed around nests on an old duck-hunting
26

t h e l i v i n g , dy i n g bay

shack. When I stopped to examine some unpleasant-looking blotches in
the ponds, I saw that even they were alive, containing thousands of tiny
red brine shrimp.

the walled-in, untamable bay
It was clear from what Tom Harvey had said that the less urbanized
North Bay and delta are crucial to the Bay-as-organism, so I headed
in that direction one hot, smoggy October day. I’d long wanted to see
Suisun Marsh, the largest single estuarine marsh in the continental
United States, but somehow never had, despite driving past it many
times on I-80. The sprawl around Fairfield hadn’t promised much in the
way of open space.
I got a pleasant surprise after negotiating the raw housing tracts
and malls around Suisun City. From Peytonia Slough Ecological Reserve at its northern end, Suisun Marsh stretched south toward the
Contra Costa hills, with only a solitary barge crane to hint at industrial activity. It was about as close as I’d come to seeing California
lowland in a truly wild state, a sweep of tule rushes, cattails, sedges,
and wild grasses extending to the horizon. Asters and marsh grindelia added blue, white, and yellow to the marsh plants’ bright green.
White-crowned sparrows whistled, marsh wrens chattered, a loggerhead shrike rasped, and an unseen bird, perhaps one of Tom Harvey’s
rails, clucked from the tule sedges.
I was even more surprised when a river otter surfaced in the slough.
I’d never seen one so close to a town. It stuck its nose in the air and
chewed on a small fish like a dog enjoying a succulent bone. When it saw
me, it dove and resurfaced behind a clump of rushes, but it wasn’t really
alarmed, and I watched it eat two more fish, turning on its back to chew
them corncob style. Sweltering in the 90-degree, hydrocarbon-laced air,
I envied it.
When I drove southeast to Grizzly Island, I found more open spaces.
Early-arriving migratory waterfowl dotted ponds, and the brushy levees
and roadsides at the state wildlife area produced many squawking cock
pheasants. Two black-shouldered kites, showy white raptors that specialize in marshy, grassy terrain, watched me from a coyote bush, flying
away only when I was a few yards from them.
27

mountains and marshes

Yet there was a difference between Grizzly Island and the Peytonia
Reserve that implied some doubts about the future health of marsh and
delta. Although by no means pristine (much of Suisun Marsh was
drained and farmed in the 1920s and ’30s), the marsh around Peytonia
Reserve is natural, maintained by the interaction of river flows and tidal
action that has regulated Bay wetlands for millennia. What I saw of
Grizzly Island, on the other hand, is heavily managed for agriculture or
to produce game and fish for sport consumption. Rather than allowing
wetlands to operate according to a natural water regimen, managers
flood or drain the land to optimize crop or game production. The state
wildlife area is plowed and bulldozed into squares that might as well be
farm fields, except that they aren’t (I hope) laced with pesticides.
There’s nothing wrong with managing duck habitat, especially at
a time when waterfowl populations are dwindling alarmingly, but increased emphasis on artificial management showed its ominous side as
I talked to people concerned about the future. Under current policies,
only diked marshes managed by hunting clubs or the state are assured
of dependable freshwater supplies. As more water is diverted from the
delta, saltwater creeps into the natural, open marshes. Brackish marshes
of rushes and brass buttons turn into salt marshes of pickleweed and
cordgrass, habitats less favorable to many wildlife species. Eventually,
such places may become so salty as to be almost sterilized.
The state Department of Water Resources proposes various engineering solutions to salt intrusion, such as the massive dam and floodgates it is building near the mouth of Montezuma Slough, Suisun Marsh’s
main source of Sacramento River water. The gates are supposed to let
freshwater into the marsh and keep saltwater out. But an environmentalist I talked to, Bay Institute founder Bill Davoren, likened such engineering solutions to putting Band-Aids on a failing kidney. Like kidneys,
brackish marshes filter pollutants and toxins out of water that ends up
in faucets as well as in wildlife habitat. If the 85,500-acre “kidney” of
Suisun Marsh should fail, it’s hard to imagine a dialysis that could replace its filtering function in any permanent way.
After leaving Grizzly Island, I went to the Sacramento River at Rio
Vista, heading east on Route 12 over miles of parched rangeland that
seemed as unlike Suisun Marsh as the Kansas Plains. The river looked
like a lot of water by the time I reached it. But appearances can be deceptive. In the drought year of 1931, delta water got so salty that residents
28

t h e l i v i n g , dy i n g bay

couldn’t drink it or irrigate with it. River flow had become so low that
saltwater had moved upstream to replace it. Freshwater flow acts as a
barrier to saltwater intrusion, the only one that has proven effective.
Driving along the Sacramento’s levee was more comfortable than
crossing the Golden Gate in an inflatable boat. Yet, even walled behind
levees, the river had a slightly disturbing grandeur that recalled the
Gate’s powerful tidal surge. This has to do with the fact that the river’s
surface is higher than the fields and orchards bordering it. Peaty delta
soils subside when drained for agriculture, while sedimentation raises
the levee-contained riverbed’s level above the surrounding land. Engineers say the river is “tamed,” but “caged” might be a better adjective. If
it gets out of the levees, it won’t be tame.
River and Golden Gate both had an incalculable look, perhaps because they are the Bay’s main links with the biosphere. The rivers link it
to the mountains; the Gate to the ocean. Looking into the Sacramento’s
swift flow, I didn’t feel that I understood much of what was going on
down there, for all the paper and talk I’d waded through. I didn’t know
as much as the big chinook salmon that were cruising off the Gate.
They’d know from the river’s taste or smell when the Sacramento was
right for them to swim up to spawn, and some would manage it despite
everything civilization has put in their way: gill nets, salt intrusion, aqueduct pumping stations, dams, log jams, silted spawning streams. A
lot fewer manage it now than even a few years ago, but somehow some
still do. My facts and figures seemed thin compared to their knowledge.
Sometimes it seems that our ignorance makes a mockery of even our
well-meaning attempts to protect the Bay. Its life can be frustratingly
indifferent to our concern, as with Tom Harvey’s clapper rail nesting in a
landfill instead of the refuges we’ve made for it. But people keep trying,
driven by that “something” Harvey mentioned. It might be a clapper rail
or a salmon run or a day’s sailing inside the Gate, but I think it amounts
in the end to a recognition that the Bay’s health reflects our own, that we
can’t draw a line between living integrity and mere exploitable matter
without sooner or later finding ourselves on the wrong side of the line.
—Image magazine, San Francisco Examiner, December 6, 1987

29

the crowded desert islands

One of my adolescent fantasies was of a desert island, a small one with
just a cliff and a beach. I’d live in a cave in the cliff and comb the beach.
I had it on Sunday nights, before I had to go back for another week of
junior high school, thus its appeal. This became less urgent as I got older,
but I still liked the idea. When I came to California, I thought about
such a place. Robert Louis Stevenson’s Treasure Island is supposed to be
based on the California coast.
Living around San Francisco Bay, I developed a mild fixation on the
Farallones, a 221-acre island cluster twenty-seven miles off the Golden
Gate. I’d see them on clear days as I hiked a ridge at Point Reyes, sugarloaf shapes jutting from an otherwise empty ocean, and feel a faint frustration at their distance. They’re an extension of the mainland, granite
ridges dragged north from California’s Transverse Ranges by tectonic
plates, but the cold, windy Pacific cuts them off.
I first came to California to visit a friend who had a salmon fishing
boat, at Bodega Bay. When I arrived the boat was broken, and all I ever
got to do was help him unsuccessfully try to fix it. The farthest out I got
was on a rowboat on Tomales Bay, east of Point Reyes. The Farallones
just hovered out there. Tectonic plates might have dragged them north
to the Aleutians—as they eventually will—so far as I was concerned.
I finally got to visit the Farallones years later when an Oceanic Society guide who was taking a writing course I taught at UC–Berkeley
Extension gave me a free ride on a whale-watching trip there. The trip
was not much like my solitary beachcombing fantasy. Few experiences
are less solitary than a whale-watching cruise, and we didn’t set foot on
31

mountains and marshes

the islands, a national wildlife refuge reserved for breeding marine life.
Yet those desert islands proved more fantastic—in the sense of diverse,
surprising, curious, lively—than the fantasy one.
A half hour outside the Golden Gate, somebody said, “Look at the
jellyfish.” I glanced over the rail, expecting to see some of the little moon
jellies and blue sailors that often wash ashore. A few drifted here and
there, but below them floated an almost solid mass of golden brown,
furry-textured disks, each as large as a child. They were close enough
to the surface to see in detail but deep enough to appear shadowy and
mysterious, and they extended in all directions—a mermaid’s meadow
of giant, pelagic chrysanthemums.
My student, Mike Ezekiel, said they were lion’s mane jellyfish, each
furry disk a colony of tiny coelenterates that strain microscopic plants
and animals from the water with structures like miniscule poison darts
on trailing filaments. I’d heard a lot about how fertile California’s offshore waters are because of nutrient upwellings from deep currents, but
I’d never seen such graphic evidence of it. The big jellyfish had to be
floating in a plankton soup to be so abundant.
Many things we passed were new to me, although I’d been living a few
miles from them for years. I didn’t recall seeing the shy little harbor porpoises that showed dorsal fins for an instant as they surfaced to breathe.
I’d seen a lot of penguin-like common murres on shoreline rocks, but
I was unfamiliar with the pigeon guillemots that flew out of the boat’s
way, the little Cassin’s auklets that dove out of its way, and the tufted
puffins (named for the peroxide blond wings they seem to be wearing)
that floated past. I’d seen red-necked phalaropes, but I hadn’t seen those
delicate shorebirds sitting on the deep-sea swells like gulls. Ezekiel said
phalaropes like to follow blue whales and eat the shrimplike krill the
whales feed on. They’d seen blues—the biggest animals that have ever
lived—around the islands the day before.
We didn’t see blue whales that day, but as we neared the main island
we saw spouts and then flukes. A pod of gray whales was feeding in
the shallows, sucking up bottom mud and straining out copepods
and other small animals with the sieve-like baleen in their mouths. Of
course, we couldn’t see them doing this, just their tails as they dived
and their mouths as they surfaced. Despite their semiconcealment, the
gray whales’ pale, mottled bodies had a weighty solidity, surprising in a
medium that so far had mostly revealed amorphous jellyfish and kelp.
32

t h e c row d e d d e s e r t i s l a n d s

Even the best photographs can’t convey this solidity: it must be seen in
the flesh. It impressed the whale watchers so much that they cheered
each time one surfaced.
As we passed the whales, something even stranger than lion’s mane
jellyfish appeared in front of the boat—a large circular object with one
black eye, like a giant, animated tea tray out of Through the Looking
Glass. When the prow neared it, the tray brandished stubby fins and
upended itself, than shook a stubby tale and swam down out of sight.
It was an ocean sunfish, or mola, a several-hundred-pound species that
likes to sunbathe lying on its side on the surface. Mike Ezekiel had described it in one of his class essays, but I had assumed something so
exotic lived only in the tropics. They come north to California’s coast to
eat the abundant jellyfish, although nobody knows how they get much
nourishment from the watery coelenterates.
We steered past the island into deeper waters to look for more whales,
and we soon found some humpbacks, a more pelagic species. Although
larger than the grays, they seemed less substantial, more part of the
amorphous marine world. Their dark, slick backs were hard to discern
from the shifting swells, and they kept farther from the boat. They soon
disappeared, probably diving to find plankton swarms.
A swarm of seabirds rested on the water, a sign of schooling fish,
and we headed that way. A herd of California sea lions appeared, also
headed for the fish. I hadn’t seen sea lions swimming in a herd since a
rowboat excursion when they’d startled me by rearing up out of the
water exactly at sunset and barking in unison. Unlike the preoccupied
whales, the lions craned their necks to eye us curiously. Some swam
under the hull and appeared on the other side. One group hung back
timidly, probably juveniles still getting used to things.
The lions departed as we turned back toward the islands, but a pod of
black-and-white Dall’s porpoises began to ride the boat’s bow wave. A
porpoise would surface just under the rail, glide effortlessly as the wave
pulled it along, and then veer off to be replaced by another. “It’s like
they’re doing it to be friendly,” someone cried, although to me it seemed
more like the daredevil exuberance of skateboarders attaching to cars.
As we approached Southeast Island, a fishy, ammoniac reek and
a screeching din filled the air, then clouds of big black kelp flies that
somehow managed to swarm around our heads despite the sea wind.
The reason for all this soon became visible. Marine birds and mammals
33

mountains and marshes

covered the island except for the empty buildings of a former lighthouse
station. Gulls, murres, and cormorants sprinkled the tan granite like salt
and pepper: their winged comings and goings blurred the horizon. When
I focused my binoculars on what seemed to be blackish-brown moss on
the seaside rocks, it resolved into masses of California sea lions, broken
here and there with light brown patches of larger Steller’s sea lions.
A litter of silvery, cylindrical objects covered one cove—basking elephant seals. They were so much larger than the sea lions that they
confused my sense of scale. I thought of the first elephant seal I’d seen, a
twenty-foot bull protruding from both ends of a willow thicket at Año
Nuevo Rookery south of San Francisco like something back-projected
in a monster movie. Once considered extinct, elephant seals have taken
full advantage of protected rookeries since I first came to California in
the late 1960s. Hundreds of bulls now rampage like blubbery buses up
and down beaches. Away from rookeries, they live like sperm whales,
swimming to mid-ocean and diving a mile deep to feed on abyssal squid
and fishes.
The crowded desert islands were exciting, but they dispelled my adolescent fantasies of living on one. I felt no wish to land on the beach where
the elephant seals sprawled. They’ve been known to run over unwary
visitors. I felt even less wish to penetrate an island interior swarming
with kelp flies, maggot-ridden guano, and territorial gulls. Wardens and
scientific researchers need protective clothing to walk there.
The island may have been more pleasant during the nineteenth
century, when commercial egg hunters and sealers had reduced their
breeding populations to a fraction of today’s restored ones. But I liked
it the way it was. Thoreau wrote: We need to have some life “pasturing
freely where we never wander.” I think we also need to have some life
rampaging, shrieking, and stinking freely where we never wander.
It was getting late, and the boat turned back. It had been a perfect
August day, with a quiet sea and only a light fog. If we’d come out a few
weeks later, when the fall storms had begun, things might have been less
serene. Entire boatloads of whale watchers have succumbed to seasickness on blustery days. The islands’ fauna also gets more active, as dozens
of limousine-sized great white sharks arrive to feed on the seal population. Whale watchers sometimes see sharks decapitate unlucky seals and
fling their bleeding bodies about. A few times, they have seen truck-sized
orcas seize unlucky sharks and fling their bleeding bodies about.
34

t h e c row d e d d e s e r t i s l a n d s

I thought I’d seen almost everything for that time of year. As we
plowed back into the lion’s mane jellyfish pasture, however, Mike Ezekiel shouted, “A turtle!” A dark, spherical head and part of a ridged
carapace protruded from the water a few yards off the bow. It was a
leatherback, the largest sea turtle species: this one was at least five feet
long. They appear around the Farallones occasionally, probably to graze
on jellyfish. Leatherbacks are less confined to tropical waters than other
species because their bulk minimizes heat loss.
I was still surprised to see a sea turtle in the chill waters off the Golden
Gate. I was equally surprised to see another leatherback fifteen minutes
later, long enough to be sure it wasn’t the first. We got close enough to
hear it breathing and to see limpets and barnacles on its carapace. Both
turtles had orange patches on their heads and pinkish ones on their
throats, colors I hadn’t expected, possibly epiphytic organisms like the
limpets and barnacles.
The turtles reminded me of one of my favorite childhood books,
Time/Life’s The World We Live In. It contains a painting of Mesozoic-era
sea life, with plesiosaurs, ichthyosaurs, and mosasaurs swimming in
an aquamarine ocean off a mountainous, palm-fringed coast. Those
toothy reptiles were thrilling, but what most struck me was an enormous, leathery-shelled turtle swimming under them. It seemed a connection to my world as well as the distantly past one. “Why turtles
were selected for survival on land and sea remains one of evolution’s
mysteries,” the book said. That was in 1955, but it’s still a mystery. But
the fact that some sea turtles nest on desert islands probably contributes to it.
—Manoa: A Pacific Journal of International Writing, Winter 1993

35

a stop on the flyway

Oakland’s Lake Merritt is, oddly enough, the oldest migratory bird
refuge in the United States, established by the state in 1870 as a sanctuary for wintering ducks and other waterbirds. This was mainly for the
benefit of the nouveau riche residents of mansions that ringed the lake
after entrepreneur Samuel Merritt created it by damming a polluted tidal
inlet to flush out the sewage. The residents probably liked having ducks
to admire at the ends of their lawns: they certainly didn’t want shotguns
blasting away at them where their children and dogs were playing. Still,
the little lake protected waterfowl during times when hunters thought
nothing of killing hundreds a day, and it later played a surprising role in
migratory bird science.
Bird migration is one of the great challenges to human understanding.
Early records like the Bible mention it, but the “why,” “how,” and
“where” of it remained mysteries. Classical Greek philosophers knew
more about math and physics. Aristotle thought redstarts, summer migrants in Europe, turned into redbreasts in winter. (Old World redstarts
and redbreasts are songbirds that resemble New World bluebirds, although they aren’t blue.) The notion seems fanciful, but it was probably
based on observation. Birds molt and change plumage before migrating,
and species can be hard to distinguish then. Redstarts and redbreasts
look similar anyway, so when redbreasts were present in winter, it made
sense to see them as winter versions of redstarts. The redstart’s winter
home in Africa was unknown.

37

mountains and marshes

Two millennia later, the English essayist Robert Burton was as puzzled
as the Greeks: “In winter not a bird is in Muskovy to be found,” he writes
in his 1621 Anatomy of Melancholy,
but at the spring in an instant the woods and hedges are full of
them, saith Herbastein. How comes it to pass? Do they sleep in
winter like Gesner’s Alpine mice; or do they lie hid, as Olaus affirms,
in the bottoms of lakes and rivers, holding their breath? . . . Or
do they follow the sun, as Peter Martyr manifestly convicts out
of his own knowledge; for when he was ambassador in Egypt, he
saw swallows, Spanish kites, and many such European birds in
December and January. . . . Or do they lie hid in caves, rocks and
hollow trees, as most think, in deep tin mines or sea cliffs, as Mr.
Carew gives out?

Burton retained something of the medieval tradition of relying more
on scholarship than personal observation for information. But two centuries later, Gilbert White, a close observer whose The Natural History
of Selborne initiated today’s nature writing tradition, remained unsure
about many birds’ seasonal disappearances from the Hampshire countryside, which he had studied all his life. Geographic exploration had
shown that birds departing in the fall went south and that others came
from farther north at the same time. But White still found it hard to
believe that little finches, thrushes, and flycatchers could fly all the way
to Africa. He also could not confidently reject the traditional belief that
swallows and swifts dived into lakes and ponds to spend the winter dormant in mud. Their behavior contributed to this idea, since they spend a
lot of time swooping over water to catch insects.
Technology solved those problems. Researchers put radio transmitters on white-fronted geese in California, follow them to Yukon Delta
breeding grounds, then to wintering grounds in northwestern Mexico.
But the “why” and “how” of migration remain problematic. We know
that billions of birds move out of the tropics every spring, seeking the
vast food and space resources of northern summer. We know almost
nothing about the phenomenon’s evolution.
Ornithologists once thought, for example, that showy songbirds like
the orioles, tanagers, buntings, and warblers that nest here in summer
evolved in North America and started migrating to the tropics when
38

a s t o p o n t h e f l y wa y

ice age cooling forced them south. But studies in the tropics found
many resident species of our gaudiest summer migrants—orioles, tanagers, and buntings—and many are gaudier than ours. While some
wood warbler species probably started migrating south because of
global cooling, most of our summer songbirds probably moved north
from the tropics as climate warmed. Two wood warbler species, the
yellow-rumped and Townsend’s, winter here, but the orioles, tanagers,
and buntings all go south.
Each avian group has evolved its migration patterns differently, and
fragile-boned birds leave few fossils. There are, fortunately, still plenty
of living ones to study. Yet the results are bewilderingly complex. Various birds seem to use every migration method imaginable short of
compass and sextant. Almost all migrants probably steer by coastlines,
mountain ranges, and other landmarks to some degree. Social birds such
as geese and cranes have traditional routes that they teach their young.
On the other hand, many fledgling birds make their first migration independently, implying a genetic programming that prompts them to fly
in the right direction for the right distance. (Sometimes they fly in the
wrong direction, which is why the Bay Area regularly gets a few eastern
or Old World birds.)
Night-flying migrants, of which there are many, may steer by the
stars; day-flying ones by the sun or, on cloudy days, by polarized sunlight. Pigeons and doves have tiny deposits of magnetic crystals in their
heads that allow them to orient themselves by earth’s magnetic field.
Some birds may hear low-frequency sounds like surf over long distances,
which could help them follow coastlines or make landfalls when they
are flying at twenty thousand feet at night, as many do.
Migratory birds have been a spectacular aspect of American history
since Europeans arrived, if a sad one. Colonial naturalists, used to decimated Old World faunas, couldn’t believe the abundance and diversity
of the birds they found in eastern forests and wetlands, but it took only
a few centuries to make those qualities, in fact, unbelievable. It is hard
now to imagine eastern forests with clouds of passenger pigeons and
flocks of Carolina parakeets. Avian faunas were less spectacular as the
frontier moved through the arid West, but when Europeans reached the
Bay Area, they found huge migratory bird concentrations. Sir Francis
Drake provisioned his ship for crossing the Pacific with seabirds and
mammals from the Farallon Islands.
39

mountains and marshes

As elsewhere, colonists quickly reduced those concentrations. Market
hunting became a ruthlessly efficient industry and remained so into the
early twentieth century. By the 1820s, Russian fur traders were killing
fifty thousand western gulls a year on Farallon breeding islands for meat
and feathers. Even the fishy-tasting eggs of seabirds such as murres from
the Farallones became a profitable commodity in the days before chicken
farms. An estimated four hundred thousand common murres originally
nested on the islands; by 1900, “egging” had reduced the population to
about twenty thousand.
In the long run, however, conversion of habitat, particularly Bay
marshes, into farmland, salt ponds, and towns had a greater overall
impact. It’s hard to say what bird species habitat loss may have extirpated from the area, since little is known about what was here and
the loss happened so fast. At least one disappearance is well-known,
that of the yellow-billed cuckoo, a South American migrant that bred in
Bay Area riparian woodlands into the nineteenth century. Civilization’s
thirst for irrigation water had expunged it by the twentieth.
Considering San Francisco Bay’s importance as one of the world’s
major estuarine harbors, the late-nineteenth-century’s conservation
movement might have championed its bird habitats, but the Bay’s economic potential outweighed this. John Muir may have worried about
ducks and shorebirds as he managed his fruit ranch in Martinez in the
1880s and ’90s, but there wasn’t much he could do about Bay wetlands, as opposed to remote Yosemite. (And the city even got part of
that in Hetch Hetchy Reservoir.) In 1909, the United States designated
some of the Farallon Islands as a national wildlife refuge, but aside from
kicking out the market hunters, it did little to protect wildlife. Through
the 1920s, as early federal refuges dotted more rural regions, the Bay
Area maintained the boomer stance typical of the forty-niner past. Entrepreneurs had plans for the Bay itself—filling it for real estate—and
its waterfowl habitat didn’t get even a nominal national refuge like the
Farallones.
In the 1930s, a series of disastrous drought years coupled with the
Depression focused attention on the need to protect some habitat for
plunging bird populations and on opportunities to do so as land values
also plunged. The federal government suddenly wanted more information about migrating birds—particularly the waterfowl that hunters
value—and some kind of context for their overall management and
40

a s t o p o n t h e f l y wa y

protection. As it happened, little Lake Merritt—less posh by then after
the mansion owners moved on but still offering winter refuge to waterfowl—played a big part in the enterprise.
An ornithologist named Frederick C. Lincoln had been running the
U.S. Biological Survey since 1920. (The survey, a Department of Agriculture agency until its transfer to the Department of Interior in 1939,
became the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, which runs today’s refuges.)
While accumulating banding and recovery records from across the continent, Lincoln had noted the faithfulness with which ducks and geese
returned to the places where they’d been banded. Among pintails and
widgeons banded at Lake Merritt from 1926 into the mid-1930s, he
found that nearly 97 percent of band recoveries were made west of the
Rockies. In the winter of 1933–1934, more than half the ducks trapped
on the lake bore bands attached there in previous years.
There was a good evolutionary reason for this. Before its conversion
into urban scenery, the tidal inlet that is now Lake Merritt had been
ringed by extensive seasonal wetlands. The ducks banded there must
have had ancestors that frequented the area going back many thousands of years. It is encouraging, in a way, that their ancestral wetland’s
conversion first to a sewer and then to a still-polluted ornamental lake
didn’t deter them from returning, although, given the overall situation,
where else could they go?
Lincoln coordinated this data with material from other sites showing
that different migrants, like shorebirds and songbirds, also often returned to the same nesting and wintering locations. He used the information to formulate the concept of the “flyway,” a kind of avian nation
“in which related migration routes . . . the lanes of individual travel from
a particular breeding ground to the winter quarters of the birds that use
them . . . are associated and blended in a definite geographical region.”
Lincoln designated four North American flyways—the Atlantic, Mississippi, Central, and Pacific. They were shaped like tornadoes, wide in
the boreal and arctic areas where many migratory waterbirds nest, then
narrowing into migration routes through the United States, Mexico, and
areas south. (Most North American migrants winter in Central America
and the Caribbean, although some reach South America and a few, like
Swainson’s hawks, fly all the way to Patagonia.) Lincoln acknowledged
that there was a lot of crossing from flyway to flyway, but aside from
their soft edges, he considered them real biological entities. After World
41

mountains and marshes

War II the new Fish and Wildlife Service came to regard them as such,
making them the basic administrative units for hunting regulations and
refuge management.
Lincoln’s work definitely contributed to migratory bird management.
Since his death in 1960, however, ornithologists have largely discarded
flyways as biological entities. One biologist who studies songbirds gave
them a scathing review, calling them “misleading . . . hopeless, bogus . . .
like saying the earth is flat . . . a disservice to science.”
“Small birds are broad front migrants,” he said. “They inherit an
ability to fly a certain distance in a certain direction, and they don’t care
if there’s an ocean or a mountain range in the way. Where’s the flyway
in that?” He grudgingly granted flyways limited usefulness for counting
and managing geese, swans, and cranes but doubted their value for
ducks, which he said fly in inherited directions and may change breeding
grounds when following new yearly mating partners.
Most ornithologists agreed in milder terms, acknowledging flyways’
significance as an administrative tool for managing species that follow
strongly established migration routes. In his authoritative Ducks, Geese,
and Swans of North America, Frank C. Bellrose called them “useful geographic terms . . . and political units” and cited some cases in which waterfowl migration “fit neatly into a flyway.” But: “Flyways fail to define
the passage of waterfowl because they cover too extensive an area and
do not delineate movements of waterfowl that are lateral to a northsouth direction.”
Some avian groups, including most of the Bay Area’s seabirds, definitely transgress the flyway concept. Brown pelicans nest on islands off
southern California, then wander up and down the coast looking for
food. White pelicans nest on inland lakes, then move to the coast for
food. Some gull and tern species also go east to lake breeding grounds
after wintering here. Other gulls and terns nest here, while some winter
here and then fly north to breeding grounds. Common murres and
pigeon guillemots that nest here may fly north for the winter as well
as south. The notoriously endangered marbled murrelet spends winters
feeding at sea and summers nesting in redwoods or Douglas firs.
Even with conventional migrants, flyways are more about administration than conservation: it’s the ground and water where birds breed
and feed that need to be protected, not the air they fly through. Lincoln
wouldn’t find much banding information on pintails and widgeons at
42

a s t o p o n t h e f l y wa y

Lake Merritt these days. In his time, and until the early 1960s, several
thousand of these dabbling ducks visited the lake in the fall. A few dozen
visit it now, because there are a lot fewer ducks. Most migratory bird
populations have declined steadily as habitat has disappeared.
Yet the federal government did little for Bay Area migratory bird habitat until the environmentalist uprising of Earth Day, 1970. The first
federal refuge on the Bay came in 1972—Don Edwards San Francisco
Bay National Wildlife Refuge, named for the congressman who helped
push it past the growth boomers and through the legislature. San Pablo
Bay NWR followed in 1974, through a similar process. (The Fish and
Wildlife Service finally replaced the Coast Guard at Farallon NWR that
year.) In 1980 the Bay Area got the only federal refuge established to
protect endangered plants, Antioch Dunes NWR. A refuge established
in 1992, 339-acre Marin Islands, protects the largest heron and egret
rookeries in the Bay Area, although most of its acreage is under water.
Together, the four refuges on the Bay itself add up to somewhat more
than fifty thousand acres of wetlands and other habitat. This protection represents massive efforts on the part of the local public. When
Congress established San Pablo Bay NWR, for example, it comprised
175 acres, and local government had approved a 1,585-acre commercial
and residential development nearby. One of the reasons for establishing
the refuge was that 80 percent of the canvasback ducks in the Pacific
Flyway were known to feed and rest on San Pablo Bay wetlands. Thousands of houses, apartments, and office buildings obviously would have
impacted that. Citizens took government to court to force an environmental review and—with the help of then congressional representative
Barbara Boxer and the U.S. Land and Water Conservation fund—finally
saved the 1,585 acres by buying the land from a Japanese corporation
for $7 million.
Yet the refuges don’t represent a massive area considering that hundreds of thousands of wetland acres disappear from the continental
United States every year. Of course, state, regional, and local parks also
protect Bay Area wetlands, and conservationists led by David Brower,
Edgar Wayburn, and Congressman Phillip Burton saved much migratory bird habitat when they pushed the United States to establish
Point Reyes National Seashore and Golden Gate National Recreation
Area. The restored marshes and riparian woodlands there are a revelation. But, considering the Bay’s international significance as a unique
43

mountains and marshes

ecological system (UNESCO designated it a biosphere reserve in 1988),
one might think that the world’s richest nation could do more.
Whatever the biological significance of Lincoln’s avian nations, it’s
hard to get much sense of the Bay as more than a “stop on the flyway”
from the National Fish and Wildlife Service refuges here. In the Central
Valley refuges, the surrounding farmland’s open horizon gives a certain
feeling of integrity, albeit a truncated one. The Bay Area’s refuges can
seem like museums because the surrounding artificial environment is so
pervasive.
When I visited San Pablo Bay one late spring day in 2014, the lone
hiking trail to the marshes at Lower Tubbs Island led past huge hay
fields and spoil banks for most of its length. At Tubbs Island, the trail
became impassible because a stretch had collapsed into the marsh and
the NFWS lacked the money to fix it. This being the off-season, waterbirds were scarce anyway, aside from a few mallards and egrets. As I
walked out to where the trail had collapsed, a buzzing roar like a swarm
of giant insects erupted from the north. Looking that way, I saw dark
objects zipping up a hillside like giant bees scurrying around a hive. It
was like a 1950s atomic mutant movie. Then I remembered— it was the
Sears Point Raceway.
The South Bay around Don Edwards Refuge is more urbanized
than San Pablo Bay, but its marshes seem less constricted because more
public facilities exist. When I walked the trails around the visitor center
a few days after my San Pablo hike, the warehouses, hotels, and technology parks to the east seemed to fade on the horizon, although they’d
looked real enough as I drove in (albeit with surprising numbers of
empty parking lots and FOR LEASE signs). I saw more birds than at
San Pablo—shoveler ducks as well as mallards, gulls dipping into salt
ponds, swallows nesting on an old hunting shack—but the only spectacular sight was a flock of white pelicans, and they weren’t flying over the
refuge but over Coyote Hills Regional Park to the north.
A wildlife kiosk on one of the restored Don Edwards marshes referred
tersely to the flyway concept: “On the west coast, most birds migrate
between their summer and winter homes along a migration corridor
known as the Pacific Flyway.” A kiosk on the impassible trailhead at
the San Pablo Refuge reflected the concept’s present status more appositely. One panel had a block of biological boilerplate about the flyway
superimposed on a color blowup of a black-necked stilt (the only one I
44

a s t o p o n t h e f l y wa y

saw that day). The type was illegibly sun-bleached—a fading screed of
ornithological anachronism.
There would have been more birds if marshes and riparian woodlands, instead of hay fields and buildings, had stretched the horizons.
When they did, the Bay must have been more than a way station for
many shorebirds and waterfowl. There was a lot more water to produce
food for them, and thus more nesting. The restored wetlands at Point
Reyes support summering coots, grebes, rails, green herons, blue herons,
bitterns, and wood ducks, as well as egrets and mallards.
If Frederick C. Lincoln had conceived his flyways in the sixteenth
century instead of the twentieth, they might have been less elegantly
tornado shaped.
Still, birds will keep coming if we let them. They are resourceful creatures, like the curlew flocks that forage many miles inland at Round
Valley Regional Preserve near Brentwood each fall. In Mount Diablo’s
rain shadow, the oak-dotted grassland there hardly seems the place for
long-billed shorebirds, but curlews eat grasshoppers as well as marsh
worms and snails. Or like a pair of mallards I saw at a tiny cattle pond
for a few years.
The pond dried up in summer, so they went elsewhere then, but they
were back in the winter and spring. During a wet year, they raised a
brood. One day, after seeing the drake on the pond, I found the female
leading a troop of ducklings in a creek on the other side of the ridge
above it. The next spring was a dry one, and the pond hardly held water,
but the mallards still came back. I saw them one day, huddled in a cattail
patch as though wondering what to do next.
—2014

45

the north bay

the raven roost

I usually like wind. I like to see it toss treetops and swirl leaves down
a street, or hear it buffet walls, rattle windows, and howl under doors.
When it blows all the time though, not in gusts and eddies but in flat
streams, it can be abrasive. Walking in a steady wind all day is like lying
on cold ground. The unyielding element robs the body first of warmth,
then of feeling, and when feeling goes life isn’t far behind. A strong
steady wind dulls smell, sound, touch, and even sight if one faces into it.
The walker begins to feel more like a rock or a ghost than a living being.
The wind blows like that a lot at a big raven roost on Point Reyes. A
long valley runs up from Drakes Estero, and ocean wind flows unhindered there. The wind itself might have carved the valley: the hills and
rocks look as shaved and huddled as the coyote bush scrub and willow
thickets. The roost occupies a pine plantation on the marshy flat just
above the water. Many of the pines are dead, gray skeletons, which enhances the spectral impression.
The wind didn’t bother me at first when I visited the roost one sunny
March afternoon. The ravens hadn’t returned for the night: I walked
under the pines looking for signs of the birds but finding only one black
feather. I did find a long-dead fox, a recently dead mouse, and a surprising number of mushrooms—clusters of slender reddish gill mushrooms; clumps of wrinkled black-and-white false morels, or “elfin
saddles”; yellow shelves of bracket fungus. It seemed that the introduced
Monterey pines had brought their symbiotic mycorrhizal fungi with
them. Or maybe they hadn’t, since so many trees were dying. Maybe the
mushrooms were mostly parasites.
49

mountains and marshes

When I walked out the other side of the plantation, I found a deer
browsing the turf. It didn’t see me, but a pair of ravens on a distant
hillside did. The big black birds took wing, and one flew toward me and
hovered overhead, croaking. The deer fled, and the ravens veered away
out of sight.
I’d started to feel the wind by then, and although the pines offered
some shelter, it was good to get back into sunlight.
I went down to the water to eat lunch, but the wind picked up sandwiches, celery sticks, oatmeal cookies, and thermos cup and flung them
to the sand ten feet away. After scrambling to catch them and gingerly
eating the gritty fragments, I was sleepy, but the wind wouldn’t even let
me take a nap in peace. It plucked at my clothes like an importunate
brat, startling me awake and snatching away the sun’s warmth.

aerobatics
I’d come to the roost looking for insight into a mentality that is a strange
mix of openness and elusiveness. I’d been interested in ravens since
reading T. H. White’s account of their flying prowess in The Once and
Future King: he calls them the best of all fliers. Growing up in New
England, I couldn’t watch them, but California offered many chances to
do so. When I lived in Sonoma County, a flock roosted in some Douglas
firs nearby, and I’d sit in the grove and listen to them croaking to one
another. It was like listening to people calling back and forth from different rooms of a house. The calls had the absentminded tone of people
talking while absorbed in other matters.
Later, walking in Golden Gate National Recreation Area’s Tennessee
Valley, I came within ten feet of a pair sitting on a fence. It was foggy,
but the ravens didn’t seem to mind my appearance out of the mist. A calf
also watched them—from a few inches away—but they ignored it too.
They were neatly butchering and eating two rodents, probably pocket
gophers. Each removed the head, swallowed that, opened the abdomen
with a sharp hook at the end of its beak, discarded the viscera, and
swallowed the rest. After both birds finished, the smaller one made soft
“craw-craw-craw” sounds that prompted the larger to fly to the same
post. They huddled together a moment, and the smaller one put its beak
under the larger one’s and then reached up and touched the top of its
50

t h e r av e n r o o s t

head. Both birds blinked, bluish eye membranes sliding over shiny black
pupils in a way that seemed curiously vulnerable. Then they shied at my
presence and flew away.
Walking on a ridgetop above Tennessee Valley some days later, I saw
a raven pair land on a fence on another ridge. Two more arrived, and
they all flew to the ground and began turning over cow flops, probably
looking for insects. They flew away when I walked toward them but
then reappeared above the knoll I stood on and began an aerial dance,
as though to show off. They circled in the air current that rose above
the knoll, barely flapping their wings, just adjusting their tails, rudderfashion, as they swept silently back and forth, up and down, twenty
feet above my head. They would rise, side slip, cross each other’s wakes,
then swoop and rise again. They let their claws hang loose, like human
acrobats resting hands on hips while doing handsprings on a high wire.
The performance clearly excited them, and it sped up. One bird
croaked several times, as if exhilarated, and they paired off. Each pair
flew close, one above the other, and they made little swoops, emitting
high-pitched liquid sounds, like rain in a gutter. That ended the performance, and they all soared away on the updraft, still barely moving their
wings. A moment later, they returned to the knoll, and one dropped to
the ground and grabbed something. The other three landed with it as it
went through the butchering and eating process I’d watched before, although they were impatient and finally left, hastily followed by the other.
I wanted to see more raven behavior, so I thought I should start at the
beginning and watch them at a nest. When I asked at the Point Reyes
Bird Observatory, however, they told me that they didn’t know where
ravens nested and that there were no recent records of ravens nesting at
Point Reyes or even in Marin County. This seemed incredible for such
a common bird. The ornithologists thought perhaps they nested in sea
cliffs or big trees but had no recent evidence of it. They did tell me how
to find the roost in the pine plantation, known since at least 1941: that’s
how I arrived there on the windy March afternoon.

the flying circus
After my attempted nap, I spent the rest of the afternoon wandering the
hills, vainly seeking windless spots, mentally shivering as emerald green
51

mountains and marshes

chorus frogs hopped into cow-trampled mires. The sun got lower and
weaker. I was surprised when I came to a ridgetop in sight of the roost
and saw a dense cloud of ravens billowing around an isolated Monterey
cypress near the pines. There may have been a hundred, and I could see
more circling a cliff on the other side of the valley. I had no idea where
they’d all come from (although the ones I’d seen in Tennessee Valley had
disappeared at that time of day).
From my experience at Tennessee Valley, I thought I’d see even more
raven behavior in this huge crowd, but I’d misunderstood their protocols. The birds in the pines at the roost kept their distance, although
perhaps more from lack of interest than fear of an intruder. I was glad
they didn’t seem to mind me, given the dozens of hooked, hatchet-sized
beaks circling around me or perched in the pines. But they were involved
in their own interactions, isolating me deftly if I approached them, like
people excluding a bore at a party. If I trained my binoculars on one, it
would move, apparently sensing it was in the frame somehow.
It was too cold to stand watching, so I crossed the dam to the cliff,
where many ravens still circled. Colors intensified as the sun neared the
horizon—red cliff, blue water, black birds. Even the mudflats glowed a
bright chocolate purple. The ravens circled so high that they appeared
no larger than swallows, but their swarming was more deliberate and
complex than swallows’. A pair flew in tandem; then one bird suddenly
flipped on its back, so the two flew breast to breast. They did a roll, a
dive, and a swoop too fast for my eye to follow, then flew into another
group and changed partners. Nearby, two birds tried flying with the
same partner. One of the apparent rivals dived at the other, which did an
aerial somersault and flew off in the opposite direction. One bird carried
a stone in one claw, dropped it, swooped and caught it in its beak, then
dropped and caught it again. The wealth of virtuoso performances was
bewildering.
Ravens seem the most consciously aerobatic of birds, unsurpassed
for general aerial dexterity. I’ve seen them flying circles around hawks
and eagles. While the raptors soared in their effortless arcs, the ravens
effortlessly flew arcs within arcs, occasionally rising above the hawks to
swoop at them. The hawks kept circling higher, trying to escape, but the
ravens followed until they disappeared. (Blackbirds and kingbirds mob
ravens, however: the big birds flinch and squawk ignobly as the small
ones torment them.)
52

t h e r av e n r o o s t

We don’t know how ravens arrived at this command of the sky.
Humans may know less about them now than we did ten thousand
years ago. They loomed large in the folklore of the prehistoric people
who inhabited their circumpolar range. One Native American tribe professed to understand many of their varied, polysyllabic cries. Although
science has produced raven statistics, I doubt if our systematic knowledge goes much deeper than our ancestors’ experiential lore. We know
how many eggs ravens are likely to lay (four or seven) but less about
where and how they lay them. According to one ornithological faction,
ravens are among the most highly evolved birds because they have the
largest cerebral hemispheres in relation to size of all birds. According to
another, they are among the most primitive birds because of their relatively unspecialized plumage.
The ravens were still at it when I left at dusk. The wind was even
colder in the dark, and getting into the car was like climbing into a
boat after swimming too long in cold water. I think the ravens enjoy the
wind though. Few creatures are better adapted to that anarchic element,
which gives the big black birds an alien quality that is surprising when
many live so close to millions of humans.
—Berkeley Monthly, July 1981

53

the mount vision fire

before
The Phillip Burton Wilderness in Point Reyes National Seashore is one
of the most heavily visited areas in the U.S. wilderness system, for good
reasons. It’s the only unit that is an hour’s drive from the Bay Area and
one of very few that border the ocean. Its mosaic of habitats—from
beaches, to coastal scrub and prairie, to riparian thickets, to old-growth
Douglas fir and hardwood forest, to ridgetop grasslands—provides a
diversity of wildlife and scenery that would be extraordinary anywhere.
So close to a megalopolis, it’s miraculous.
In the three decades I’ve been visiting the Burton, I’ve seen it change
considerably. Many changes have been positive. Native shrubs and
grasses have reclaimed weedy pastures. Riparian vegetation has covered
eroded streambeds. Wildlife populations have grown. The bobcat population in the wilderness is phenomenal. I see one or more bobcats about
every other visit. Other changes in recent years have made me wonder
about the future. Trails are deteriorating under heavy use. Mountain
bike tracks are everywhere, despite NO BIKE signs on foot and horse
trailheads. Horseback use—particularly around the Five Brooks area—
is such that stretches of trail are deep in dust in the summer and fall
and in mud in the winter and spring. I sympathize with the Park Service in dealing with these impacts. Horseback riding is a legitimate use,
and mountain bikers are hard to control. Anyway, they probably don’t
threaten the wilderness area’s overall ecological quality.

55

mountains and marshes

Ironically, a natural process now under way in the Burton could affect
some aspects of ecological quality significantly. Douglas fir is invading
forest glades, coastal prairies, and other habitats, including bishop pine
groves in the area’s north end. This invasion is fascinating to watch, as
thousands of little firs suddenly cover the bare slopes of Mount Wittenberg, the glades along the Woodward Valley Trail, and the grassy slopes
at the ocean end of the Bear Valley Trail. The implication for someone
who likes the present mosaic of forest and open habitat can be unsettling though. In another decade or two, much of the present grassland
and scrub in the Burton may look like a tree farm.
To be sure, much of the Burton is former tree farm. A lot of Douglas
fir was planted during various commercial reforestation projects or grew
naturally after logging in the 1950s. And the Burton’s scrub and grasslands also reflect past human activity— the decades of ranching before the
seashore’s establishment in 1962 and the many centuries during which the
native Miwoks managed the land to foster game and food plants.
There’s not too much protected Douglas fir forest in the world today,
so there would be positive aspects to letting reversion go on at Point
Reyes. Yet I think some things might be lost in the process, and not only
from the human viewpoint. I don’t think bobcats would benefit particularly from a tree farm state of forest reversion. Most bobcats I’ve seen
in the Burton have been in grass or scrub, where the gophers, rabbits,
quail, and voles are. There would be bobcats in a tree farm Burton, but
perhaps not as many. There might be fewer badgers, burrowing owls,
and other interesting creatures. There would be fewer poppies, lupines,
tidy tips, brodiaeas, goldenrods, asters, and other grassland wildflowers.
Of course, reversing Douglas fir invasion of open habitats would require either human intervention or wildfire, neither of which seems altogether desirable in a wilderness area so near a megalopolis. At present,
the Park Service is letting reversion proceed more or less freely. In the
past few years, they’ve done small controlled burns at Divide Meadow
on Bear Valley Trail, mainly to eradicate a patch of Scotch broom (an
exotic weed that Douglas fir reversion would eradicate anyway). They
put out a wild brush fire south of Coast Camp with fire lines and chemical retardant.
Worrying about Douglas fir reversion may seem trivial when human
activities threaten wilderness everywhere. Yet California’s high biodiversity is a result of the kind of habitat mosaics that are starting to dwindle
56

the mount vision fire

in the Burton. The situation there isn’t unique to California, where suburban growth around wilderness areas makes fire unpopular both in
its wild state and as a management tool. Still, I bet most hikers would
prefer a mixture of forest, glades, meadows, and brushy slopes to one
of Douglas fir forest and saplings. Since the Burton is one of very few
ocean-bordering wilderness areas, people like to see the water.

after
Little did I know—when I wrote a piece last year about encroachment
of Douglas fir forest on other habitats at the Phil Burton Wilderness on
Point Reyes—how soon nature and some high school campers would
address the matter—or how near apocalyptically. An early October
wildfire that started at an abandoned campfire on Mount Vision west
of Inverness burned most of the wilderness area’s north half, consuming
eleven thousand acres and destroying forty-eight homes at a cost of well
over $20 million in damage alone.
I walked around the southern part of the burned area after the Park
Service reopened it in mid-November. As I stood on the Coast Trail
midway between Arch Rock and Coast Camp, all the land in sight was
burned. It was a magnificent spectacle—in an austere way even a lively
one. A lot of raptors and songbirds were flying about, and insects, particularly butterflies, were even more abundant. The only living nonavian
vertebrate, however, was a young alligator lizard on the trunk of a huge
old eucalyptus (unharmed by the fire except for dead lower limbs and
charred bark) at a homestead site above Kelham Beach. Many bones lay
around, exposed when the grass burned off. Most looked old, although
I saw one fresh deer skeleton, either a fire casualty or a lion kill.
The contrast between the fire’s behavior in coastal scrub-grassland
and fir forest was striking. It had burned grass and scrub so uniformly
that the effect was rather tidy; fir forest so nonuniformly that the effect
was chaotic—almost whimsical.
At first, the grass, scrub, and riparian woods of the headlands and
coastal slopes resembled the pre-fire scattering of light and dark vegetation—until I saw that the light patches were bare soil instead of grass,
while the dark ones were charred sticks instead of brush. Along creeks,
the fire had baked the leaves of bay, buckthorn, and wax myrtle to a
57

mountains and marshes

light orange color. The landscape was like a photo negative of its pre-fire
self. Having burned uniformly, the scrub and grassland were starting to
regenerate that way. All the coyote bushes had an inch of new growth
at the base, and bracken ferns a foot tall grew from the blackened soil.
Perennial native grasses like purple needlegrass and California fescue
were sprouting from their root bases.
The only scrub-grassland that hadn’t burned was the headland south
of Coast Camp that had burned the year before. Although the coyote
bush there had regrown to a couple of feet high and timothy and other
grasses grew densely, the Mount Vision Fire merely scorched the ground
and a scattering of bushes. It left the dry grass unburned. Evidently there
wasn’t enough fuel for it.
The fire’s effect on the Douglas fir forest of Inverness Ridge was obvious from the reddish brown of dead treetops all along the ridge and in
the ravines below. But the dead foliage mixed with living green foliage in
a disorderly way, quite unlike the tidy scrub-grassland. When I climbed
Inverness Ridge and walked through the forest on the Woodward Valley
Trail, it confirmed the impression. Sometimes the fire had burned only
the ground, sometimes only the tree trunks, sometimes only the foliage.
I passed one place where it had charred an open grove of good-sized firs
but had left untouched an adjacent thicket of saplings that seemed much
more vulnerable.
The fire did have the predictable effect of erasing most of the young firs
that had become established on the upper slopes of the scrub-grassland
and of opening up the largely even-aged forest on the ridgetop, much
of which was planted during reforestation projects in the 1930s. It
didn’t reach the grasslands around Mount Wittenberg or the meadows
on the landward side of Inverness Ridge, so they continue to revert to
Douglas fir.
The fire affected the wilderness area with more than its flames. The
top of Inverness Ridge now looks like a post-logging tree farm instead
of a pre-logging one because firefighters brought in heavy equipment to
cut a break south to near Coast Camp. This was a violation of the spirit
if not the letter of the Wilderness Act, but I doubt anybody thought of
that in the panicky atmosphere. They were afraid the fire would crown
in the old growth above Bear Valley and keep going toward Bolinas and
points south. As though in mitigation of this, the Park Service has done
some rehabilitation of eroded trails.
58

the mount vision fire

Along with hand-wringing about property damage, the media carried
feel-good rhetoric about how nature is adapted to fire and will regenerate. I wonder, though, about some of the effects of such a big, rare fire
on a natural area surrounded by farms and suburbs that is still recovering from two centuries of heavy livestock grazing. Exotic weeds like
pampas grass and broom, and introduced forage grasses like timothy
and wild oats, have regenerated as quickly as the native vegetation. They
are as fire-adapted as the natives, since most come from similar Mediterranean climates.
The fire might have been less costly and destructive if the Park Service had the funds to manage vegetation more with controlled burns.
At least, it might have managed the area along the Inverness residential
zone, since the bishop pine habitat is fire-dependent. If it had, the fire
might have stopped at the houses, which could have been worth the
money, not only in short-run terms of property and public money saved
but in long-run ones of learning to live with fire. Civilization will have
the luxury of fighting fires with aircraft, bulldozers, and chainsaws only
as long as fossil fuel is cheap and abundant enough, which, incredible as
it seems, won’t be forever.
—Wilderness Record, January 1995, December 1995

59

the ghost of crystal lakes

In the 1970s, it was a treat to see the fallow deer that Point Reyes National Seashore had inherited from its ranching past. The Eurasian species, introduced for hunting half a century ago, has several color phases,
from white to blackish brown, and the stags have impressive antlers. A
few dozen of the deer lived in the park then. Today, it’s less of a treat because they’re hard not to see. Their population has exploded to almost
nine hundred: some meadows look like fallow deer feedlots.
Earlier this year, the Park Service announced a plan to remove fallow
deer from the seashore, along with another exotic species, Asian axis
deer, which number almost three hundred. They say the axis deer population could double within six years and that both species are competing
with black-tailed deer and other native species, impacting adjacent
ranches and threatening to spread elsewhere. I believe them.
In recent decades, I’ve perceived a decline in the black-tail population
and even in the numbers of smaller herbivores like rabbits and jackrabbits, which also compete for browse plants with exotic deer. I’ve seen
fewer bobcats, which live mainly on rabbits and jackrabbits. This has
happened surprisingly fast. In the 1970s, large black-tail herds were
common in the seashore’s grasslands. As late as 1987, I recall walking
north toward Bear Valley on the Earthquake Trail one June evening in
what seemed a black-tail paradise, with groups of the deer scattered over
the flats like antelope on African savanna. A bobcat bounded through
them almost playfully. But such scenes faded after the early 1990s as
fallow deer thronged the Olema Valley.

61

mountains and marshes

Given this situation, I think the exotic deer should be removed. But
I’m glad it’s not my job. Some years ago, the Park Service had to stop
a culling program aimed at managing the exotics because of public
displeasure orchestrated by local media. So its removal proposal is
even less popular. Local homes sport big green banners proclaiming:
“Manage, Don’t Exterminate, Fallow Deer.” I understand the sentiment. The fallow and axis deer aren’t at fault, of course, and people
like to have diverse faunas in wild lands. But perhaps there’s a lesson
in this unhappy affair: that we need to think more about biodiversity
in parks.
When Congress established Point Reyes National Seashore in 1962,
biologists could have foreseen that three species of medium-sized deer in
the same habitat would cause problems. They could have removed the
exotic species’ small populations easily then. Unfortunately, we don’t
allow the Park Service to think ahead much because we underfund it
and thus keep it busy dealing with crises that arise from lack of foresight, like the present exotic deer explosion.
When we do let the Park Service think ahead, on the other hand, the
results can be positive, as with California’s other native deer species,
tule elk. Once abundant at Point Reyes, the elk disappeared there in the
1800s, as in most of California. Soon after the seashore’s establishment,
the Park Service established a fenced preserve for the species on Tomales
Point. Since the elk thrived there, they were able to release a few in the
seashore’s Phillip Burton Wilderness Area in 1998, restoring some lost
native biodiversity. The elk are a good replacement for the exotic deer.
Still, the removal of two thriving and attractive, albeit nonnative,
species from the seashore raises a knotty planning question. Are blacktailed deer and tule elk really the only native wild ungulates we can have
at Point Reyes and, by extension, in much of California? This question
relates to a debate about the definition of “native” that has gone on for
decades.
In the 1960s a national panel of scientists, the Leopold Committee,
advised the Park Service to set a goal of maintaining or restoring the
species that had lived in parks at the time Europeans reached the Americas. But other scientists, such as Paul S. Martin, a paleontologist at the
University of Arizona, think this goal is too limited. They argue that if
we are really interested in restoring natural biodiversity we should go
further back in time, since the fossil record shows that North America
62

t h e g h o s t o f c ry s t a l l a k e s

had many more large wildlife species during the past 65 million years,
the “Age of Mammals.” Only in the past fifteen thousand years or so has
species diversity dropped to present low levels.
The debate involving another native ungulate is already on the
ground at Point Reyes. Records show that pronghorn “antelope” inhabited the Bay Area in historical times, although it is unclear if they
inhabited Point Reyes then. Still, pronghorns almost certainly lived at
Point Reyes sometime in the past, since they’ve inhabited western North
America for millions of years. Should they be restored? I don’t know
if pronghorns could thrive at Point Reyes today. I do think Martin has
a point when he says that confining park biodiversity to historic levels
may be unnecessarily austere. Judging from prehistory, Point Reyes
might even accommodate yet another large native ungulate besides elk
and pronghorns.
There are areas of the seashore where elk don’t venture and even
black-tails are scarce—the old-growth Douglas fir forest in the southern
half of the seashore’s Phil Burton Wilderness Area. Indeed, large herbivores are scarce in most West Coast ancient forest now. Has this always
been so? Not according to the fossil record, which shows that California
forests contained not only extinct giants like mastodons and ground
sloths but surviving species like tapirs, relatives of horses and rhinos
that can weigh over five hundred pounds.
Tapirs live in South and Central American forests today, but fossils
show they inhabited North American ones from 50 million years ago
until the great die-off of the past fifteen thousand years. They are about
as native to North America as an extirpated species can be. And, according to Martin, they disappeared not because of an environmental
cause like climate change but because humans extirpated them. In that
case, tapirs could live here again. The local Sierra Club chairman told
the San Francisco Chronicle that we should remove exotic deer from
Point Reyes because we imported them. Maybe we should return tapirs
there because, albeit long ago, we extirpated them.
I don’t know if tapirs could thrive at Point Reyes now, but there are
parts of the Phil Burton Wilderness that seem to me like tapir heaven,
particularly Crystal Lakes, a primeval-looking complex of marsh, ponds,
and conifers in the south part of the wilderness. If there’s a “place that
time forgot” in the Bay Area, it is Crystal Lakes. It’s a half day’s hike
from the Bear Valley Trailhead, and since the Park Service budget for trail
63

mountains and marshes

maintenance is spotty, the hike can be adventurous, with some crawling
through brush and climbing around fallen trees. Eventually, the trail drops
into a basin that has a unique sense of secrecy and self-containment. I’ve
been visiting it almost every year for more than a decade, but I’ve seldom
seen anyone else there. The basin has no surface outlet, so the landscape
changes continually according to the weather, which enhances the impression of discovery.
In wet periods, the spring-fed lakes grow to cover the trail, and hiking
becomes wading. Then their clear depths reveal large fish that I haven’t
seen elsewhere—perhaps one of several primitive giant minnow species
native to the Bay Area, like hitch, California roach, or thicktail chub
(although the latter is considered extinct). Since the lakes are so isolated,
the fish may have been there for a long time.
In dry periods, the lakes shrink to algae-dotted ponds, and Douglas
firs start to grow on former lake bottom among the skeletons of the
firs that grew there in previous dry periods. The fish disappear from
the smaller ponds: I suppose they shelter in the deepest parts of the remaining ones. It is strange to see a landscape change so much within a
few years, like a time-lapse film.
The place is a kind of diorama of forest evolution, a living version
of 40-million-year-old fossil lake beds found in Wyoming, which then
had a warm temperate climate and vegetation like California’s now. The
diorama could use some animal life besides fish, however, and although
I’ve seen herons, ducks, coots, and other waterbirds there, I’ve never
seen a mammal larger than a squirrel. Tapir fossils are common around
those prehistoric lake deposits. Living ones certainly would be an interesting addition at Crystal Lakes.
I don’t think tapirs would conflict with other park ungulates or adjacent ranches. They are shy, solitary, and slow breeding. Even where protected, they seem ghostly for such large animals, although their horselike
smell can betray their presence. Most surviving tapirs inhabit tropical
forest, but they also live in much cooler mountain cloud forest, so climate would not necessarily be a barrier to their living here.
Hunting and deforestation are threatening tapirs all over Latin
America. The mountain tapir, a cool-weather species of the Andes, is
endangered. So restoring tapirs to North America would be good longrange planning if we really do want to save large mammal biodiversity.

64

t h e g h o s t o f c ry s t a l l a k e s

There could be other benefits. Having more large ungulates in the
forest could enhance plant diversity and reduce potential wildfire intensity. And, along with elk and black-tailed deer in Point Reyes’s more
open areas, visitors might get a rare chance to glimpse an evolutionary
“ghost” among its Douglas firs, maples, and oaks.
—Los Angeles Times, July 7, 2005

65

yellowstone west
bishop pine and the mount vision fire
I spent part of my childhood in farm countryside, and when I started
visiting Point Reyes National Seashore in the early 1970s, the landscape
from Limantour Beach up to the crest of Inverness Ridge made me nostalgic for that time, the late 1940s. The homestead sites, dammed lakes,
fence lines, and old pastures of the pre-seashore days had a long-ago,
storybook feeling—spider silk and thistledown drifting under banks of
cumulus clouds; alder leaves shaking over creeks; flowering sweet pea
vines; old man’s beard lichens waving in the wind. The feeling combined
with the wild ecosystem’s return—deer, bobcats, hawks, quail—to make
it a special place.
Yet I wasn’t too clear about just what that wild ecosystem was. I knew
that north-central Point Reyes supports a forest of bishop pine, Pinus
muricata, a species confined to areas of dry, nutrient-poor soils along the
Pacific Coast. Bishop pine resembles its widely planted relative, Monterey pine, but differs in bearing two needles to a fascicle instead of
three and in having a much larger natural distribution. Named for San
Luis Obispo (obispo is Spanish for “bishop”), where botanists first identified the species, it now occurs in scattered stands from Santa Barbara
to Humboldt County, with an isolated population in Baja California.
Fossils show that its ancestors were even more widespread during drier
times over the past two to five million years.
Like Monterey pine, bishop pine is a termed a closed-cone species because its cones remain on the branches instead of opening every year to
release their seeds and then falling off, as with most pine species. Closedcone species are fire-adapted: the cones finally open when heat melts the
67

mountains and marshes

resin that keeps them closed. Then they release their seeds. They thus
depend on periodic fires for reproduction.
Granitic bedrock and proximity to the ocean (where the trees benefit
from fog drip) make the Limantour area a good place for bishop pine.
Hiking there in the 1970s and ’80s, I saw plenty of them. Yet the stands
on the crest and west slopes of Inverness Ridge seemed a little peripheral
and vestigial to be considered a “bishop pine ecosystem.” Point Reyes’s
main bishop pine forest grew on the ridge’s east slopes down to Tomales
Bay. I knew places along the Inverness Ridge Trail where bishop pines
were large for a species that seldom grows over fifty feet tall or lives
more than a century. But few young pines occurred in the underbrush
of huckleberry and other shrubs, and the largest pines seemed senescent. Although hot weather or gray squirrels can open some cones, that
doesn’t release enough seeds to regenerate a bishop pine forest, and the
pine seedlings compete poorly with other trees in their parents’ shade.
Saplings of hardwoods like bay laurel, wax myrtle, madrone, and live
oak mainly grew under the big pines.
There were places on the ridge’s west slopes where small pines predominated, but those were shallow-soiled granitic outcrops and the
little pines were dwarfs, older than they looked, growing where few
other woody plants could thrive. On deeper-soiled sites, Douglas fir saplings poked up everywhere among the grass and brush. Although the
landscape changed little from year to year, the overall plant succession
seemed to be headed toward the mixed hardwood and Douglas fir forest
that grows on the sandstone and shale bedrock in the seashore south of
Limantour.
Then came the wildfire of October 1995, which consumed the vegetation from Mount Vision west to Limantour Beach with astounding
thoroughness. Standing on Inverness Ridge a few weeks after the fire
and seeing almost nothing but blackened earth in every direction, I
felt less inclined than before to take plants for granted. And the speed
with which they reclaimed the area over the next few years made me
take them even less for granted. They began to seem less vegetative and
more animated—almost animal. Bracken fern and coyote bush sprouted
from charred bases days after the fire. Grasses and forbs like trefoil,
lupine, clover, and rush-rose covered the soil by the summer. Shrubs
and vines—blue blossom ceanothus, huckleberry, salal, manroot, blackberry—shaded out many of the herbs by the summer after that. Patches
68

y e l l ow s to n e w e s t

of blue blossom grew six feet tall in that time. Two rare endemic shrubs,
Mount Vision ceanothus and Marin manzanita, produced many seedlings for the first time in years.
No plant species in the post-fire Limantour area proved more dynamic, however, than Pinus muricata. The fire killed almost all the existing pines in the burn area; indeed, the pines contributed greatly to the
fire’s speed and intensity. A firefighter told the San Francisco Chronicle
that they burned “like Roman candles.” Yet the heat freed countless pine
seeds, which can stay viable for decades within their sealed cones. Fiery
updrafts sent the winged seeds showering onto the westward slopes and
headlands, including many places where pines had not grown. Bishop
pine seedlings started appearing a few months after the fire and a year
later formed large, irregular patches in sites where grass, brush, or
Douglas fir had seemed the permanent vegetation.
Those seedlings looked different from the bishop pines I’d known
before. The pre-fire trees had a lot of character, both the picturesque,
umbrella-shaped large specimens and the gnarled, persistent little
ones. But they were a bit drab—their needles plain green; their trunks,
branches, and cones grayish. The post-fire bishop pines had an electric
quality, as though some plugged-in current was emanating from them,
making bark and needles glow. After three years, their silvery terminal
shoots, many six feet tall, began producing blue-and-purple male cones,
gaudy enough for a Christmas tree.
A phenomenon in the soil may have contributed to this impression of enhanced vitality. Mycologists found that the fire stimulated
a population explosion of fungi that live symbiotically on the roots of
young bishop pines, helping them absorb mineral nutrients in return
for photosynthesis-produced food. Uncommon before the fire (when
other fungal species performed the symbiotic function for the mature
trees), the young fungi—Rhizopogon and Tuber—grew abundantly
from spores that had been resting in the soil for decades.
Looking east from Limantour Beach toward Inverness Ridge in 1997,
I saw few of the farmland vestiges that had made me nostalgic before the
fire. The burned landscape reminded me more of Yellowstone National
Park after the 1987 fires there. The headlands and slopes now had a
similar shaggy look, like a landscape for elk rather than cattle, and in
1998 the Park Service introduced some tule elk from the Tomales Point
Preserve.
69

mountains and marshes

Although the flames temporarily impacted sensitive species like the
aplodontia, or “mountain beaver” (not a beaver but a uniquely primitive rodent species with an isolated race endemic to Point Reyes), the
post-fire landscape seemed to attract and stimulate wildlife. Butterflies
and other insects thronged the burned area even before the wildflowers
bloomed, as though anticipating the feast to come. One insect species, a
small black moth, proved new to science.
Meadow voles underwent one of their periodic population explosions, probably encouraged by the wealth of leguminous forbs. The conical stick dens of dusky-footed wood rats appeared in the new thickets
of pine and blue blossom with surprising speed, considering how vulnerable that species is to fire. Dens become virtual funeral pyres for
their sedentary occupants during wildfires, but the species recolonized
the area abundantly, taking advantage of new shrub growth. Predators
in turn took advantage of open ground and rodent abundance. Coyotes became more common. Soon after the fire, I had my first and only
sighting of a golden eagle—rare at Point Reyes—in the seashore. I also
saw a long-tailed weasel near Limantour, the only one I’ve seen in that
part of the park.
There was no doubt after the Vision Fire that the Limantour area
is a bishop pine ecosystem, just as there was no doubt after its 1987
fires that most of Yellowstone is a lodgepole pine ecosystem, also dependent on fire for renewal. Visiting Yellowstone after that fire, I saw aspen
sprouting everywhere, as I saw blue blossom ceanothus sprouting everywhere at post-fire Point Reyes. Both species had dwindled to senescent
remnants before the fire, and the renewal of both benefited important
rodents—beavers at Yellowstone, wood rats at Point Reyes. They in turn
benefited wildlife generally. Beaver ponds provide habitat for otters,
muskrats, herons, ducks, turtles, and many other creatures. Wood rat
dens shelter mice, lizards, and salamanders.
I understand better how Pinus muricata’s ancestor thrived in a prehistoric landscape that included mammoths, saber-toothed cats, and
ground sloths, as well as the surviving elk, deer, and mountain lions.
Such giants wouldn’t look out of place there now. As the last ranching-era
vestiges have vanished, roads revegetated, dammed lakes and hay fields
reverted to marshes and riparian woodland, I’ve sometimes missed my
pre-fire nostalgia, but not that much. Bishop pine forest seems right
for the place, although the wildfire on which it depends for renewal
70

y e l l ow s to n e w e s t

can be catastrophic. Still, whether started by an illegal campfire like
the Vision Fire or by more natural factors, wildfires are inevitable, like
earthquakes. We just have to adapt to life’s dangers in the end, like all
the other organisms.
The thousands of teenaged bishop pines now growing from Limantour Beach to the Inverness Ridge Trail are vivid reminders of that fact,
although the landscape doesn’t look quite as shaggy now as it did in
1997. In fact, some of it resembles a 1950s Weyerhaeuser tree farm ad,
as the even-aged pines give the slopes an almost industrially regular
look. Some hikers find the close-growing young forest claustrophobic
and monotonous compared to the panoramas that the Bucklin and
Drakes View Trails offered before the fire. But time is opening the forest
as weaker trees die, and diversity is increasing as ferns, vines, shrubs,
and hardwoods invade the understory, exploiting coppery patches of
sunlight that penetrate the canopy. Native bunchgrasses and wildflowers
thrive in glades and open headlands: even in midsummer—when most
of the Bay Area is baked brown—deep blue gentians, “Martian eyeball”
heleniums, and ladies’ tresses orchids bloom among the more common
scarlet paintbrushes and yellow hawksweeds.
Above, where their needles endlessly sing in the wind, the little pines’
two-foot-long, silver-and-amber terminal shoots still seem to glow from
within. Female cones in various stages of development—bright green
new ones, year-old orange ones, weathered gray ones—ring the trunks
and branches, patiently awaiting the next wildfire.
—Bay Nature, July–September 2012

71

the east bay

grasslands

One of the few places I know in the Bay Area that resembles California’s original native grasslands is a hillside behind the East Bay
Regional Park office on Skyline Boulevard in Oakland. From a distance, the east-facing hill looks like any other grassy slope around
here—green in winter, brown in summer—but a closer look reveals
something different from the wild oats, foxtail, mustard, and thistles
that cover most California hillsides now. Native bunchgrasses and wildflowers cover this slope, and every time I go there, it seems, I find new
species of them.
Last June, the slope was studded with yellow mariposa tulips, lilyfamily flowers aptly described by their name’s double reference to tulips
and butterflies. Usually found in relatively undisturbed grasslands,
they are an uncommon sight in the Bay Area today. Even thicker on
the hillside were lacy, white-flowered tarweeds, sunflower-family plants
named for sticky secretions that protect their leaves and stems from hot
season desiccation, allowing them to flower throughout it. And almost
as abundant as these flowers were chalcedony checkerspots, red, black,
and white butterflies clustering so thickly on some plants that I at first
thought they were big showy blossoms themselves.
Many wildflower species that had peaked earlier in the spring
were still in bloom: fiery California poppy, blue lupine and Ithuriel’s
spear, bright pink farewell-to-spring. I found many seedpods of blueeyed grass, a small iris relative that had covered the hillside in April
and May, when low-growing patches of goldfields, another sunflower

75

mountains and marshes

relative, had bloomed even more thickly. “Goldfields” is an apt name:
the little bright yellow flowers literally form fields of gold if conditions
are right.
Native grass species covered the hillside even more thickly than wildflowers, from big, droopy California fescue with flowering stems up to
my chest, to medium-sized wild rye, to smaller purple needlegrass. I could
name only these most common ones. Most had already passed the flowering stage, and the only way to definitely identify many grass species is
to dissect the florets and key them out according to details in structure.
Regional park botanists have identified some fifteen native grass species
on the few acres of hillside, including pine bluegrass, brome, melic, and
bentgrass, as well as the ones I recognized.
Botanists think native plants survive there for a paradoxical reason—
because the soil is bad. The bedrock is serpentine, a rock with a chemical
composition that makes it not only infertile but even toxic to the aggressive Old World weeds that have taken over better soils in most of California. Many natives are adapted to serpentine, however, so the exotics
are unable to move in and crowd them out. The apparently tranquil
hillside is a kind of botanical Indian reservation, natives holding onto a
piece of ground that invaders aren’t able to exploit.
California’s Native Americans and the grasslands from which they
drew much of their food and fiber were thriving when European colonists
arrived. Colonization reduced both to scattered survivors within little
more than a century, one of history’s human and botanical tragedies and
one that raises a troubling ecological and evolutionary question. If the
natives were well adapted to their environment, how could invaders replace them so quickly? How could organisms that had evolved halfway
across the planet overcome organisms evolved here during thousands
of years? This situation seems to transgress the idea—important to the
conservation movement—that survival depends on adaptation to the
environment.
History shows how Native Americans succumbed to invasion. First,
Old World diseases to which they had no resistance decimated them,
and then colonists destroyed their culture and environment. Wheat fields
and livestock replaced their native grasslands and game, and when they
tried to defend their livelihood, colonists murdered many and drove survivors onto missions and reservations.

76

grasslands

History is less clear about the causes of native grasslands’ destruction. Old World plant diseases and pests may have affected them, but I
haven’t seen documentation of this, although alien diseases are known
to threaten many native tree and shrub species. Colonists certainly decimated native grasses and wildflowers by turning most of California into
farms and towns. Yet wild oats, foxtail fescue, mustard, and thistles also
invaded parts of the state where native grasslands were never plowed or
paved. And although livestock overgrazing and drought certainly contributed to the destruction, botanists don’t think they were completely
responsible for it. They think the exotic annuals were more efficient at
growing and reproducing here than the native perennials.
In fact, weed-grown land that is withdrawn from grazing often just
keeps producing exotic annuals for the most part. In some once-grazed
natural areas like Mount Diablo State Park, many natives still bloom
abundantly among the wild oats, foxtail, and filaree. In others, like Briones Regional Park, native grasses and wildflowers have virtually disappeared, although native trees and shrubs still thrive. Botanists have
failed to find more than a few acres that might be called “virgin” California grassland. Jepson Prairie in Solano County is one of these rare
sites, but when I visited it one spring day, it was hard to distinguish from
surrounding pastures. Except for some goldfields and blue Downingia
around vernal pools, I saw few flowers among the grasses. It was less
showy than the little hillside behind the Regional Parks office.
The situation is puzzling. Gardeners who plant native “wildflower
mix” in the hope of restoring local plants to their property may get colorful masses of poppies, lupines, baby blue eyes, and other species the
first year but find that weeds have reclaimed the plot the next. Perhaps
such soils have lost the symbiotic fungi that would allow the natives to
reclaim them. But that’s not clear.
It’s hard to say what might happen if weedy land were left undisturbed for centuries. Native perennials might eventually outlast exotic
annuals. For the present, it seems to be a matter of “survival of the
fittest,” with more annual weeds surviving than native perennials. Yet
evolutionary thinking has gone beyond equating “fitter” with “better,”
and it would be wrong to dismiss California native grasslands. For one
thing, we don’t know what values they may have. Civilization has swept
them aside so abruptly that they’ve hardly had a chance to show their

77

mountains and marshes

potential. A native grass recently discovered in the Mexican mountains
is a perennial relative of annual maize, offering the possibility of cornfields that wouldn’t have to be plowed up every year. Even without such
sensational attributes, beauty and ecological significance are worth perpetuating. Once I learned how interesting and diverse the natives are, the
sight of hillside after hillside covered with wild oats, foxtail, and filaree
got very depressing.
Native grasslands can be restored. Midwesterners have restored
much tallgrass prairie, an ecosystem as decimated by farming and alien
weeds as California bunchgrass lands. Today, midwestern park agencies
generally have prairie restoration programs. One that I worked for in
Ohio—not exactly a “big sky” state—has one. They first plow and burn
the weeds off a likely field, then seed it with native tall grasses like big
bluestem, Indian grass, and switchgrass, and perennial wildflowers like
blazing star, rattlesnake master, royal catchfly, purple coneflower, and
compass plant. These are magnificent plants, some of which grow ten
feet tall. Once a prairie forms, they burn it again every few years to keep
weeds and trees from reinvading, since enough rainfall occurs that forest
would predominate without the fires. They burn in spring, when danger
of fire spreading is lowest. Ohio’s original prairies burned almost every
spring from lightning fires.
Restoring native grassland in semiarid California is more complicated. Native Americans managed grasslands with fire as well as selective gathering of food and fiber plants, and there have been attempts
to use fire management in places where exotics still predominated after
grazing stopped, but results are patchy. A close look at fire-managed
places reveals natives mixed in with the weeds, especially in rocky or
thin-soiled places where there is less competition. The overall impression is still mostly of wild oats, mustards, and thistles, however. In wet
years, the weeds get tall; in dry years, they get small, but any changes
toward native recovery must be proceeding very slowly. And even controlled burns are risky in California with its air pollution and urban
wildfire disasters. So there hasn’t been a consistent effort to use that tool,
in the Bay Area at least.
Carefully controlled livestock grazing can benefit native grassland
by thinning exotic grasses and allowing more space for natives. But
it’s hard to limit economically hard-pressed ranching operations, and

78

grasslands

grazing doesn’t help grasslands where natives are already gone. Maybe
more intensive efforts on a smaller scale might work—perhaps just
having volunteers clear some weedy plots to plant and tend natives. It
would be good if every Bay Area park had some mariposa tulips in June,
when the wild oats are dead and brown.
—Berkeley Monthly, November 1979

79

life in the cemetery

Mountain View Cemetery above Piedmont Avenue in Oakland probably
matches any place in the Bay Area for volume of plant and animal life. It
is tended well enough to keep the ornamental plants healthy but not so
well as to exclude a lot of wild plants, native and feral. Many are good
food sources—the place is a delicatessen of exotic fare for local wildlife.
A hummingbird can choose from Australian eucalyptus, South American fuchsia, Asian pittosporum, and African acacia, as well as California monkey flower. In winter, Anna’s hummingbirds sing squeakily
from the eucalyptus, joined in spring by the migratory Allen’s hummingbirds that take possession of the shrubbery.
Abundance brings competition. Three-inch hummingbirds don’t hesitate to claim hundred-foot trees, and they have a lot of trespassers to
deal with. Flocks of cedar waxwings and robins appear in winter to eat
blackberry, pyracantha, cotoneaster, and ivy berries; chickadees, titmice,
and nuthatches eat insects as well as fruits; goldfinches, mourning doves,
and quail go for seeds. There’s competition for some prize throughout
the year. Doves and quail, proverbially so gentle, are particularly combative. The mammals squabble a lot too. Once a vole tumbled out of a
burrow at my feet, ejected by another mouse, which stuck its head out
and eyed me a moment, as if wanting to see me off too. Another time the
wild oats were alive with shrews (a tiny gray species called the ornate
shrew) that chased each other around like Keystone Kops.
The cemetery’s invertebrates are even more frenetic. I once watched
several male wolf spiders competing for a female on a fallen tombstone. Male spiders are skinny dwarfs compared to females, but they
81

mountains and marshes

compensate for their size with energy. These males ran in circles and
jumped up and down on each other in their excitement. When the stout
female ventured out of her hole under the stone, one of them would
rush down and wave his pedipalps (his copulatory organs) in her face,
thus inhibiting her from eating him. The pair would then zip under the
stone together. A few minutes later the female would emerge to choose
another suitor. I didn’t see any of the chosen suitors again.
Two pairs of raptors preside over all this: one of red-tailed hawks
and one of kestrels, small falcons. They are glad to take advantage of an
unwary vole or songbird in the throes of competition. I’ve seen neatly
removed quail skins beside the cemetery drives and kestrels administering the coup de grâce to victims on tombstones. The kestrels resent
the hawks and spend a lot of time scolding and chasing them during
mating season. Of avian predators, only the scrub and Steller’s jays seem
to waste little time squabbling, instead keeping sharp eyes on the main
chance. I’ve seen a Steller’s jay pluck a chickadee nestling from a tree
hole and swallow it in one gulp.
It is easy to overlook all this and experience the cemetery as a dignified retreat, which it is. Still, the biotic turmoil in a place of eternal
repose can skew the expectations people usually bring to necropolises.
One marble monument proclaims: “Earth itself is not the goal, but stepping stone for Man,” but gophers have undermined the massive stone,
and it has a precarious tilt. Some smaller stones have almost sunk out of
sight. Depending on point of view, the avowedly rising, actually sinking
monuments might symbolize either earthly transience or the difficulty
of disentangling human aspirations from more mundane evolutionary
origins. The quail and mourning doves that hurtle through the stately
avenues of mausoleums might be liberated souls until they land and
start to gobble seeds and defecate on headstones.
The cemetery can embody a kind of earthly eternity as well as a heavenly one. A large marble fountain overlooks it, one of those Victorian
wedding cake affairs with ascending tiers of small basins that drip into
a large basin at ground level. When I first saw it, the small basins were
mini-marshes of cattails and sedges grown from windborne seeds, and
the large basin was full of green algae and tiny killifish, presumably
arrived there as eggs on the feet of birds that came to bathe or drink.
One day I found it drained, and the basins cleaned of mud and plants.
But when I returned again, surprisingly soon afterward, I found that,
82

l i f e i n t h e c e m e t e ry

with the water turned back on, the cattails and sedges had come back.
Killifish remained absent from the large basin, but something equally
interesting had arrived. Aquatic snails with golden spiral shells were
floating upside down at the surface, feeding on algae. They swam by,
undulating the muscular “feet” on which land snails crawl.
The undulating snail feet looked like amorphous wings, and it was
mesmerizing to see creatures usually associated with the most earthbound existence “flying” in a place that had been dry and lifeless shortly
before. The floating, sunlit snails made life’s transience seem not all that
unattractive. Why ask more of the universe than a little while of floating
and feeding between the ground and the sky? We humans worry about
the shortness of their lives, but I think it is the length of them that really
bothers us.
Whatever their viewpoint, I think most people today would agree
that cemeteries, especially beautiful historic ones like Mountain View
(designed in 1863 by Frederick Law Olmsted, who also created Manhattan’s Central Park), are as much for the living as the dead. They are a
measure of earthly wealth for one thing—idling valuable real estate for
sentiment. In India, the authorities clear cemeteries left by the British Raj
for more practical purposes, stacking the ornate headstones in alleys.
That’s too unsentimental for me. When I walk in Mountain View, I like
to regard the dead as my benefactors, generous landlords of the quiet
greenery and its noisy inhabitants.
—Berkeley Monthly, 1980

83

the peak of unexpectedness
mount diablo
I spent a night on Mount Diablo during a hot spell in August 1973.
Utterly still in the afternoon’s 101-degree heat, the campsite erupted at
dusk with a surprisingly deafening cacophony of chirps, trills, crackles,
hoots, whistles, rattles, and howls. A scent of dust and sulfur hung in the
air, which stayed hot into the small hours as bats, apparently the only
quiet night denizens, fluttered overhead. The dusty air obscured the stars
and made the night seem infernally dark. Daylight’s bucolic setting of
picnic tables and barbecue grills had turned into something more like
“Night on Bald Mountain” in Disney’s Fantasia, wherein a nocturnal
peak spews out swarms of demons.
Of course, demons were not making the racket: ground crickets, tree
crickets, and shield-backed grasshoppers were—accompanied in the distance by owls, poorwills, and coyotes. But the inoffensive insects still
seemed a bit demonic when I tracked them down in the dark. Waving
their improbably long antennae, unperturbed by my flashlight, they just
kept on making incredible noise, trying to attract females.
I thought of something Thoreau wrote: “Is not the midnight like Central Africa to most?” A half hour’s drive from the San Ramon Valley’s
bustling suburbs, I was surrounded by an array of organisms as untamed and diverse as those in many more remote places.
The mountain isn’t always as boisterous as it was that night, but there’s
usually something happening, and it’s often surprising. Fence lizards are
a common sight on rocks along the trails, but I didn’t expect to see one
dive into Pine Creek and swim off downstream like a small alligator, as
I did during one wet spring. In another wet year, as I waded a pool that
85

mountains and marshes

had flooded part of North Peak Trail, I saw what appeared to be dozens
of tiny squid suspended in the water. A closer look revealed that they
weren’t squid but something almost as unexpected—shrimp. Although
not closely related to their edible marine cousins, these little creatures are
also crustaceans, called fairy shrimp because of their delicate, colorful
bodies. They live in temporary spring pools only long enough to breed.
Then their eggs survive in the soil, sometimes for years, until heavy rains
re-create the vernal pools wherein their short life cycle unfolds.
Plants can be surprising too. Seeing a particularly gorgeous patch of
red and blue wildflowers on a sunny ridge, I assumed they were California
poppies and lupines, the more common spring blossoms. A closer look
revealed that two much less common plants—wind poppies and Chinese
houses—had made the mass of color visible from hundreds of feet away.
Wind poppies may appear in abundance after fires, but that didn’t explain
the purplish-blue masses of Chinese houses, which usually grow scattered
in shady places. Fires are generally a good source of plant surprises on the
mountain, as when a wildflower called whispering bells covers blackened
chaparral with masses of greenish gold in spring following a blaze.
The surprises aren’t always so welcome. Walking beside the Pine
Canyon cattail marsh one spring day, I realized I was passing a rattlesnake at the marsh’s edge. My wife was coming a few paces behind me,
so I called softly to warn her, not wanting to alarm the snake. She didn’t
hear me and kept coming, but we apparently hadn’t surprised the rattler.
It was calmly crawling back into the cattails.
There are mutual surprises with jumpier denizens. Walking the trail
from Curry Point to Frog Pond one May morning, I was startled to see
six half-grown coyote pups trot out of an arroyo that evidently contained a den. They were startled too—at least five of them were. They
hightailed it back into the arroyo. The sixth didn’t notice me and blithely
trotted away along the trail. Another time, a bobcat that suddenly appeared around a bend in the Pine Canyon trail started when it saw me,
but then it decided that business somehow outweighed caution in this
case and kept forward on the trail. Its only concession to prudence was
a short detour into the trees as it passed me. I wondered what was so
important about the business. I had encountered a confused-looking,
half-grown bob kitten earlier, so the business might have involved that,
but it was hard to see exactly how.

86

the peak of unexpectedness

Sometimes reasons for unexpected behavior are more apparent, as
when I surprised a coyote pair in a chaparral gulch near the temporarily
snow-covered summit one winter. They sat tight and barked at me like
watchdogs instead of running away. I surmised they had a den of newborn pups there.
Even Mount Diablo’s name came as a surprise. “Devil Mountain”
sounds just like what Spanish missionaries might have called the East
Bay’s main peak, perhaps after an Indian legend. Native Americans
did have many stories about the mountain, which they considered a
powerful, mysterious place that had played a part in the world’s creation. The local Miwok tribelet, the Volvon or Bolbones, had a village
southeast of the mountain and hunted and gathered on its slopes. (The
mortars they dug into rock formations to grind acorns remain in some
canyons.) But, because of its religious significance, they didn’t have permanent settlements on the mountain. Other groups such as the Central
Valley Wintun revered the peak and visited it for religious reasons because it is so plainly visible from its environs.
In the 1700s, the Spanish explorers Pedro Fages and Juan Bautista
de Anza predictably named the mountain Cerro Alto de Los Bolbones,
the Bolbones’ Peak. The present name originated some years later from
a surprising confusion. Around 1805, some Indians fleeing captivity at
a mission eluded Spanish soldiers in a willow thicket just northwest of
what is now Concord. The soldiers dubbed the place El Monte de Diablo—“the devil’s woodland”—perhaps because they thought the devil
had helped the Indians escape or perhaps simply to express frustration.
As it happens, monte can mean either “woodland” or “mountain.” A
Mexican ranch later took the name, although it wasn’t associated with
the mountain. Mexicans hunted and ran livestock on the peak, but it
still remained too remote for settlement.
By the 1830s, however, Americans had begun to acquire land around
the mountain and, confusing the former Spanish meaning with the latter,
had started calling it Mount Diablo. In 1851, since it was the region’s
most prominent peak, the government made this official by adopting
the summit as the first meridian for establishing property boundaries
throughout northern California. In the 1860s, California state naturalists arrived to explore the mountain’s geology and botany as well as its
geography. There were surprises about those as well.

87

mountains and marshes

birth of a mountain
Mount Diablo’s summit is so high and isolated—with views east to the
Sierra’s snowy peaks and west to the Farallon Islands—that people often
assume it is a volcano like Mount Lassen, also visible from the summit
on clear days. When geologists explored the peak, however, they found
that it is not a volcanic cone of lava and ash erupted from the earth in relatively recent times. “The material of which it is composed is extremely
variable in its lithological character,” wrote Josiah Whitney, head of the
California State Geological Survey, in 1865, “but it consists essentially of
a central portion of very hard metamorphic sandstone.” Metamorphic
sandstone usually forms on the seabed, which implies that Mount Diablo
is a slab of ancient Pacific Ocean floor that has risen above what is now
sea level. In fact, it is such a slab, although most of it is not sandstone but
something more unexpected from a nineteenth-century viewpoint.
Early geologists like Whitney thought that earth’s oceans and continents had always occupied their present positions. But, if so, how did
ancient seabed rise to Mount Diablo’s present elevation of 3,849 feet
above sea level? It took the late-twentieth-century theory of plate tectonics to explain this. The theory maintains that continents and oceans
have been shifting throughout the planet’s existence, borne by the
enormous tectonic plates that comprise earth’s crust. According to the
theory, the rocks that Whitney first described on Diablo’s summit originated far out in the Pacific during the dinosaur age, the Jurassic and
early Cretaceous periods, as lava from undersea eruptions mixed with
material from earth’s upper mantle to form the ocean floor. These eruptions occurred in “spreading zones,” where tectonic plates originate and
from which they spread out like conveyer belts as more volcanic material rises. It was the eastward spreading of one such plate—the Farallon
Plate—that gradually carried the seabed rocks here.
While it spread, the Farallon Plate carried more than volcanic and
mantle material. As it inched eastward during the ensuing hundred million years, the siliceous skeletons of planktonic microorganisms called
radiolarians accumulated as deep sediments on the ocean floor. Heat
and pressure slowly metamorphosed them into chert, a flinty, purplish
rock now common on the mountain. Then, as the eastward movement
continued toward another, westward-moving plate (called the North
American Plate because our continent rests on it), sand and mud eroded
88

the peak of unexpectedness

from the land also accumulated as sediments, eventually forming other
common metamorphic rocks such as schist.
All this material eventually rose above sea level through a startling
tectonic process. Where the two plates collided, the North American
Plate rode over the Farallon Plate, causing its subduction back into the
hot, plastic mantle. The subduction process scraped much of the seabed
material that had accumulated on the Farallon Plate onto North America’s western edge, forming a mélange of rocks called the Franciscan
Complex, which comprises much of California’s coast. By 30 to 25 million years ago, the North American Plate had “consumed” the Farallon
Plate through the subduction process and a northwest-moving plate, the
Pacific Plate, had replaced the Farallon at the plate boundary. A lateral
“strike-slip” movement then took the place of subduction as the Pacific
Plate slid sideways along the North American Plate.
About three million years ago, the sliding movement between the
plates changed in a way that added an element of compression, in effect
squeezing the local planetary crust. This compression created central
California’s northwest-southeast-trending faults and rugged terrain, as
some rocks between faults dropped to become valleys while others rose
to become ridges and peaks. As mountains rose, erosion removed layers
of sediment that had covered older rocks.
Mount Diablo itself began its rise above the surrounding Coast Range
about five hundred thousand years ago. Faulting activity then began to
create another of the mountain’s surprises. A basic axiom of geology is
that older rocks underlie younger ones, but Mount Diablo is an exception. Faulting there thrust Jurassic-period rocks over younger rock strata
that had covered them for millions of years. Outcrops of such Jurassic
igneous rocks—deep-ocean volcanics called pillow basalts—dot the
summit today. A band of equally ancient material from earth’s mantle, a
slick blue-green rock called serpentine, runs along the north sides of the
summit and North Peak. Most rocks on Diablo’s middle slopes, by contrast, are metamorphosed sedimentary cherts and schists formed during
the subsequent Cretaceous period, which ended 65 million years ago. In
steep lower canyons, sedimentary outcrops such as Castle Rock’s marine
sandstones date from the Tertiary period, between 50 million and 10
million years ago. They’re full of fossil oysters and snails. Younger Tertiary deposits containing bones of mastodons, camels, and other extinct
mammals occur in the foothills.
89

mountains and marshes

Geologists do not understand exactly why Mount Diablo’s older
rocks have risen so far above the surrounding ridges’ younger ones.
One theory is that a particularly deep thrust fault underlies the peak
at a depth so great (perhaps ten miles) that it is hard to detect. (Thrust
faults are diagonal faults caused by the complex stresses of plate interaction.) This fault may have developed because the unusually massive
chunk of Jurassic rock that includes the mountain’s summit blocked
two shallower faults, the Greenville on the southeast and the Concord
on the northwest, from connecting across it. The blockage could have
displaced the pressures that formed the shallower faults deeper into
earth’s crust, pushing the older rocks over the younger ones. Erosion
would have removed the top of the up-thrust sheet, exposing the Jurassic rocks.
Deep thrust faults can hold enormous stress and are suspected of
causing disastrous earthquakes, such as the 1994 Northridge Quake in
Los Angeles. So, although it is not a volcano, Mount Diablo may yet be
a source of geological upsets. Meanwhile, the summit continues to rise
at a rate of about one to three millimeters a year.

a n ecological crossroads
The plate tectonic theory of mountain origins is one of geology’s great
achievements. But that hasn’t exhausted Mount Diablo’s capacity for
scientific surprises, which can concern very small things as well as very
big ones. When William H. Brewer, Josiah Whitney’s botanical assistant
on the state geological survey, was exploring the mountain in May 1862,
for example, he collected a pink annual wildflower that he evidently
thought little of at the time. He didn’t mention it in his notes, although
the area where he found it, east of the peak, impressed him. He described it as “a flat of perhaps two or three hundred acres surrounded by
low rolling hills and covered with oaks here and there, like a park. And
such oaks! . . . one was seven feet in diameter, with a head a hundred
and thirty feet across.”
The wildflower, with spindly stems from four inches to two feet tall,
would have seemed insignificant in comparison, and rather ordinary.
It was a kind of Eriogonum (Latin for “wooly knees,” referring to its
cottony stems), a buckwheat-family genus of which the West has more
90

the peak of unexpectedness

than a hundred species. The little plant wasn’t all that ordinary, as it
happened. When Brewer sent his specimens east to Harvard, Asa Gray
and Sereno Watson, two leading botanists, decided it was a new species,
which they named Eriogonum truncatum in 1871. Even this wouldn’t
have surprised Brewer, who found other new species in California, then
largely unexplored botanically. But as the state became better known,
nobody found E. truncatum anywhere except Mount Diablo, and that
might have surprised Brewer. The species, now called Mount Diablo
buckwheat, seemed to be endemic to the area.
Such a discovery had important implications at a time when Darwin’s
theories were changing ideas about life’s history. One implication was
that the little plant might have come into existence fairly recently as evolution, through natural selection, led to “the origin of species.” According
to Darwinism, isolation from an original species would have caused
Mount Diablo buckwheat to evolve new characteristics as it adapted to
changing conditions. Brewer found it on dry sites, suggesting that it had
adapted to the peak’s lengthening rain shadow. Indeed, Mount Diablo
turned out to be a major center of such plant endemism. At least another
fourteen plant species (including a sunflower, a manzanita, and a globe
lily) occur only in the area, suggesting that the new conditions caused by
its relatively rapid rise over the past half million years have caused them
to diverge from more common and widespread relatives.
“The native plants of California are some of the most exciting in the
world,” says botanist Peter Raven. “Many of them are of recent origin
geologically, and the Mount Diablo buckwheat is clearly one of those.”
Yet E. truncatum is unusual even for a local endemic, because it is the
mountain’s most elusive one. After Brewer’s discovery, it disappeared
until 1886, when a botanist named Mary Katherine Curran identified
it near Antioch, and then again until 1903, when another named C. F.
Baker found it “locally common along rocky banks” on Marsh Creek
Road east of the peak, near where Brewer had discovered it. Then
nobody collected it again until the 1930s, when a young UC–Berkeley
graduate student found some specimens.
That rediscovery would become part of a lifelong involvement with
the mountain for that student, Mary Bowerman, although she would
have been surprised if someone had told her so at the time. As she recalled, she “hadn’t thought of Mount Diablo as being anything special”
when her botany professor assigned her to study it in 1930. He chose
91

mountains and marshes

her because she had a car. Yet Bowerman grew increasingly fascinated
with the mountain as she explored it in the ensuing years, visiting it
more than a hundred times and collecting many hundreds of plant
species. In 1932 she surprised her thesis adviser, the eminent botanist
Willis Lynn Jepson, by proposing to write her doctoral dissertation on
the whole mountain’s vegetation and its interactions with the physical
environment. She proposed to approach the vegetation not just as an
assemblage of plant species to be cataloged individually but as a system
of plant communities, each with typical members and conditions. Such
an ecological approach was relatively new at the time.
“During my studies, I became more interested in ecology than in
straight identification,” she wrote. “I kept track of which plants were
growing together because it was so completely fresh to me. . . . I soon
realized that Mount Diablo is a unique geographical location. It’s part
of the inner Coast Ranges yet is subject to coastal influence owing to the
absence of high mountains to the west over the Bay. It’s also a pivotal
link between the differing vegetation units to the north and south Coast
Ranges. The broad variations in temperature, rainfall, wind exposure,
and altitude account for its wide variety of plant life.” Bowerman completed her thesis in 1936. An expanded version, published in 1944 as
The Flowering Plants and Ferns of Mount Diablo, California, is a major
reference on the mountain’s natural history.
The book takes an evolutionary as well as an ecological approach.
Bowerman notes that the area’s vegetation was very different before
Mount Diablo arose. Fossils discovered nearby show that a forest of
bald cypress and tupelo, trees like those now found in southeastern
swamps, grew here in the Miocene epoch (23 to 5 million years ago).
Some plants like those of that prehistoric forest—deciduous trees like
box elder and sycamore—remained, but as the land gradually became
drier and hillier, others moved in to create today’s biotic mosaic.
Rising over the past five hundred thousand years, Mount Diablo
became an ecological crossroads because of its central location and diverse topography. Organisms that occur north to British Columbia’s rain
forests intersect with ones that occur south to Mexico’s deserts. Western
pond turtles, red-legged frogs, and varied thrushes like those of Redwood National Park coexist with tarantulas, roadrunners, and western
whiptail lizards like those of Joshua Tree National Park. On September
evenings, when tarantulas roam in search of mates, the mountain is so
92

the peak of unexpectedness

dry that it might almost be desert. On nights in March, when red-legged
frogs look for breeding pools, it can be so wet that it might almost be
rain forest.

the mountain’s mosaic
Bowerman’s book divides this biotic mosaic into plant communities
based on the varied conditions. The riparian community, growing along
streams in places like Sycamore and Curry Canyons, has deciduous trees
such as alder, bigleaf maple, and cottonwood. Sun-dappled grapevines
twine overhead, and shrubs like snowberry cover the ground. Almost
as lush, but shadier, is the broadleaf sclerophyll community, which grows
in moist places such as the north-facing slopes above Pine, Curry, and
Mitchell Canyons. Most of its species, including coast live oak, madrone, and California laurel, have tough evergreen (sclerophyllous) leaves
adapted to dry summers. The deciduous oak–pine community occurs
on rockier, dryer areas such as Castle Rock and Rock City and also on
ridgetops and flats, where scattered valley oak, blue oak, and black oak—
mixed with ghost pines, Coulter pines, and knobcone pines—grow among
grasses and wildflowers.
Bowerman’s other two plant communities occur in places where
trees have trouble growing. The grassland community gives the mountain its fireworks of poppies and lupines in spring and its golden glow
in summer. Exotic weeds have severely impacted it, but native plants
survive in many places on the mountain. On Long Ridge, serpentine
soil discourages weeds, and native goldfields, tarweeds, and poppies still
bloom thickly. Bald Ridge and Donner Canyon also have expanses of
native grassland. The chaparral community occurs in places too dry,
steep, and rocky even for grassland, covering most of the mountain’s
south-facing slopes with a shaggy carpet of shrubs that would be desertlike if it weren’t so dense. Chaparral may look monotonous, but it has a
special wealth of native shrubs and forbs. These flower throughout most
of the year: manzanita in early winter, aromatic buckbrush in spring,
chamise in the heat of summer. Chaparral flowers, from the white of
chamise and buckbrush to the neon magenta of chaparral pea and the
electric blue of California lilac, can be so profuse that they color entire
slopes and perfume the air.
93

mountains and marshes

Even the mosaic of plant communities doesn’t quite capture the complexity of the mountain’s ecology. The transition zones between them
form distinct habitats of their own. The elusive Mount Diablo buckwheat appears to depend on one such boundary habitat, between grassland and chaparral. C. F. Baker, the early plant collector, noted that the
little plant grew in places where the two communities met, and that was
where Mary Bowerman found it, growing with shrubs such as poison
oak and California sagebrush but also with grasses such as brome.
That was significant, because many new species tend to evolve in such
transition zones. So E. truncatum might well have evolved in the last
half million years as the mountain’s rising slopes and lengthening rain
shadow created new conditions. But it was hard to learn more about
the little wildflower because Bowerman didn’t find any specimens after
1936; nor did anyone else. As decades passed, Mount Diablo buckwheat
seemed to have died out.

the cost of grow th
Mount Diablo buckwheat’s extinction would not have been a surprise
in the twentieth century, given the human forces increasingly arrayed
against rare organisms. While the native Bolbones had burned vegetation to foster food plants and game, that probably hadn’t threatened
annuals like E. truncatum. It may have benefited them by reducing
competition from the perennial plants that dominated California’s
native grasslands. The advent of European agriculture changed things.
Spanish livestock brought seeds of aggressive weeds such as wild oats,
and heavy grazing allowed them to replace native grasses and forbs
over large areas. Grazing intensified when Americans homesteaded the
mountain. They also cut trees and burned chaparral to increase livestock yield and plowed flats for hay and other crops. Miners dug up
hillsides in search of lime, coal, and mercury. The peak became a popular resort after the building of Mountain House Hotel just below the
summit in the 1870s.
Although homesteads failed because of the semiarid climate, surrounding towns grew quickly and entrepreneurs looked to the mountain
for more space. Between 1910 and 1917, a speculator named Robert
Noble Burgess acquired some sixty square miles in the area, realigned
94

the peak of unexpectedness

old stagecoach roads for automobiles, and extended them to the summit.
(These routes, which Burgess called the Mount Diablo Scenic Boulevard,
would become the park’s North Gate and South Gate Roads.) Burgess
hoped to build a huge housing estate on his land, and he was not alone.
In 1914, William Randolph Hearst, the newspaper magnate, contemplated buying fifteen thousand acres and placing a castle-like hotel on
the summit.
Mount Diablo proved too remote and rugged, however. Hearst built
his castle at San Simeon instead, and Burgess went bankrupt during
World War I. Another entrepreneur, Walter P. Frick, continued to hold
land on the mountain, and if the 1920s boom had continued, he might
have subdivided much of it. Yet Frick liked the mountain’s natural landscape (he let Mary Bowerman collect there), and the 1929 Wall Street
collapse threatened his finances. By then, headlong growth had generated a movement to save open space with state parks, so Frick sold six
parcels, a total of 2,004 acres, to the state. The first two of these were
dedicated as Mount Diablo State Park in 1931.
Most of the mountain remained in private hands, subject to heavy
grazing, quarrying, hunting, and other impacts. Increased pesticide use
and poisoning of coyotes and ground squirrels threatened uncommon
species like eagles, burrowing owls, falcons, kit foxes, and badgers. Although urban growth pressure remained comparatively light through
World War II, this changed after construction of the Caldecott Tunnel.
Freeways and suburbs devoured the valleys’ fields and orchards, and as
growth accelerated with the construction of BART in the 1970s, subdivisions spread into the canyons and foothills. Just one of these, Blackhawk Ranch at the foot of Sycamore Canyon west of the park, proposed
to cover some forty-two hundred acres with luxury homes and malls.
That was nearly as large as the state park itself, which had grown to
6,788 acres in the 1960s through state bond measures but which still
excluded most of the mountain.

protecting the whole
New factors began to resist wholesale urbanization at this point, and
the last person to locate Mount Diablo buckwheat played a big part in
95

mountains and marshes

that resistance. Over the years, Mary Bowerman’s fascination with the
mountain’s natural habitats had generated a passion to protect them.
She foresaw that a small park around the summit wouldn’t do that in
the long run. “Because there’s so much variation between different parts
of the mountain, we need preservation of the whole to understand the
whole ecological picture,” she wrote. “It is my dream that the whole of
Mount Diablo, including its foothills, will remain open space.”
Bowerman’s concern for Mount Diablo’s ecosystem was active as well
as informed. She would surprise local landowners such as the Wright
family—owners of a recreation park in Curry Canyon—by suddenly
appearing and asking what could be done to preserve the mountain.
“She was talking about us donating [land] when we were just starting to
buy it,” Dorothy Wright recalled. “We thought she was crazy, but she’d
talk about nature, the future, the mountain, then five or six years later
she’d show up again.” Bowerman’s persistence eventually paid off with
Dorothy Wright, who sold part of her land for inclusion in the park in
2002. “I realize now,” Wright said, “what a neat thing it is to have your
priorities in something that will last into perpetuity.”
Bowerman moved from Berkeley to Lafayette in 1954 and became
active in local conservation groups. She found that Mount Diablo often
took a backseat to other causes, however, so she started asking: “What
can we do for the mountain right here?” In 1971, her concern prompted
Art Bonwell, an engineer who liked to hike and bicycle in the park, to
suggest that they start an organization dedicated to saving the whole
mountain as open space. Bonwell had served as chair of the Sierra Club’s
Mount Diablo Regional Group and knew a lot of conservationists,
so, as he said, “I was the organizer and she was the inspiration.” Save
Mount Diablo (SMD) held its first meeting in December of that year,
with twenty participants chipping in twenty-five cents apiece to get the
minutes mailed.
From the start, SMD advocated expanding the state park through
public acquisitions. Thanks to a combination of citizen pressure and
state park funds, the park had grown to more than nineteen thousand
acres by 2000. When public bodies were short of money to buy important parcels that became available, SMD often raised the funds to
acquire them for eventual transfer to public ownership. The first purchase was 117 acres at the corner of Marsh Creek and Morgan Territory
Roads in 1976.
96

the peak of unexpectedness

Conservation funds are always limited, and SMD developed other
strategies to protect as much of the mountain as possible. It opposed
subdivisions that encroached on significant natural habitats and tried to
mitigate urbanization by encouraging owners to dedicate parts of their
lands to conservation. An early example of this involved the huge Blackhawk Ranch proposal. In the 1970s, SMD negotiated for 2,052 of the
property’s 4,200 acres to be dedicated to the state park as a condition of
building the subdivision. This acreage includes many of the most scenic
areas on the mountain’s southwest flank, such as the Black Hills, the
Wall Point area, Blackhawk Ridge, and parts of Dan Cook and Jackass
Canyons.

conservation corridors
As urbanization continued to spread, SMD and other conservationists
saw that protecting Mount Diablo itself would not be enough to ensure
long-term preservation of its biotic diversity. Studies of “island ecology”
show that isolated natural areas steadily lose such diversity. Wild populations are always prone to local extinction under natural stress from
predation, disease, and climate, but recolonization from adjacent areas
replenishes them. When urbanization surrounds a park, natural flora
and fauna may fail to renew depleted populations.
Mount Diablo has lost diversity in recent times. Native rainbow
trout inhabited Mitchell Creek until the 1980s but haven’t been found
recently. Plant species have disappeared, and not just rare ones. Mary
Bowerman found leopard lilies on the mountain in the 1930s, but the
magnificent orange wildflowers have not been seen since, probably because of livestock trampling and browsing at springs.
Yet island ecology studies also show that relatively small areas can
protect diverse animal and plant populations if they are linked to form
“wildlife corridors” along which migration, recolonization, and other
natural processes can continue. Since the park’s founding, charismatic
species like mountain lions and bobcats have persisted there because
other, albeit still-unprotected natural areas border it. The future of diversity thus depends on establishing and maintaining wildlife corridors.
Accordingly, conservationists’ primary objective shifted from expanding the state park to promoting open space corridors around the
97

mountains and marshes

mountain, a timely move as urbanization threatened to isolate the park
from vital areas that the East Bay Regional Park District (EBRPD) was
acquiring—Morgan Territory to the east and Black Diamond Mines to
the north. On the west slope, where urbanization pressure was strongest, SMD worked with EBRPD and local communities to protect open
space around the park at Wall Ridge, Lime Ridge, Shell Ridge, Crystal
Ranch, and other areas.
SMD’s ultimate goal became linking Mount Diablo’s nineteenth thousand plus acres with roughly ninety thousand acres of other protected
open space outside the state park, from Walnut Creek and Antioch in
the north to Livermore in the south. These forty or more separate open
space units would not be isolated preserves but anchors for a 180,000acre wilderness complex that would let plants and animals continue to
circulate naturally. The concept of a Diablo Grand Loop embodies the
goal: a continuous trail through the open space of the northern Diablo
Range, from Mount Diablo south to the Los Vaqueros watershed,
looping north and east through Cowell Ranch State Park and Black
Diamond Mines Regional Preserve.
Once corridors are established, SMD’s long-term strategy includes the
restoration of native species like rainbow trout and leopard lilies. Successful restoration of peregrine falcons in the area in the 1990s was an
encouraging sign. Conservationists hope that the California condor may
return to forage or even nest on Mount Diablo someday. With enough
protection, some apparently vanished species may also “restore” themselves. A particularly encouraging example of this happened recently.

return of a native
Mary Bowerman died in August 2005, but not before her life’s work took
a surprising turn. Her book, The Flowering Plants and Ferns of Mount
Diablo, went out of print in the mid-1990s, so she began collaborating
with Barbara Erter, a botanist at UC–Berkeley’s Jepson Herbarium, on
an updated version (published by the California Native Plant Society in
2002). The project involved intensive new exploration of the mountain’s
vegetation, and collectors found a number of plants as yet not recorded
there, although they failed to find some recorded ones, including Mount
Diablo buckwheat.
98

the peak of unexpectedness

Exploration continued after the book’s publication, and in May
2005, a UC–Berkeley graduate student happened on a little pink annual
wildflower growing between grassland and chaparral. “I was looking
at a common plant that likes rock outcroppings and wondering why
it was growing on sand,” recalled the student, Michael Park, “when I
realized that I was surrounded by early blooming buckwheat. I decided
I needed a closer look since I didn’t recognize it and then I realized this
was something new.”
Park was looking at a species that no one had collected for seven
decades—Eriogonum truncatum. “Once I knew it was Mount Diablo
buckwheat,” he said, “I was in shock. . . . It’s a surprisingly dainty plant
once you see it in the field, because it’s so celebrated in the botanical
community that it had grown in my imagination. It’s only because I
stopped and was moving more slowly that I realized it was there.”
Barbara Erter and other botanists confirmed Park’s identification
of the plant. By chance, news of a possible sighting in Arkansas of an
ivory-billed woodpecker—also considered extinct for decades—had
emerged three weeks earlier, so the media was primed to notice returns
from apparent oblivion. National Public Radio interviewed Erter and
Seth Adams, SMD’s land programs director, who exulted: “With all the
normal controversies and lands battles, what great news that this beautiful and unique wildflower has managed to survive. When I visited the
site, I was struck by how fragile the plant is. There are fewer than twenty,
it’s an annual and reseeds and dies each year, but it has survived.”
The species’s future remains uncertain, in part because botanists
aren’t sure how it has managed to survive. One theory involves brush
rabbits, which hide from predators in dense chaparral and venture into
adjacent grassland to feed. By thinning exotic weeds at the chaparral’s
edge, the rabbits may benefit the rare native annual. But science still
knows little about protecting endangered species like Mount Diablo
buckwheat. Propagating them in nurseries can preserve their genetic
material—botanists at UC–Berkeley Botanical Garden grew the species
from seeds collected in 2005—but organisms can’t really survive unless
viable populations continue to reproduce in their natural habitats. The
plant’s reappearance on the mountain in the following year was good
news, but no guarantee of ultimate survival.
It kept coming back to preserving habitat. “Our first priority,” said
SMD executive director Ron Brown, “is to make sure that Mount Diablo
99

mountains and marshes

is not cut off from the rest of the Diablo Range to the south, so that the
area retains healthy breeding populations and an enriched gene pool
of plants and animals. Second, although SMD has done a good job of
defining the outer edges of the habitat we want to protect, we need to
fill in those limits with large enough swaths of protected land to sustain
wildlife and provide visual and recreational amenities.”
Brown said that SMD has benefited from good relations with landowners who share its values and goals. An example of this is the 2006
purchase of the Mangini Ranch at the park’s northwest side, a crucial acquisition, facilitated by a State Coastal Conservancy grant, that links the
park with Walnut Creek’s Lime Ridge Open Space. The 208-acre ranch,
in the Mangini family for more than 125 years, has exceptional habitat
for wildlife and plants, including the northernmost stand of desert olive,
a typical Mojave Desert shrub, and several endemic wildflowers such as
hospital canyon larkspur, a pink-flowered species that stands up to six
feet tall in wet years. It is one of the sites where Mary Bowerman found
Mount Diablo buckwheat, and although the plant has not surfaced
there since, its grassland–chaparral interface habitat remains.
“We believe that our ancestors would be very proud of us for working
with Save Mount Diablo,” said Karen Mangini, one of the ranch’s
owners. “It is our responsibility to protect this land for others. We want
future generations to enjoy what we had; we want them to be able to
roam among the land’s friendly confines as we have done. We hope that
the work we are doing with Save Mount Diablo will encourage other
farming and ranching families in this beautiful valley to do likewise.”
SMD estimated at that time that the amount of protected land in
the area would have to double before its work was finished, quite a
challenge. California didn’t pass a major park bond issue between
Proposition 70 in 1988 and Propositions 12 and 40 in 2000 and 2002.
Those funds were soon spent. Land prices were jumping dramatically,
and the state was having trouble managing its existing parks, let alone
expanding the system. “Urban pressure for large scale developments in
the foothills has never been greater,” said former SMD board president
Bob Doyle.
But Mount Diablo continues to specialize in surprises, as I
found when I visited a place near where William Brewer first found
Eriogonum truncatum. Round Valley Regional Preserve is in the peak’s
rain shadow to the southeast of the state park and has desert species
100

the peak of unexpectedness

like kit foxes and roadrunners, so I’d anticipated a forbidding, even infernal place. But it was a wet April, and it was more like Fantasia’s bucolic “Pastoral Symphony” sequence than its diabolic “Night on Bald
Mountain.” Meadowlarks sang in buttercup-spangled turf; bluebirds,
goldfinches, and warblers thronged oaks rivaling those that Brewer
described in 1861.
I didn’t find Mount Diablo buckwheat, but I did find something unexpected. When the Lewis and Clark expedition was exploring the West
in 1805, they discovered a large species of woodpecker with plumage
unlike that of any other in the United States. Its back and wings were a
dark, glossy green, and Captain Meriwether Lewis described its breast
plumage as “a curious mixture of white and blood red which has the
appearance of having been artificially stained that color.” The species’s
behavior was unusual too: it flew straight ahead like a crow (most
woodpeckers have an arcing flight) and hawked insects from a perch.
Since Lewis was the first to describe it, taxonomists named it after him.
Looking up to Round Valley’s foothill oak woodlands, I saw a nearly
crow-sized bird flying straight through the trees and perching to hawk
insects from them. When I got near enough, I saw that it had a green
back and pink breast. It was a Lewis’s woodpecker, the first I’d seen
in decades of hiking the Bay Area. Like Mount Diablo buckwheat, the
species has specialized habitat needs—expanses of parklike savanna—
and faces threats from exotic species and human activities. Starlings
preempt its nest holes in savanna trees, and logging, overgrazing, and
development threaten savanna. Round Valley almost became a landfill
before EBRPD acquired it. If it had, I would not have seen the species
near the peak.
My favorite Mount Diablo surprise so far was in the park itself, on
rocky, windswept Eagle Peak Trail one hot May morning. An exuberant
end-of-term school hike had started from the Mitchell Canyon area
that day, so I thought wildlife would be scarce along the trails. As I
walked through thick old chaparral on a saddle north of Eagle Peak,
however, the pebbly red soil coalesced into a creature that had seemed
almost mythical because I’d often heard of it but had never seen it—a
coast horned lizard. It was a large stout specimen, but it blended so well
with the ground that I probably would have missed it if I’d been in a
hurry. Mary Austin describes the spooky camouflage of its smaller, more
common desert relative in her classic The Land of Little Rain: “Now
101

mountains and marshes

and then a palm’s breadth of trail gathers itself and scurries off with
a rustle under the brush, to resolve itself into sand again. This is pure
witchcraft.”
This horned lizard had even more confidence in witchcraft than its
desert relative—it just stayed on the trail. As I sat down and watched
it for a half hour, it moved twice—once to blink an eye, once to move
a foot. Only when I had crept up close enough to touch it did it scurry
off, and then it just disguised itself as pebbly red dirt again a little way
within the chaparral. Its behavior was fascinating if also troubling given
the species’s evident scarcity in the park. Mountain bicyclists had left
many tracks on the legally off-limits hiking trail. That lizard would have
had no chance to “scurry off with a rustle” if one had come along.
Enough range and habitat for Lewis’s woodpeckers and coast horned
lizards exist outside the crowded Bay Area that neither species is endangered. Lewis’s woodpeckers live from central British Columbia to
northern Mexico and east to the Great Plains; coast horned lizards from
the northern Sacramento Valley to Baja California. It’s still a thrill to see
them here. Such sightings show that the biodiversity protection strategy
of Save Mount Diablo and its allies is working. The more linked habitat
there is in the area, the more chance there is that a Lewis’s woodpecker,
a coast horned lizard, or even a Mount Diablo buckwheat will be here
to surprise us.
—Bay Nature, July–September 2006

102

beavers and boutiques

I had heard so much about the beavers that colonized downtown Martinez in 2006 that I thought they would be easy to find. A brief Internet search disclosed no directions or maps, however. I set out anyway
and eventually found myself in Martinez, although on the way I didn’t
see any billboards welcoming me to the Bay Area’s beaver capital. The
downtown also offered a conspicuous absence of signage. Yet it was in
fact easy to find the beaver colony.
A line of willows and cottonwoods, the borders of Alhambra Creek,
snaked through the restaurants and shops, and although beaver signage was absent, beaver word of mouth wasn’t. The first passerby I
asked knew when and where to find them and directed me to three
dams downstream from where I was on Main Street. Heading that way,
I could see that it was an unusual downtown. Large turtles swam in the
creek, and even more unusual, baby turtles did too. Mallards and snowy
egrets appeared, which was not so unusual, but the sight of a pair of
green herons was. Green herons need riparian woodland, scarce along
diverted and culverted California streams. I heard they’d been absent
from Alhambra Creek before the beavers arrived.
When I came to the dams, it was something of an anticlimax. Compared to a lot of beaver dams, they weren’t very impressive—and beaver
dams can be very impressive indeed, as can their other engineering
works. On a trek into Montana’s Beartooth-Absaroka Wilderness
in 1978, they’d astonished and mystified me. I was used to low dams
across gentle eastern streams, but the Montana beavers had adapted

103

mountains and marshes

their work to rugged terrain along what is called, not too accurately,
the Stillwater River. When I passed the steep ravine of a river tributary,
it looked as though Asian rice farmers had terraced it. A series of check
dams ran up as far as I could see, turning what must have been a torrent
into a string of quiet ponds. Some of the dams were considerably taller
than me, with arching shapes so regular and elegant that they resembled
miniature Grand Coulees.
I knew they were beaver dams, since they consisted of gnawed
branches. That wasn’t true of another engineering feat I saw there. In
a large marsh on the river, I found a canal that cut through the rushes
and sedges with such straightness and precision—the spoil piled neatly
along the banks—that the Army Corps of Engineers seemed the likely
agent, although this was a day’s walk from the nearest road. Reading
up on beavers, however, I found that they often dig canals, even more
impressive ones. They dig ones as much as one thousand feet long to
divert streams into home ponds or to reach food sources. (They prefer
herbaceous marsh plants like cattails but also eat the inner bark of trees
like willows and cottonwoods, partly because branches can be stored
underwater when ponds are frozen in winter.) If the canals pass through
sloping terrain, moreover, they build small check dams at intervals along
them so that the water won’t flow too fast.
The abundance of such feats in North American beaver colonies
amazed Europeans (who already had decimated Old World beavers for
the fur trade), although early accounts tended to exaggerate. On the eve
of the American Revolution, a Captain John Carver described how, “after
mature deliberation,” troops of two or three hundred beavers assembled
to build dams; how they plastered the dams with “a kind of mortar . . .
laid on with their tails”; and how they built their “cabins . . . on poles.”
Illustrations showed beaver lodges with square, framed windows and
second stories. Alexander Majors, originator of the Pony Express, said
that beavers “had more engineering skill than the entire Corps of Engineers who were connected with General Grant’s army when he besieged
Vicksburg.”
The size, complexity, and skill of beaver colonies really are amazing,
and they became prime subjects for an “instinct versus intelligence” controversy that agitated the emerging sciences of biology and psychology in
the nineteenth century. Traditional lore had granted nonhuman animals
a degree of reasoning power, to the extent that they sometimes were tried
104

b e av e r s a n d b o u t i q u e s

and punished for crimes. This went against the Judeo-Christian doctrine
that they lack souls, however, and eighteenth-century Enlightenment-era
science, influenced by Cartesian mechanistic dualism, tended to dismiss
such lore. Frederic Cuvier, head keeper of the Paris zoo and younger
brother of the early-nineteenth-century’s most famous naturalist, Baron
Georges Cuvier, set out to test the question by raising a pair of beaver kits
in isolation. The pair cut down trees and built dams with the branches,
thus demonstrating, he thought, all the talents and abilities of wild beavers. He decided that their behavior was purely instinctive.
Yet Cuvier’s experiment was inconclusive because naturalists had not
really studied beavers in the wild. The fur industry kept well ahead of
them, exterminating colonies as they became accessible. In California,
trappers wiped out one of the continent’s largest beaver populations
even before the gold rush, decimating Native Americans with Old World
diseases in the process. They wiped out beavers so fast, indeed, that it’s
unclear just what their role in the Bay Area’s ecology was. Although
early accounts mention beavers throughout the area, biologists assume
they mainly lived in the delta, with its abundant water supply. Many Bay
Area creeks ran all year then, however, so the early accounts of beavers
all around the Bay may have something. (Early accounts described sea
otters throughout the Bay, which seems strange now.)
I remember my surprise, after hiking down a Maryland creek that
empties into Chesapeake Bay, at finding a large beaver pond (more of
a lake, really) right by the bay’s shore. There were dams upstream too,
predictably, but beaver coastal engineering seemed counterintuitive.
There it was though. It made me wonder what role beavers might have
played in forming the San Francisco Bay marshes.
The fur industry expected to keep “harvesting” beavers until it exterminated them, as it apparently exterminated sea otters and fur seals.
But the big rodents proved too widespread and resilient. Small colonies survived and recovered after the industry collapsed, with some
help from conservationists. Industrious and familial, beavers underwent a late-nineteenth-century vogue, perhaps comparable to dolphins’
late-twentieth-century one. Naturalists who studied them then weren’t
at all sure that their activities were purely instinctive.
Canals seemed the most striking suggestion of beaver intelligence because they implied planning. One naturalist, Alexander Dugmore, noted
that when beavers built a canal toward a grove of food trees, they dug
105

mountains and marshes

it before they cut the trees, not while they were moving back and forth
to cut them. They apparently dug it with the conscious intention of providing access to a planned “timber sale.” Another naturalist, Enos Mills,
thought beaver “logging” also showed foresight:
“He occasionally endeavors to fell trees in a given direction,” Mills
wrote. “He avoids cutting those entangled at the top. . . . Sometimes he
will, on a windy day, fell trees on the windward side of a grove . . . he commonly avoids felling trees in the heart of the grove, but cuts on the outskirts of it.” Mills found that beavers generally took good care of their
dams and lodges, plastering them with mud and promptly repairing
damage. They sometimes built lodges over springs, which eliminated
the danger of water freezing around the entrance in winter, trapping the
occupants inside.
When I was in Montana in midsummer 1978, a large lodge in the
ravine that beavers had terraced so impressively wasn’t even in water at
the time. It loomed by the creek bank like an untidy wooden castle. It
didn’t have windows, but it was tall enough for two beaver-sized stories.
Apparently it was a seasonal residence to occupy when the stream level
was higher from fall to spring.
Mills also saw beavers display the reverse of foresight, cutting trees
that were entangled with others or located in the middle of a grove and
thus impossible to move. He found dead beavers that had felled trees
on themselves. Some beavers, especially young and solitary ones, were
sloppy or perfunctory dam builders. They might build dams needlessly, as when transplanted to an already existing beaver pond. But
individual idiocy doesn’t prove general stupidity—otherwise Homo
sapiens will have to change its name. Individual beavers’ brilliance or
incompetence could also imply that their engineering involves thinking
as well as instinct.
But if a beaver thinks, how does it think? Humans largely think
through language: we don’t build dams or canals without it. Beavers
are quiet creatures, although they do make various communicative
noises, including the well-known tail slap on the water. But such noises
don’t seem complex enough to expound engineering techniques. Young
beavers’ sloppy dam construction suggests that parents pass on expertise, but the kits may simply learn through observation instead of instruction. Mills saw little evidence of leadership in groups of beavers

106

b e av e r s a n d b o u t i q u e s

at work, although he noted one instance wherein parents accompanied
their young to a new location, helped them build a dam and lodge, and
then returned to their old pond, leaving the youngsters at the new one.
Given the intelligence question’s continuing relevance, the beavers’
colonization of downtown Martinez in 2006 might be an extension
of Frederic Cuvier’s original experiment, albeit under reverse circumstances. Instead of Cuvier’s naive beaver kits, observed in the zoo’s protected environment, the Martinez “experiment” took a pair of mature,
presumably experienced beavers and placed them in an environment
that was very dangerous for beavers.
The experiment might have seemed conclusive enough if the Martinez
authorities had killed the beaver pair that dammed Alhambra Creek, as
they meant to do. (Authorities routinely kill beavers when their engineering might interfere with urban growth or agribusiness.) That
would have tended to support Cuvier. Although the offending pair’s
origins are unclear, they presumably came from a more beaver-friendly
habitat, some less urbanized wetland or stream. Foresight might have
told them that a busy downtown was a problematic place for a dam.
Beavers don’t have to build dams: they can live in stream-bank dens
instead of stick-and-mud lodges in dammed ponds. Damming a creek
bordered by multistory buildings might well seem a thoughtlessly destructive product of blind instinct.
On the other hand, killing the subject of a behavioral experiment
when some desired conclusion is reached has a way of biasing the experiment. As it happened, the intervention of local environmentalists,
who formed a beaver protection organization, Worth A Dam, prevented
the pair’s immediate execution. So the experiment continued, with more
problematic results.
The dam didn’t flood the downtown during the next eight years. This
probably was at least partly because Worth A Dam installed a control
device in it to keep the water below a certain level. Yet the beavers’
failure to flood the town also raised the possibility that their behavior
might have been less unreasonable than it seemed, at least from a beaver’s viewpoint. Beavers dam streams because they need water to swim
in, and they can build very large ones to make very large ponds. The
rudimentary nature of the Martinez dams could imply that the beavers were not simply damming blindly away but were engineering in

107

mountains and marshes

proportion to an environment to which they perceived limits. Flooding
buildings (perhaps perceived as cliff-like structures) would not turn
them into beaver ponds, so why flood them?
The beavers’ survival and reproduction in downtown Martinez might
thus suggest some kind of reasoned adjustment to environment. The
original dam’s rudimentary size could have been simply a result of just
two beavers working on it, but the dam didn’t get bigger when the beavers had young, although they did build two more dams downstream,
perhaps in reaction to increased water velocity caused by the control
device on the first dam. Those two dams are also unimpressive. As to
other activities, I thought I saw evidence of canal building in a marshy
area beside the lower dams, probably to reach patches of cattails, but it
also seemed rudimentary. The beavers didn’t seem to have tried building
lodges—they lived in bank burrows. The passerby who told me where
to find the dams had never heard of beaver lodges.
Of course, the beavers’ failure to flood the downtown for eight
years doesn’t guarantee they won’t help to flood it sometime, although
Bay Area downtowns untroubled by beavers flood often enough.
Antibeaver officials say the rodents destroyed thousands of dollars
worth of flood-control improvements, such as tree plantings, although
I didn’t perceive anything on my visit except a dying, beaver-gnawed
cottonwood. Willows, the main beaver food trees in the area, seemed
abundant. Worth A Dam maintained that beavers were getting a relatively small proportion of their food from trees, since marsh plants
were available.
At present, the Martinez experiment seems little more conclusive as
to the intelligence versus instinct question than the Cuvier one, and for
the same reason: we just don’t know enough about the question. Indeed,
we probably know less than we thought we did in the early nineteenth
century. It was easier to define intelligence and instinct when naturalists
like Frederic Cuvier believed a creator had imbued humans with unique
reasoning powers that set them apart from other creatures. But two
centuries of evolutionary biology have made such beliefs increasingly
hard for scientists to hold, although most Americans, perhaps including
Martinez officials, still hold them.
The scientific evidence suggests that the human mind evolved from
the minds of earlier animals—that thinking is not an absolute phenomenon but a contingent and relative one that combines conscious
108

b e av e r s a n d b o u t i q u e s

“intelligence” with unconscious “instinct” in highly unpredictable and
sometimes mindlessly destructive ways. Human intelligence is very well
developed, of course, which makes our bouts of mindless destructiveness very impressive.
Whatever happens on Alhambra Creek, beavers probably won’t ruin
downtown Martinez. Given our historical background, humans probably will, somehow, sooner or later.
—2014

109

the south bay

sunol falcon watch

Falcons inspire almost universal admiration. Literatures around the
world praise them. They are beautiful; fly faster than almost anything
alive; and can be trained to catch ducks, pigeons, and other things people
like to eat. Medieval noblemen went everywhere with theirs and amused
themselves at banquets by setting their pets after blackbird flocks released from ornamental pies—thus the nursery rhyme.
It is ironic if not surprising that one of the most admired of birds has
become one of the most threatened. Wild falcons are worth thousands
to oil sheiks, who have depleted their native populations and now have
the birds smuggled from Alaska. But falcons weren’t of value to the
pesticide manufacturers and farmers whose activities rendered their eggshells too thin for successful brooding in the 1950s. The most popular
species, the peregrine falcon, which nested in the Palisades across the
Hudson from New York City until the 1940s, was virtually extinct as a
breeding bird in the contiguous United States by the 1970s.
The western United States was lucky enough to still have a breeding
population of another species, the prairie falcon. Slightly smaller than
the peregrine, it resides in remote areas with relatively low pesticide
levels instead of migrating through urban and agribusiness land like
the peregrine. Falconers considered it a substitute for peregrines, however, and they probably outnumbered the falcons. Some pairs hatched
clutches for years only to have falconers steal them. Audubon societies
and other conservation groups started setting round-the-clock guards
on falcon nests during breeding season.

113

mountains and marshes

I volunteered to guard a prairie falcon nest in Sunol Regional Park
for five days in 1974 and kept a journal that gives an account of some
spring days in the California Coast Range. Less comfortably for me, it
also gives an account of the kind of feckless human behavior that makes
life harder for things like falcons. I’m not sure the prairie falcons were
too fortunate in having me to guard them.
Did the falcon guard stay at his post, day after day, scanning the
horizon for falcon thieves? Or was he drawn with rationalizations and
self-justifications to spying on the falcons he was supposed to guard?
At least he didn’t climb down the cliff to photograph the fledglings in
the nest as some guards reputedly did, and the fledglings were still there
after he’d gone.
• • •

APRIL 28: When I arrive, two fence lizards are stretched out on top

of the tent, one atop the other. The top lizard jumps off as I approach
and starts to flee, then circles back. The bottom lizard merely cocks its
head at me. I see the sun reflected in its eye. The day is dry and hot, although the hills are lush green. I put my gear in the tent and walk out
to the cliff top. Hordes of swifts and swallows circle overhead as though
jet-propelled. They seem to enjoy veering away from obstacles like my
head at the last moment. One of the falcons appears suddenly in the air
below me, screams, and swoops away.
I have to walk a mile to a well at an old barn for water. I go at sunset,
when the hillsides are orange with the last light. Poorwills start to call
in the canyons. A horned lark springs into the air beside the road and
spirals upward, singing. When I get back to the tent, it’s dark. Toads
patrol sedately, beige colored, their pearl gray warts tipped with pale
orange. They match the stones here, which are coated with gray-andorange lichens.
I walk along the cliff top in the darkness. Some large bird flies up
behind me silently—then shrieks. A moment later, when my heart stops
racing, I glimpse it gliding down the gully at the other side of the cliff
top, emitting a squeaky, three-note call. It is too stubby and shaggy to be
a falcon. The cliff has a nocturnal nester, as I’ll see.

114

s u n o l f a l c o n wa t c h
• • •

APRIL 29: In the first sunlight, strands of spider silk on the trees sparkle
prismatic red, green, and blue. A meadowlark flies by with an earwig in
its beak. Flocks of blackbirds pass overhead. In the gully’s oak woods,
Steller’s jays search the trunks for insects. One jay circles me curiously,
challenges my presence by imitating a red-tailed hawk scream, and then
loses interest.
When I walk to the cliff top, a falcon drops off the nest (which is
hidden by a rock overhang) and flies away along the spine of the ridge.
I keep away from the edge after that. I never get a really close look at
the birds or see the nest—that’s not what I’m here for, after all. I content
myself with observing the adults through binoculars.
Other inhabitants are less timid than the falcons. California ground
squirrels from burrows around the tent are quite bold, casually, since my
food doesn’t interest them. As I eat lunch, one browses on yellow-flowered
owl clover and pink-flowered filaree almost at my feet.
The cliff’s daytime nesters include turkey vultures, and the big birds
come and go frequently. The falcons stoop at them, a touchiness that
might indicate that their eggs have hatched. The vultures just drop down
a few feet—shrugging off the falcons’ testiness—then fly on. Instead of
returning to the nest after diving at the vultures, the falcons often plunge
across the canyon and start a series of upward spirals that carry them
out of sight.
It gets very hot, and I walk down into the gully. The live oaks’ shade
is cool and drowsy, very different from the windy, bustling cliff top.
Lark sparrows—big handsome birds with chestnut brown markings—
loiter around a half-dried stock pond. Male fence lizards chase up
and down a buckeye trunk, pausing to puff up their throats and do
“push ups,” which flash azure scales on their flanks to attract females
and discourage rivals. When they stop moving, their gray scales conceal
them against the bark. Most animals are camouflaged here: the toads,
the grasshoppers, which are either gray like pebbles or striped green and
beige like grasses.
When I go to get water at sunset, a deer herd silhouetted against a
ridgetop doesn’t see me against the dark ground, so I get quite close before
they bolt. The last to disappear is a well-antlered buck that seems to pose
self-consciously against the pale sky. When the stars come out, coyotes
115

mountains and marshes

call briefly from the eastern hills. After I get into my sleeping bag, a big
black ground beetle keeps me awake by crawling around the tent.
• • •

APRIL 30: The wind has shifted to the west and the air is clammy with

fog, which shrouds the canyons to the east. I get up late. A female oriole
is trying to pull off some twine tied on a buckeye branch by the tent. The
black-and-orange bird yanks at it from various angles and tries to fly away
with it, but it keeps pulling her up short. She chatters irritably but keeps
pulling at it for most of the morning, although it won’t break. I finally cut
off a piece and offer it to her, but she flees in terror. Soon she is back, tugging at the attached string while my offering dangles in the breeze.
Two ground squirrels frequent this place, an old one and a young one.
The old one is bolder, the big-eyed youngster more curious. It spends a
lot of time sniffing around the tent as I eat lunch.
I spy on the falcons from the ridgetop north of the cliff in the afternoon. When I get up to leave, a falcon flies quietly out of the trees
behind my vantage point and swoops off down the gully. As I walk back
past the cliff top, it returns and circles me watchfully.
Toward sunset, vultures perch on a dead tree across the gully and
spread their wings to catch the last light slanting through the haze. A
mourning dove calls. The wind rises and it gets chilly. At night I hear a
bird scream, and, later on, gunfire.
• • •

MAY 1: I have bad dreams and wake up early. The fog is up to the

cliff top, heavy and cold. I glimpse a falcon coursing along a ridgetop,
looking for unwary meadowlarks. To get warm, I walk farther down
the gully than previously. The woods are denser down there. A gray
squirrel climbs slowly along an oak bough, pausing to scratch or nibble
a young leaf. A red-tailed hawk or Steller’s jay screams farther downhill.
The grass is full of fairy lanterns, golden lily relatives named for their
resemblance to Japanese paper lights.
The fog burns off in late morning. The ground squirrels emerge from
their burrows, followed a little later by a toad. As it suns at the burrow
entrance, the toad’s orange markings look paler than they seemed at night
116

s u n o l f a l c o n wa t c h

in my flashlight beam. In the afternoon, one of the falcons brings a catch
to the nest, a blackbird. The wind rises again, stronger than yesterday,
and tosses the grass around the rocks.
When I go for water at sunset, I encounter a cattle herd near a burned
ranch house, attended by starlings, blackbirds, and magpies. The cows
regard me solemnly, except for two yearlings that stop butting each other
and rush toward me, perhaps looking for something new to butt. I tell
them to leave me alone, and they withdraw, but they soon turn back for
another try, along with a cow and calf that are caught up in the excitement. I’m past the herd, however, and they lose interest. When I look
back, one of the yearlings is trying to start a butting contest with the calf.
It’s dark by the time I fill my canteens. The canyon beyond the barn
looks spooky—it’s full of pallid, wraith-like sycamores. The old windmill
still creaks and splashes, although the ranch is abandoned—pumping
water for animals and for the nettles and yellow monkey flowers clustered around its outflow. On the way back, a pair of green eyes streaks
across the road in my flashlight beam, probably a coyote, since it runs
level instead of bounding like a bobcat.
• • •

MAY 2: I’ve tried to resist an urge to see what is visible from the cliff

bottom, but curiosity gets the best of me. I walk north along the ridge to
a grassy hillside and descend to a buckeye thicket about a hundred feet
below the foot of the cliff. Undeceived, a falcon watches me from the
cliff crevice that probably contains its nest. A ground squirrel runs along
the cliff face just above the crevice, but the falcon ignores it. When I
enter the thicket, the falcon leaves its perch and dives down the canyon,
a straight, steep dive that takes it out of sight.
I train my binoculars on the cliff. There are swallow nests on it—mud
balls in rocky angles. About halfway down the cliff is a long, low fissure
into which, it seems, someone has placed three upright rocks. I look
more closely and see that they aren’t rocks. A great horned owl and two
owlets gaze down at me. The owl was probably what startled me on
the cliff top my first night. The owlets look like gray velvet bolsters on
which tiny white faces have been painted. Somehow I know they see me,
despite my concealment in the thicket, although I can’t see them without
my binoculars. Their postures seem to register my every movement.
117

mountains and marshes

The vultures are sunning at the edge of their nest fissure, a more palatial one than the owls’, which look like peas in a pod by comparison. Feral
Eurasian rock doves flutter around their own nests in the cliffs, seeming
much wilder than they do in town. None have the white plumage patches
that mark their urban relatives—the raptors must see to that.
I climb back up the hillside through tall grass thick with California
poppies, a perfect place for bees. Their buzzing is pervasive. It’s not
an entirely perfect place, however. About one poppy in ten conceals a
yellow crab spider, its claws poised to grab unwary bees. Dry bee carcasses lie under the poppy stamens, the black-and-yellow stripes on their
abdomens still bright.
When I reach the ridgetop, I meet a western whiptail lizard, a species
that mainly inhabits desert, so it is a surprise among all the greenery. It is
so intent on sunbathing that it lets me touch its back before it disappears
in the lush grass.
It’s windy again in the afternoon. A golden eagle (an immature one,
its wings and tail marked with white) flies up the valley. Cattle start
to bawl, which attracts vultures. Ten of them start circling the herd,
first skimming close over it, then landing on rocks in a ring around it.
They jockey for position, dominant birds lunging at timid ones. But the
cows are unhurt, and the vultures depart. Meanwhile, a kestrel (a small
falcon relative) has been loitering around the canyon, which eventually
provokes a falcon to leave the nest and stoop at it. The kestrel flees, the
falcon in pursuit.
I go for water late, after sundown. In the barn, a dead flicker hangs
from the loft door, its foot caught in a crack. It looks so gruesome that I
try to knock it down with rocks, but it is too dark to see.
As I’m getting into my sleeping bag, a toad hops into the tent. I
wouldn’t mind the company but I’m afraid of crushing it in my sleep, so
I evict it. The indignity causes it to urinate on my hand, and I wonder
where it gets the water on this dry cliff top. It’s very cold tonight. The
toad may have been attracted by the Coleman lantern’s warmth.
• • •

MAY 3: This is my last day. I haven’t encountered any nest robbers, but

they usually come on weekends. The guards I replaced turned away two
teenagers with ropes and gauntlets who wanted to “just look” at the nest.
118

s u n o l f a l c o n wa t c h

In the early morning I see deer across the gully, perhaps the herd I
saw on the second day. They see me and imperceptibly work their way
downhill out of sight. When the sun hits the treetops, they’re gone. I
find fresh coyote tracks in the mud around the stock pond when I walk
down the gully.
Around noon, I hear someone on a hilltop to the east shouting: “I
am God! I am God!” Otherwise, it’s an uneventful day. The falcons fly
back and forth to the nest and chase the vultures; the sun shines; the
wind blows.
My skin has darkened, but I still feel as though I’m being broiled alive
if I stay out of the shade very long. This is not really a place for human
beings. At five, the truck brings my replacement and takes me away.
—Berkeley Monthly, April 1979

119

puddles

Coyote Hills Regional Park is a good place for one of the Bay Area’s less
appreciated features—rainy-season puddles. On a post-storm visit last
winter, I walked through or around grassy sheets of water that covered
most of the trail as I headed toward some Ohlone Indian mounds. The
soggy landscape seemed empty at first, except for a black-shouldered
kite on a fence post, but my passage scared a surprising number of birds
from a willow-bordered slough—an American egret, a cinnamon teal
flock, a black-crowned night heron, a mallard pair. Attracted by the
commotion, a marsh harrier skimmed over, scaring out some coots and
a pied-billed grebe.
Near the mounds, the trail became a temporary stream instead of a
chain of puddles, so I stopped, enjoying the sunlight and looking into
the puddles. There was a lot to see. What seemed at first glance to be
just drowned mud and grass teemed with rapidly revolving greenish
specks—untold numbers of small crustaceans—copepods, ostracods,
and amphipods that spend the dry season as eggs in the soil, then hatch
with the rains so they can mate and lay eggs to await the next rains.
Here and there larger red specks pursued or clutched the green ones.
These were mites, tiny spider relatives.
Less numerous than the specks, fortunately, were mosquito and gnat
larvae, also called wrigglers because they move through the water by
undulating their cylindrical bodies. Many other creatures—probably
water beetles and bugs—swam or hid so energetically that I couldn’t
identify them. Every puddle I looked into had its population of revolving
crustaceans, predacious mites, undulating fly larvae, and hyperactive
121

mountains and marshes

beetle-bugs. It seemed primordial. The entire terrestrial planet must have
been like it when life first spread out of the oceans: land’s first inhabitants
probably were tiny dwellers of puddles. I don’t suppose the ones that
stayed in them have changed much since. For an ostracod, a crustacean
that lives in a translucent bivalved shell, the Paleozoic era has never ended.
Of course, other life has moved on, as proclaimed by cock pheasants
that flew metallically squawking over my head every few minutes. A
squeaky bubbling sound with angry overtones came from a patch of
cattails, a racket so noisy that I was surprised when the caller finally
hopped into sight. I’d thought it might be a rail, a good-sized wading
bird, but it was a long-billed marsh wren, a small brown songbird that
also lives only in marshes and so isn’t heard much in the well-drained
Bay Area. The wren flew into another patch of cattails, startling out a
yellowthroat, a bright yellow warbler with a black mask.
I gave up on the inundated mounds and walked south across more
semiflooded land that had been in crops before the park. An egret stood
meditatively in the grass watching for voles, killdeer flocks called mournfully, and western chorus frogs began to croak in ditches and large puddles as the sun headed west. I almost stepped on a hen pheasant in a
patch of burdock and sow thistle. The next field contained half a dozen
ground squirrels, two jackrabbits, and shorebirds—sandpipers, willets,
and avocets. The reddening sunlight made the black-and-white avocets
look very showy against the green new grass and yellow mustard flowers.
The frog song rose to a syncopated din after sunset. Gray shapes like
giant owls flew out of the dusk and landed in the fields—night herons
from the willow thickets. Egrets and blue herons joined them, all hunting
frogs and mice, all drifting aside like melancholy ghosts as I passed.
It was quite a spectacle, in an understated way, and I had it to myself.
There were many visitors in the park, escaping after a stormy week indoors, but they stayed on the hills or on a boardwalk that ran through a
permanent marsh west of the Ohlone mounds. The wet fields weren’t an
attraction, which seemed paradoxical given modern attitudes to natural
areas. We value rarity, and little is rarer in the Bay Area than a bit of flat
land that doesn’t have buildings, agribusiness, or at least a duck marsh
on it. But just flat land by itself doesn’t have much appeal.
It wasn’t always like that. Seventeenth- and eighteenth-century landscape paintings celebrate flatlands, although there’s usually some pretext
of farming or other useful practices going on there—cows, woodcutters.
122

puddles

The artists clearly have a strong feeling for the level meeting of earth
and sky, however—clouds, water, bird flocks. But twentieth-century aesthetics seem to have erased this realm of landscape appreciation, at least
in California.
I learned to love flatlands while working at a regional park agency
in central Ohio, where they are nearly the only lands to love. Walking
through the woods one warm March day, I idly peered into clear rivulets of snowmelt and began to see surprising things. Twigs and clots of
sand crawled across the bottom. They were caddis fly larvae, insects that
cement tubes of detritus with a sticky secretion and live in them. Grayish
white specks that swam about kept changing shape unexpectedly—thin
to fat and back to thin again. I scooped some up and saw that they were
planarians, the droll, arrow-shaped flatworms featured in every biology
textbook. Wild planarians! Soon I found another textbook mainstay, a
hydra, a jellyfish relative that plants itself on sunken twigs like a tiny
tree and snares passing crustaceans in its tentacles.
The snowmelt rivulets were like tide pools: the more I looked, the
more I saw. The tiny crustacean and spider mite populations seemed
infinite, and there were other things—horsehair worms like coils of
copper wire, inch-long fairly shrimps colored iridescent blue and gold.
Every imaginable kind of aquatic insect lived in the rivulets—backswimmers, water boatmen, whirligig beetles, water beetles, giant water bugs.
In grassy spots, grasshopper-sized eastern chorus frogs inflated orange
throat sacs to make calls like thumbnails drawn across the tines of large
metal combs. My ears rang for hours after listening to them.
And it wasn’t even a real swamp. By late April it had dried up
and become an ordinary beech and oak wood. The real central Ohio
swamps were even more formidable. Wood frogs, green frogs, spring
peepers, green tree frogs, and eastern toads added their voices to the
chorus frogs; black-and-yellow-spotted salamanders and blue-mottled
Jefferson salamanders crept over the bottom to deposit gelatinous egg
masses; six-inch mud turtles sunned on logs, under which, gargoyle-like,
lurked two-foot snapping turtles.
The Coyote Hills flatlands didn’t measure up to that, although
they might have come closer in the past. California flatlands feature
perennial vernal pools, where fairy shrimp, newts, and tiger salamanders mingle each winter and spring with chorus frogs, red-legged frogs,
and western pond turtles. Giant red copepods that inhabit such pools
123

mountains and marshes

gather on salamander egg clusters like rose-sized underwater blossoms.
The real wildflowers that ring California vernal pools outshine Midwest swamps: masses of blue and gold that change as the pools shrink
through the spring. Few remain in the Bay Area, though. I wondered if,
left to itself long enough, the soggy expanse I walked through that day
would grow vernal pools again within historical time, but since none
remained in the vicinity as far as I knew, it seemed unlikely.
I phoned the East Bay Regional Park District to ask about the Coyote
Hills flatlands’ past and future, but I didn’t learn much except that the
Alameda County Flood Control Board had jurisdiction over the area
and that the permanent marsh would be enlarged as part of a flood control plan. I asked if native vernal pools could be reestablished there, but
the planner I talked to didn’t seem interested. He said the field where I
watched night herons at dusk would be a parking lot and picnic area.
—Berkeley Monthly, January 1980

124

a walk on the ridge lands

It is a steady climb as we walk southward along the ridge. The top narrows as we ascend, and ghost pines and canyon live oaks crowd around
the dirt road. Deer hooves and coyote pads mark the soil, still soft from
later winter rain. Flickers, jays, and acorn woodpeckers call. The day is
overcast, and the ridgetop is in the clouds—we see things fitfully as mist
streams past. Sometimes it obscures everything except the road: sometimes it reveals distant ridges. We walk past snow patches from a storm
earlier in the month.
Suddenly the clouds open on a coyote on a knoll. It is the same gray
as the misty grass, and we see it only because it moves. It is small and
short-legged. As it disappears, two taller, rangier coyotes materialize and
hurry after it: this is mating season. When they’re gone, it is as if they
had never been.
We turn eastward and descend the ridge. The slope is dark with bay,
live oak, and madrone; loud with running water. It drops steeply to
the canyon bottom, where the creek runs high and brown with silt. A
few small sycamores grow among tumbled boulders of a rich blue, like
lapis lazuli, which contrasts vividly with the cream-and-olive sycamore
bark. Upstream, a huge boulder covered with moss and maidenhair fern
looms like a ruined castle.
Raccoons have tracked the creek’s border. We cross and start up the
other slope. It is gentler, rising in a series of terraces covered with valley
oak savanna. Some of the oaks are giants, and an isolated madrone
could win a prize for the grace and symmetry of its crown. A yellow
haze of buttercups sets off the deep green of the grass. The remote place
125

mountains and marshes

strangely seems more a tended arboretum than a shaggy wilderness, as
though esoteric influences keep it weeded and mowed.
We become aware of one less esoteric influence when a red-tailed
hawk lands in an oak and eyes a rock outcropping veined with paths
connecting burrow entrances. This colony of California ground squirrels must contribute to the tended aspect. The squirrels aren’t out today:
they don’t like wet weather. But the hawk keeps watch as we move on.
Higher up, the savanna terraces run into winding ravines hung with
bay and live oak. We pass one of the abandoned homesteads that dot
the ridge lands. There are bed frames, chairs, a stove, a sink. There is
an enameled water dipper like cowboys drink from in Westerns. But
there are no walls, the homestead having burned down, leaving the furnishings open to the sky but, strangely, not vandalized because nobody
comes here.
Coulter pines stand at the ravine heads, where frost stays on the grass
most of the day. Straighter and bushier than the ghost pines, they give
the ridgetop an alpine aspect. Vivacious little streams meander through
miniature valleys. As we walk up one, a bobcat bounds away. It is small
and slender, with black-banded legs and back. Its white tail patch shows
for a moment after the rest of it fades into the pine shadows.
We reach the ridgetop, a narrow plateau covered with open stands
of small blue-and-black oak trees growing on gravelly clay worked to
a spongy texture by pocket gophers. A lawn of perennial grasses mixed
with lupines, poppies, buttercups, larkspurs, and many other wildflowers grows on it, although few are in bloom yet. The oak buds are
just beginning to swell and show color. On the ground, fallen black oak
leaves—large, yellow, and spiny-lobed—contrast handsomely with pale
purple blue oak leaves. If the valley oak savanna is like an arboretum,
this is like an orchard.
The first sunshine appears after a day and night of rain. A gulf opens
in the mist, and the ridge suddenly overlooks a hundred square miles
that show no human presence except a power line and some dirt roads,
just peaks, ridges, and canyons—some densely wooded, some grassy,
some with olive green dustings of chaparral over red soil.
We head back north, returning in the direction from which we
started two nights before. After a few miles, signs of human influence
begin to impinge on the strange sense of natural cultivation. There are
fewer trees, more annual grasses like wild oats, and the trees show a
126

a wa l k o n t h e r i d g e l a n d s

browse line at three feet from the ground. Soon we see cattle, although
these are not the usual polled steers. They are rangy, motley beasts
with functional-looking horns. A magpie perches on one’s back, while
starlings walk among their hooves. They might be in Africa. They don’t
panic and lumber away: they stand and stare. We give them a wide
berth.
We see another bobcat ambling along a lateral ridge a half mile away
and watch it for fifteen minutes. It approaches a big oak as though
to climb it and then changes its mind. It stands a moment watching
something and then lies down and starts to clean itself house cat–style,
twitching its tail with pleasure at the emerging sun’s warmth. It is much
bigger than the bobcat in the pines, and its body is not banded but plain
gray, with a golden tinge around the head. It jumps up and stalks something for a moment, then relaxes and sits down, and finally trots of out
sight down a gully.
—Berkeley Monthly, 1980

127

the mountains of running away
the south diablo range
Human dramas often characterize wild places. Everest would be different if famous climbers hadn’t died on it. Less operatic dramas characterize less famous places, like the tangle of ridge lands around Mount
Hamilton east of San Jose. An encounter that occurred there three
months before the U.S. Declaration of Independence was so fleeting that
it barely entered history. But it still resonates.
Fray Pedro Font, a Franciscan missionary from Mexico, was the first
European to describe the ridge lands, having crossed them with explorer Juan Bautista de Anza’s expedition in April 1776. After choosing
the site for San Francisco, the expedition tried to reach the gleaming
Sierra Nevada via Livermore Valley but found their way blocked by
vast marshes in the San Joaquin Valley. Anxious to return to relatively
civilized Monterey, Font urged de Anza to take a shortcut across some
unknown mountains they saw to the south. De Anza obligingly led them
into the range, which they expected to cross in a day. When they camped
that night in an arid canyon just a few miles south, Font was having
second thoughts.
“In all the journey today we did not see a single Indian,” he wrote,
“finding only human tracks stamped in the dry mud. It seemed to me
that the country is so bad that it could not easily be inhabited by human
beings.”
Although central California had one of North America’s densest
native populations, the rugged mountains, now called the Diablo Range
after their northernmost extension, Mount Diablo, probably stood empty

129

mountains and marshes

for most of the year. Bay Area Ohlones and San Joaquin Valley Yokuts
mainly passed through seasonally to hunt or to gather acorns, bulbs, and
pine nuts.
The Spaniards spent the next day laboriously climbing in and out of
canyons, trying to go southwest, but “forced every which way” by the
terrain. “All this country which we crossed this day and next is very
broken, and the haunt of many bears,” Font observed nervously. Finally,
they came to some flat land, a “very long valley,” where they encountered—briefly—the Diablos’ apparently sole human inhabitant. “In the
course of the valley,” Font wrote, “we saw some ruinous and abandoned
little huts, but the only Indian seen was at a distance and running, for as
soon as he saw us he fled into the brush of the Sierra like a deer.”
The encounter probably occurred in what is now San Antonio Valley,
a stretch of oak savanna east of Mount Hamilton. It is unclear why
the man was running, whether simply in startled terror at the sudden
advent of hairy-faced strangers or from a rumor that they might grab
him and herd him into a mission. He had much to fear: the Franciscans
who founded nearby Mission Santa Clara meant well, but disease and
depression killed most of the people they planned to convert into Christian peasants.
All that was in the future, however. The Spaniards finally straggled
back into the known Gilroy Valley two days later, and their fumbling
canyon-crawl was such an embarrassment to the highly competent and
accomplished de Anza—who earlier had trekked confidently across
California’s entire desert, from the Colorado River to the coast—that
he called the Diablos the Sierra del Chasco, the “Mountains of the
Prank.”
The “ruinous and abandoned” Ohlone or Yokuts huts are long gone
today, of course, and a paved road runs down San Antonio Valley. But
it’s still easy to visualize that running man, a speck of frantic liberty in
a world that Font’s magisterial prose was already starting to subdue.
Despite the road, the valley is little more inhabited now, and the Diablos
remain good mountains to run away into, as I found when I began running away into them in the early 1970s. The very qualities that had repelled Font attracted me—the emptiness and the way the hills led “every
which way,” twisting around and opening into surprise canyons and
sudden vistas. Something about the sky hinted at vast expanses: a feeling
of convexity, of opening out.
130

t h e m o u n t a i n s o f r u n n i n g awa y

I found an alluring amalgam of familiarity and exoticism. The oaks,
pines, maples, sycamores, and buckeyes had smells and seasonal changes
like those of eastern woodlands I grew up with, but the way they grew—
scattered in savannas, massed in canyons, gnarled and isolated on ridgetops—had a novel Mediterranean clarity. The savannas seemed African,
with their sweeps of grasses and bold wildlife— deer, wild boar, coyotes,
eagles, and bobcats. The canyons’ aromatic evergreens—bay laurels and
madrones—had a subtropical lushness, while the ridgetops, dotted with
shaggy Coulter pines and sprinkled with snowfalls, were like glimpses
of an ice age.
Novelty seemed inexhaustible in the roughly half million acres—from
Livermore to Pacheco Pass—around the Bay Area’s highest peaks—
4,209-foot Mount Hamilton, 4,230-foot Mount Isabel, and 4,372-foot
Mount Copernicus. And there was good scientific reason for my impression. At the interface of hot Central Valley, humid coast, and cool
highlands, the Diablos contain outstanding biodiversity, even for diverse
California. I could walk an hour on a dry plateau haunted by whiptail lizards and tarantulas, then suddenly descend into a moist basin
with ponds full of frogs, newts, and turtles—it was like stepping from
Arizona to Oregon. And that was just the day shift. Nocturnal oddities I might never see lurked in the rocks and ridges—ringtails, spotted
skunks, badgers. What I did see after sunset could be startling. Longeared pallid bats scuttled over the ground hunting crickets and sometimes flew up from under my feet. Once I came on a large toad with a
scorpion clamped in its jaws, the stinger curled around one eye.

prehistory
Exploring the Diablos was like entering a remnant of the nine-millionyear-old world that fossils have revealed at various East Bay sites, like
Blackhawk Ranch. That world, the Miocene epoch, was even more a
mixture of the familiar and strange than today’s. The coast was a rolling
plain with active volcanoes to the east. Rhinos, mastodons, hyena-like
dogs, and three-toed horses inhabited it, but so did ground squirrels,
rabbits, gray foxes, deer, and pronghorns. Oaks and pines dotted savannas; sycamores and cottonwoods lined streams. California is a very
old place.
131

mountains and marshes

We don’t understand everything about how that coastal plain evolved
into today’s more rugged landscape, but we have a general idea. Current
geological theory suggests that the plain began turning into Font’s “bad
country” about three million years ago, as two vast tectonic plates that
underlie the Pacific Ocean and western North America began to move
sideways against each other at an increased rate. The stress fractured
coastal bedrock into many active faults, turning the plain into a jumble
of ridges and depressions, thrusting up the ridges at a rate of .07 inch
a year. Rising peaks created rain shadows, transforming the rolling
plain into a mosaic of moist and dry habitats—woodlands on north- and
west-facing slopes; chaparral, savanna, and grassland on south- and eastfacing ones. Streams lined with gallery forest carved mazes of canyons.
About 1.8 million years ago, the series of climatic fluctuations called
the Pleistocene ice age started adding another layer of diversity. Although
not high enough for glaciers, Hamilton and other peaks supported a
conifer forest like that of the Sierra Nevada today. Relict ponderosa
pines still occupy a few high ridges around them. Some wildlife became
even stranger than before as lowered sea level allowed eighteen-foot-tall
ground sloths and Volkswagen-sized glyptodonts to migrate from South
America. Other wildlife became more like today’s as elk and grizzlies
arrived from Eurasia.
Then, about fifteen thousand years ago, the modern world emerged
as the most recent glaciation ended and most large animals vanished. By
then the Diablos probably looked very like what Font saw when he called
them “very tangled and full of brush, pines, live oaks, oaks, spruce, and
other trees.”

hard climbs a nd dry wells
The Diablo Range hadn’t changed much a century after Font, when
the new California State Geological Survey explored it. “Back of the
treeless hills that lie along the San Joaquin plain,” wrote survey botanist William H. Brewer in his aptly titled memoir, Up and Down California, “there rises a labyrinth of ridges, furrowed and separated by
deep canyons. . . . It is almost terra incognita. No map represents it,
no explorers touch it; a few hunters know something of it, and all

132

t h e m o u n t a i n s o f r u n n i n g awa y

unite in giving it a hard name.” Exploring “picturesque but desolate”
canyons south from today’s Corral Hollow, Brewer and his men encountered pronghorn herds, cottonwood groves full of “squawking
and screaming” blue herons, and ridgetops that had been completely
“dug over by bears for roots.”
When Brewer and his crew climbed Mount Hamilton in June 1861,
it was the first recorded ascent. Although farms already “enclosed”
the Santa Clara Valley below, the mountain remained so trackless that
the geologists underestimated the distance to the summit by six miles.
“We had attained an altitude of nearly three thousand feet, when we
came upon another deep and steep canyon, cutting us off from the
peak,” Brewer wrote. “Here we left our mules and proceeded on foot
about three miles and reached the peak about 4 p.m.” The surveyors
noted, a bit peevishly, that Laurentine Hamilton, a local Presbyterian
minister who accompanied them, reached the summit first because he
wasn’t carrying instruments. They named the peak after first-up Reverend Hamilton, but only after the survey’s leader, Josiah Whitney, had
declined the honor.
Civilization did change the Diablos in the next century. Homesteaders moved in, extirpating elk, grizzlies, and pronghorns; building
roads, cabins, and many miles of fences. George Thomas Jr., a Morgan
Hill attorney whose family has ranched locally since 1877, told me
that seven or eight homesteads, as well as a school with thirty-five
students, once occupied the two thousand acres his family now owns.
There was so much social activity that people came from San Jose to
attend dances. Little trace of that time remains. Water was too scarce
for small family farms, and most homesteaders sold out and left in the
1920s and ’30s.
Civilization’s best-known mark on the Diablo Range is idiosyncratic. In the 1870s, an aging San Francisco bachelor named James
Lick felt an urge to commemorate his life, and when friends suggested
he endow an astronomical observatory, he liked the idea. A former
piano maker who prospered in gold rush real estate, Lick spent much
of his fortune to have a thirty-six-inch refracting telescope installed in
a hardwood-paneled dome on 160 acres atop Mount Hamilton. He
died in 1876, before he could see the result of his largesse, but when
his friends donated the observatory to the University of California

133

mountains and marshes

in 1888, he was present nonetheless. They’d installed him in a tomb
under the telescope, where he remains.

but terflies a nd monster homes
It might almost have been 1861 when I started running away into the
Diablos in the early 1970s, because like Brewer and his crew I could
hike for days and not see anybody. A few abandoned homesteads stood
undisturbed, their domestic contents intact. The solitude was unusual
even then, when much land along I-80 between Oakland and San Jose
was still open fields inhabited by pheasants and burrowing owls.
Suburban growth has since become more obtrusive. Corporations
and speculators acquired most of the former homesteads, and although
they managed them as ranches or hunting clubs, it was with an idea
to future expansion. In the 1970s, the development firm Kaiser-Aetna
planned a large subdivision on the Dowdy Ranch north of Highway
152, the lonesome road that crosses the Diablos at Pacheco Pass. Investors at the Lakeview Meadows Ranch near Anderson Reservoir east
of U.S. 101 hoped to build a hundred-thousand-resident “new town”
to be planned by Castle and Cooke, developers of Sea Ranch on the
Sonoma coast.
Running away had its supporters too, however. In 1972 Josephine
Grant willed her father’s 9,250-acre ranch west of Mount Hamilton
to charities, which then sold it to Santa Clara County as the Joseph D.
Grant Regional Park. In 1953 Sada S. Coe gave Santa Clara County a
12,500-acre ranch that her father and uncle had worked at Pine Ridge,
south of Mount Hamilton, and in 1958 that became the nucleus of
Henry W. Coe State Park. Henry Coe has since grown to more than
eighty-one thousand acres, including a twenty-two-thousand-acre Wilderness Area, and is now northern California’s largest state park. In
1974 I could walk around most of the park in a day. In April 2000, a
day hike didn’t get me halfway across.
A lesson of the past two decades, unfortunately, has been that big subdivisions can impact even big parks. Urban growth seemed inexorable in
the late-twentieth-century boom years, and in 2000 I got a strong taste of
this south of San Jose, where a Stanford biologist named Stewart Weiss

134

t h e m o u n t a i n s o f r u n n i n g awa y

was studying an endangered butterfly, the bay checkerspot. The species
mainly survives on a serpentine ridge that rises out of the Santa Clara
Valley just east of U.S. 101, across from the Riverside Golf Course. Soils
weathered from calcium-poor serpentine bedrock are infertile to invasive
exotic weeds, so native plants persist in unusual numbers. The bay checkerspot depends on the natives for food, and Weiss’s study area may be the
only place with enough of them to permanently support a viable butterfly
population.
I’d driven past the ridge many times on U.S. 101, and it had seemed
just another expanse of grazing land. When Weiss showed me around
in April, it was one of the most spectacular native wildflower displays
I’ve seen, acres of yellow goldfields, tidy tips, and cream cups interspersed with pink wild onion, owl clover, and linanthus. Those were just
the common species. Weiss said he’d counted more than two hundred
native ones in all, some of which grow nowhere else. Even big thistles
in streambeds—which I’d thought were just weedy milk thistles—were
rare natives.
It was an extraordinarily vibrant place—the flowers thronged with
butterflies and bees, the small creeks full of tadpoles—but a beleaguered
one. Weiss pointed out a patchwork of pending subdivisions and industrial parks in the valley below. Nearer, to the north, the “monster
homes” of the new Silver Creek subdivision climbed the hillsides. Even
the spring air flowing from the advancing suburbs threatened the wildflowers. “This place is a funnel for smog,” Weiss said. His studies had
shown that polluted air could deposit nitrogen oxide on the ridge’s soil
in large amounts, as much as ten pounds per acre every year. Nitrogen
is a nutrient, so this fallout can significantly increase serpentine soil’s
fertility, allowing exotic grasses to crowd out natives.
The serpentine ridge was a first line of defense for the Diablos, and
Weiss was trying to get it preserved. This would make sense even without
threatened flora and fauna, because landslide-prone serpentine is bad
for building. A conservation trust agreement with a landfill company
on the ridge’s Kirby Canyon area had provided protection for the past
decade. It wasn’t permanent, however, and protecting any land beside
a major freeway is tricky. The ridge was outside San Jose’s “greenline”
urban growth boundary, so city services weren’t supposed to go there,
but subdividers had mounted legal and political challenges. “There’s a

135

mountains and marshes

ridiculously small amount of habitat here with long-term protection,”
Weiss concluded.
Yet sprawl may have met something like its match in the Diablos.
The Nature Conservancy is one of the more powerful conservation organizations, with more than a million members and well-tuned financial
machinery for snatching land from subdividing jaws. In 1997, when the
organization applied a new “biological scoping” process to the central
California coast region, the Diablo Range came up as a “portfolio site,”
large enough to “define and contain” the region’s diversity. So the Conservancy initiated a Mount Hamilton Project, with the goal of protecting
four hundred thousand acres within seven years. A map of its acquisition priorities resembled a pair of angelic wings outspread to the east
and west of Henry Coe, a configuration that would block subdivisions
from cozying up to the park boundaries. Attorney George Thomas Jr.,
who wanted to maintain his family’s century-old ranch as such, called
the project a “dream come true.”
Project director Mike Sweeney, a former aide to Interior Secretary
Bruce Babbitt, talked about the dream on a May 2000 visit to O’Connell Ranch, a new Conservancy acquisition north of Anderson Reservoir. “The 1990s were among the longest sustained urban expansions
in our history,” he said. “Small preserves weren’t protecting biodiversity
enough, so in the last five years we’ve been launching big ones. When
the project started, this was an area where the subdivision wave hadn’t
crested yet. A relatively small number of large ranches existed, and land
prices weren’t out of sight. We can move faster than government agencies to acquire land in a market like that.” He pointed at a ridge to the
southeast, where the Conservancy had acquired the Lakeview Meadows
Ranch from developers in 1999. “Lakeview Meadows is an example,”
he said. “They were trying to put monster homes in view of Henry Coe
headquarters, but it was a little early for that, and they saw a chance to
cash out with us quickly.”
The Mount Hamilton Project planned to place some of its acquisitions in public ownership through sale to Santa Clara County and the
California Department of Parks. Even the Conservancy couldn’t afford
to preserve the whole range, however, so it planned to sell other properties back into private hands, retaining development rights and working
with ranchers to improve range management and protect riparian areas.

136

t h e m o u n t a i n s o f r u n n i n g awa y

“The way we design a big project like this is not to say you can’t develop
here,” Sweeney said. “We try to control development so it won’t impair
the ecosystem’s ability to function. The main problems we’re trying to
control in the Mount Hamilton area are residential sprawl, overgrazing,
and exotic species invasion.”
Walking around the O’Connell Ranch, we saw examples of all three
problems. Leapfrog subdivisions sprawled around Anderson Reservoir
to the southeast, and exotic weeds from two centuries of heavy grazing
covered the hillsides. It was still a beautiful place, dotted with oaks, bays,
and buckeyes and teeming with songbirds and butterflies. “A problem
with these inland areas has been that they’re relatively unknown, so you
don’t get as much public support to save things as you do on the coast,”
Sweeney said. “What we’re doing with an acquisition like this is trying
to improve opportunities for people to get out and see what’s here while
preserving habitat for species of special concern, like tiger salamanders,
Pacific pond turtles, and red-legged frogs.
The project moved fast. In late 2000, the state bought the 4,413-acre
Stevenson Ranch, which the Conservancy had acquired in July. Once
zoned for at least forty “executive mansions,” the ranch was added to
Henry Coe State Park. Two huge properties east of the park (Simon
Newman and Romero), acquired by the Conservancy in 1998, were
resold to ranchers minus the development rights, which were transferred to public agencies. “There are beautiful old sycamores out there,”
Sweeney said of the big ranches, “but no young ones. They kept getting cropped, along with all kinds of other species. You can’t blame the
ranchers: fences are expensive, and the cattle need water. Our role is to
allow them to continue without devastating the area. And just in the last
few years, we’re starting to see rapid recovery in places that have been
eaten back for a century.”
If the Mount Hamilton Project meets its goals, it will help keep the
Diablos like they were when Font and Brewer explored them. This
should help protect extant biodiversity, like the outstanding mountain
lion and golden eagle populations, and also allow for reintroduction
of some extirpated species. The Department of Fish and Game has reintroduced tule elk and pronghorns, although hikers seldom see them
because they live mostly in privately owned valleys. California condors
from the population reintroduced at the Pinnacles probably will venture

137

mountains and marshes

farther north. Grizzly bears won’t be back anytime soon, although wild
boars, which have replaced them in their omnivorous, rooting ecological
niche, are an impressive presence. I once watched a very large one that
I had surprised in pond wallow run up a nearly vertical slope without
the least sign of effort. Black bears are also expanding their range into
former grizzly country.
Like the grizzly, one thing that is unlikely to return to the Diablos
soon is the solitude that prevailed in Font and Brewer’s times, or even
in the 1970s. I passed dozens of hikers on my April 2000 visit to Henry
Coe, and that was on a weekday. When park ranger Doug Meyers took
me around the backcountry in May, he expressed amazement at how
much the park had changed in the time he’d worked there. “When I first
came, in 1978, there might have been ten trail signs in the park,” he said.
“Now there are probably about two thousand signs and over two hundred miles of trail. I don’t even think we’ve begun to see the increased
visitation that’s going to result from the changes that have taken place
in the Bay Area in the past five years. It’ll be in the coming years that we
get the full impact.”
Yet the Diablos’ sense of inexhaustible remoteness and diversity remains. It took us all morning to traverse the park from south to north
in Meyers’s four-wheel-drive patrol vehicle. The temperature that day
reached 102 degrees. Besides us, a coyote and a tom turkey were the only
sizable vertebrates that had ventured out in it. The heat felt like a wall
by noon, when we reached the park’s northeastern boundary, where a
cliff called the Rooster Comb looms above Orestimba Creek, a tributary
of the San Joaquin. The creek had already sunk underground except for
a few puddles, but they teemed with insect and amphibian larvae, all
rushing to complete their life cycles before summer’s real heat clamped
down. Little blue oaks and ghost pines dotted the hills in every direction.
It seemed about as wild a place as there can be in twenty-first-century
California.
The Diablos still have their secrets. When I was on Mount Hamilton’s
summit in April 2000, I idly wondered if they had built the observatory on some unique plant species. A few months later, I met a botanist
at UC–Berkeley’s Jepson Herbarium, Barbara Erter, who recently had
helped to name an endemic carrot family wildflower, Lomatium observatorium, found by an observant photographer on the summit in 1996.
A place where dozens of people have been walking every day for over
138

t h e m o u n t a i n s o f r u n n i n g awa y

a century had yielded a new species. And there probably are still places
in the Diablos—arroyos, chaparral thickets, cliff overhangs—where no
humans have ever walked at all.
—Bay Nature, April–June 2001

Author’s note: The future of Hamilton’s summit clouded in 2014 when the
university decided to cut funding for the Lick Observatory and move its astronomy
research to telescopes in Hawaii. After protests from students and faculty, the
university restored funding, but it’s unclear what will become of the observatory
and its ancient occupant. Given urbanization, the stars above Hamilton must
be much less visible than they were when Brewer climbed it, although declining
research finances were the main reason given for the move.

139

cultures and creatures

starlings

It is November in northern Europe seven thousand years ago. Heather
and birches grow on hills, willows and sphagnum moss in bogs: they
form a thin plant layer over the stones and clay left by a retreating ice
sheet. No songbirds call in the frosty birches as the sky reddens at dawn,
but a noise begins to come from the bogs. It is not the miscellany of
songbird territorial calls: there is something monolithic about it, and it
rises to a roar as thousands of blackish, short-tailed birds pour out of
the willows like a hail of darts.
The darts coalesce as they rise and form a sphere, then an oval. A
starling flock is coming out to fly up the valley, and little in nature
matches the amorphous elegance of it. Other birds display more color
or grace in flocking, but starlings are unexcelled in coordinated movement. Although individual starlings or groups leave or join the flock, it
remains a single entity, flickering as the birds bank or swerve in unison,
a living smudge against the skyline, sometimes dark, sometimes nearly
transparent, pulsating like a huge, weightless amoeba.
A herd of aurochs grazes on the plain above the valley, wild cattle the
size of small elephants. As the flock nears them, it circles, lights briefly
in a birch grove, then flattens into a kind of dense mist as the starlings alight on the herd. Some run among the aurochs’ hooves, picking
through manure for seeds or parasite larvae: some land on the broad
backs and comb the hair for sheltering insects. After feeding, most of the
flock disperses to rest or forage for wild fruit and seeds, but they stay
near the herd and come back to feed again when the sun is low.

143

mountains and marshes

At dusk, the hail of darts funnels back into the bog willows, and before
long not a bird is visible, although the noise continues awhile. When the
stars emerge, incredibly brilliant by today’s standards, the roost is silent.
Light snow falls during the night, and some of the birds move south
the next day. Starlings from farther north take their place, and it is not
until the solstice, when snow lies deep and aurochs and other ungulates
have retreated south into forests, that the roost is completely abandoned.
The flocks pass on to southern European marshes or across a widening
Mediterranean to the savannas of what is now the Sahara. Others converge on Middle Eastern marshes and grasslands, where some get their
first taste of orchards and vineyards.
Starlings belong to a large avian family, the Sturnidae, most of which
are showy birds of Africa and tropical Asia. The talking mynah is one;
starlings are mimics too. How Sturnus vulgaris, the common starling,
adapted to life in the north isn’t clear, but it did so very successfully,
although the species’s mass flocking depended, as in Africa, on large
ungulate herds living in fairly open areas. As forest covered warming
Europe in the postglacial period, starlings may have undergone a population slump. But help was on the way, as growing human populations
cut forest and ran large cattle herds on the resultant fields and pastures.
Starlings nest in tree holes, but buildings make acceptable substitutes.
Then things got even better for northern starlings. In an unprecedented burst of goodwill, nineteenth-century humans took the species
to the New World. Legend has it that the first North American ones
nested in the eaves of New York’s American Museum of Natural History
in 1891. An ornithologist and Shakespeare enthusiast named Scheifflin
is said to have introduced them in an attempt to bring all the birds
mentioned by the bard here. If so, he failed, since only starlings caught
on. (English sparrows and rock doves had arrived earlier.) But starlings
caught on in a big way. Although it was too late for the bison herds they
might have exploited a few years before, they found plenty of cattle
herds. They colonized the continent from Alaska to Mexico in less than
seventy years.
Starlings also developed an ability to thrive in industrial landscapes,
both urban and rural. Habitat destruction and pollution are no problem
to birds that can nest in factories and forage in landfills. Agribusiness,
with its giant monocultures, does not discourage starlings if a roost
exists within twenty miles. And starlings make their own contributions
144

starlings

to habitat destruction and pollution, preempting native birds’ nest holes,
contaminating livestock feed, and depositing guano a foot deep under
roosts. One roost in Virginia’s Dismal Swamp accommodated an estimated twenty million birds.
The dawn sky above College Avenue in Oakland is gray with fog,
but linnets, robins, and titmice have been singing for a half hour. A starling emerges from the eaves of a house, perches on the roof rain gutter,
and joins the chorus with a series of low whistles, not very musical but
enough to call her mate. As still-migrating cedar waxwings flock around
a holly bush, the starlings fly into an ornamental birch, where they pick
at catkins, moving around the trunk in spirals like woodpeckers, then
descend to the ground to look for insects.
Their yellow beaks show clearly against the dark earth as they probe
among bark chips. A month before, in February, the beaks were gray.
They turned yellow as the birds’ gonads swelled in response to the
lengthening days, releasing a color-changing hormone. Their plumage
is glossier than it was in the winter: the ocher specks that tipped the
feathers of their fall molt have worn off, leaving the showy iridescent
parts. Swelling gonads also caused emotional changes that led the birds
to leave the flock and settle in the eaves, although they’re not alone.
Another starling pair occupies another corner of the house. Starlings
tolerate high nesting density in favorable sites, which gives them an advantage in maintaining population and in increasing it when conditions
are good.
One of the starlings under the birch picks up a bit of straw, then
drops it absentmindedly. A car door slams, and the pair flies to a TV
aerial. From there they see the other pair bathing in the rain gutter, so
they join them with great splashing. Then they all dart off in different
directions. One flies back to the eave, hones her beak, and looks around
cautiously, then disappears under it. In a while, her mate flies up with
a twig, but the house door opens and he ducks into the gutter. Nesting
starlings are seldom seen during the human workday. This unassuming
family life is another source of population maintenance. They’d be more
vulnerable if they nested in noisy groups.
A few weeks later, the pair is nest building seriously. Starling nests are
untidy heaps of straw and twigs, on which they lay, in April, five to seven
green eggs. Nestlings hatch and fledge by June, although unmated males
sometimes sneak in and destroy nests. If all goes well, the parents then
145

mountains and marshes

raise another brood, which can mean there will be five or seven times as
many starlings in an area after the breeding season as before. The birds
then leave nesting areas, which can be in wilderness as well as cities, and
join flocks for their customary mass feedings and migrations. But life
gets harder for them then.
For a little while, the pale green glow of the cities to the west and the
yellow glare of the power plant and gypsum mill across the Sacramento
River obscure the November dawn. Then it begins to spread across the
sky, and hills appear on the horizon. Pheasants squawk metallically in
the harvested fields behind the river levees, and geese formations straggle
overhead like sooty cobwebs. As the sun rises, red and huge in the smog
of freeway exhaust and burning rice fields, an island grown with willow
thickets and tule marshes emits a wave of noise as thousands of redwinged blackbirds, Brewer’s blackbirds, and starlings emerge to fly
over the levees and light on fields or power lines. The blackbirds form
scattered, straggling flocks; the starlings larger, denser ones. The flocks
billow and swarm across the flats, then move toward the hills.
The sun is yellow and bright when they reach the feedlot, which
looks strange among the bare brown hills—acres of brightly painted
mixing and storage bins and pens full of steers. The blackbirds scatter to
feed on waste grain, but the starlings are more discriminating. Ignoring
unused pens, they concentrate on the feeding troughs and manure of
the full ones, eating the expensive fare that cattle being fattened are
given. That day, the ground of the pens is also sprinkled with bluedyed chicken feed pellets that have been treated with a compound
called Trichloro-p-toluidine-hydrochloride. Many starlings eat varying
quantities of these.
The flock fans out into the hills after feeding as usual, but then something unusual begins to happen. By late afternoon, starlings that have
eaten a lot of pellets crouch on the ground or fences with feathers fluffed
as though they’re cold, although the California sun is warm enough.
Their blood is running sluggishly as it fills with uric acid from disabled
kidneys. These birds have trouble breathing, then lose consciousness
and die without cries or convulsions that might disturb other birds. So
the flock feeds at the lot again before it returns to the river roost.
During the night, birds that have eaten small or moderate amounts
of the blue pellets also die. The next morning, after unaffected birds
have flown, several thousand dead starlings litter the marsh, along with
146

starlings

a few hundred blackbirds and two crows. Some corpses still cling to
their roosts, and a Cooper’s hawk glides in to grab one of these. Since
the dead starling has metabolized and excreted most of the slow-acting
poison, the hawk shows no noticeable ill effects from eating it. Within
two weeks, birds migrating from the north have replaced most of the
dead birds in the roost.
—Clear Creek, 1972

147

the fifth season

This August I moved back to the Bay Area after living in Ohio for several years. I’d grown used to the intense green of summers, and I looked
at the brown grass here with something of Midwest disapproval. At the
same time, I was glad to see the yellow hills. During the five years I’d
lived here, I’d grown to like the spiky desiccation of California’s dry
time. It gave bite to an environment that otherwise might have been
tediously benign.
The old complaint about California not having seasons is wrong. In
fact, it has more than the Midwest. The period from mid-July through
September is a fifth season, a second plant dormancy. Fall’s bright, crisp
days go from October to mid-November; winter’s storms and occasional
frosts to mid-February; spring’s manic flowering to mid-May; and summer’s lingering greenery to July, at least in wet years. The fifth season
after that should have a name, but I can’t think of one, and our culture
doesn’t want to acknowledge it anyway. Millions throng the Sierra to
romp in December snow, but few want to romp in blazing Bay Area
August’s dry grass, although that would be more appropriate to human
evolution. An African savanna hominid would be happier in a Bay Area
August than in a Sierra January.
For all its harshness, however, the fifth season is fragile. It quickly
shows the marks of abuse. Native perennial grasses and forbs are beautiful and well adapted to the dry season, but agribusiness and competition from introduced annual grasses have pushed them aside. A golden
August swath of bunchgrass and yellow or white tarweeds turns into a

149

mountains and marshes

dusty scar with overgrazing or trampling, impacts that harm reproduction of native oak woodland and savanna as well.
Partly because it is so easy to degrade, we treat the fifth season as
a lapse of taste—we cover it with evergreens and lawns. For every
native plant garden, there are thousands of exotic plant ones ranging
from banana and bougainvillea to birch and barberry. Freeway borders feature oleander, eucalyptus, pyracantha—even some out-of-place
redwoods struggling against ozone and sunburn—anything to avoid
showing a bare branch or a patch of dry grass. But the herbicide-bared
dirt and litter under the straggling greenery give the lie to it.
We should come to terms with the fifth season and give it a place
alongside the traditional four, but there are problems. Wildfire is the big
one. California plants and animals are adapted to periodic fires—California suburbs aren’t. It’s nice to have a house nestled in greenery until
what Raymond Chandler called “the red wind” from the deserts blows
for a few days. Then—as crisp leaves spiral in little tornadoes across
driveways—homeowners may wish for a yard of bare dirt, like Spanish
California’s adobes.
Wildfire is a reason why freeway borders aren’t kept in grass here as
they are in the Midwest. Grassed California highway borders mostly
would be brown and dead from June to November, highly flammable,
and smoke doesn’t harmonize with aggressive driving habits. Freeway
grass in Ohio is dead and brown from October to March, but there’s
little fire danger then, and in spring it quickly comes alive with grasses
and wildflowers that change through the summer and fall: in April
dandelions and clover; in May, daisies and birdsfoot trefoil; in June,
thistles, fleabane, and hawkweed; in July, milkweed and black-eyed
Susan; in August, sunflowers and ironweed; in September, asters and
goldenrod.
Wildfire aside, if the Department of Transportation lost its oleanders
and let the grasses and forbs grow, California’s roadsides could be a
lot less ugly. They mostly would be exotic weeds at first. But the Ohio
highway border plants are largely exotic weeds too, and many natives
grow mixed in. Horticulture crews freed from maintaining evergreens
might restore some native grasses and wildflowers. Fire management of
railroad rights-of-way preserved Midwest prairie plants that farming
otherwise threatened. Railroad rights-of-way may have a comeback
someday: we can’t afford freeways forever.
150

the fifth season

Civilization has always had a tricky relationship with “Mediterranean” climates like California’s. With their gentle fertility, they can seem
limitless, but fragile dry seasons offer large arenas for destructiveness
and carelessness. Newspapers talk about “the dark side of the California dream,” but sunlight provokes more violence than moonlight.
Early California murder trials recognized the “red winds” as extenuating circumstances.
Despite the problems, I think we lose an important element of change
by covering up and neglecting the fifth season. Change is life’s universal
attribute, and it is often scary, but it can’t be stopped. California cities
begin to look embalmed with their eternal greenery after the novelty
wears off. Like most easterners (I grew up in New England), I liked
eternal springtime when I first came to California, but I’ve come to suspect it. The old California’s wrinkled body may be unflattering, but it is
the true matrix of renewal here.
—Berkeley Monthly, January 1979

151

gardening

I got interested in gardening when I was driving a Yellow Cab on the
night shift in San Francisco. Such an urban occupation seems incongruous with a bucolic one, but that was the attraction. My first fare was
a bandaged cabbie just released from the emergency room after running
through a plate-glass window to escape an armed mugger. That was
in the early 1970s, when the Zodiak’s serial murder victims included
cabbies. It suddenly seemed wonderful—visionary—that I might get at
least part of a living from growing things, from natural harmony, and
that I could enlist the support of other living things like earthworms, soil
bacteria, and insect-eating songbirds in doing so.
When I moved out of the city not too long afterward, I started a
garden by digging up some ground, churning manure into it, and
throwing seeds in. I didn’t get much of a crop, but since I hadn’t invested
much, I found the tsunami of weeds that broke over my backyard plot
interesting. The weeds usurped my patch of cultivation in so many ways,
and there were so many kinds—bindweed, curly dock, mallow, mustard,
sow thistle. I hadn’t known weeds were so resourceful.
My gardening skills were slow to improve. I’d go out with a spading
fork on a spring day and fling lettuce, radish, and pea seeds into soil that
was dark and moist after its winter sleep. I’d fuss over the seedlings for a
few weeks, but as summer advanced and the soil got paler and thirstier,
I’d get distracted. I wouldn’t get much more than a meal’s worth before
the pea vines withered and the radishes and lettuces flowered. I probably
wouldn’t have gotten past that stage if I hadn’t married someone with a

153

mountains and marshes

more practical attitude. My wife worked the soil enough that the plants
got their roots into it, and she fertilized and watered it enough that they
could get something out of it, and we started to get significant produce.
This didn’t motivate me to be much more painstaking, but it did provide
me with a substantial garden to contemplate. That modified my original
vision of gardens as sites of natural harmony.
Gardening is participation in the natural world, all right, but it is about
as harmonious as a night in North Beach during my Yellow Cab career,
when hordes of tourists, prostitutes, sailors, dope dealers, and narcs
surged in and out of my taxi as I careened over the steep cobbled streets
and cable car tracks. Vegetables are like cab passengers in that one never
knows what they will do, or if they will pay. Weeds are dependable: they
are certain to grow on any patch of disturbed ground, and to flower and
bear fruit. Vegetables aren’t, but they are sure to disturb their benefactor’s
peace of mind in various ways, even if they do bear fruit.
From an evolutionary viewpoint, a garden is the essence of disturbance, a ramshackle pseudo-ecosystem originated piecemeal from
seeds and tubers on prehistoric middens. Most garden plants not only
thrive on, but demand, constant disturbance. We call that cultivation,
but anyone who has dug into the dirt and turned up a clod of hysterical earthworms can see what is happening to their little world. From a
worm’s-eye view, a garden is place of dizzying cataclysm, as mountains
of compost and manure land on the soil to be devoured by the overgrown mutants we call garden flowers and vegetables.
My garden vision had included the idea that I could build a fertile
soil; that some point would arise wherein the soil was finished and I
could stop shoveling manure and compost. But a garden’s appetite for
such fodder is as endless as any organism’s. My double-dug raised beds
shrank inexorably through the long, dry summers, and by the end they
were just as powdery and pebbly as when I first dug them. Gardens
aren’t really conducive to progressive notions. They don’t so much accumulate virtues as consume them.
This isn’t to say that I had to start from scratch each year. My wife
created many nice beds of perennial flowers and herbs, although even she
wasn’t confident about them. She marched the plants around from bed to
bed, as though to keep them fit. If a bed was particularly flourishing, that
meant something would have to be done about it. And of course the perennials devoured compost and manure just as relentlessly as the annuals.
154

gardening

Flowers and vegetables also confounded expectation by replanting
themselves. Melons appeared in the bean beds; tomatoes in the lettuce
and spinach; giant, orange cucumbers in the squash. Huge borage and
potato plants shot up in paths. Things like calendula, catnip, chamomile, and dill grew everywhere. Despite my vision of natural harmony,
this vegetable generosity didn’t please me. It seemed too extraneous and
untidy, which exposed a self-serving side to my vision. I wanted natural
harmony on my terms.
If my gardening vision was a disappointment, it was an interestingly
surprising one, although by no means all the surprises were pleasant.
I was forking a bed one day when a reddish furred creature suddenly
appeared at my feet, baring its teeth. It was a pocket gopher, and it had
reason for distress: I’d accidentally skewered it in its burrow. I ended
its suffering with a rock and felt a disquieting mix of satisfaction and
sadness. None of the gardeners I told about it felt the slightest sympathy for the gopher, rather envy at my luck in disposing of it so easily.
Still, it had reminded me of interesting times in wild places, watching
gophers push earth out of their burrows, or watching coyotes and
weasels hunting them.
The encounter brought up an aspect of gardening not much mentioned in books about its merits. The backyard plots that promise to be
gardens are occupied already, not as spectacularly as wilder places, but
just as fully, and cultivation must sweep a lot of that aside. Of course,
no organism lives without sweeping others aside. Still, there are options
about how much to sweep aside, especially if one doesn’t depend on the
garden for a livelihood or even for significant economy.
On the whole, I’ve found more interest in garden inhabitants than
I have in vegetables. The pocket gopher, for example, is a marvelous
creature that people might pay to see if it were rare and exotic instead of
an ineradicable component of soil ecology in North America’s drier regions. Indeed, gophers have made the soil there to a considerable degree.
Every year, they cover much of the West with soil pushed out of their
burrows, otherwise sterile, compacted dirt they have broken up, aerated,
and fertilized with their droppings.
No creature is better evolved to cultivate dry soil than the pocket
gopher. It is built like a bulldozer, with powerfully enlarged shoulders
and forepaws for pushing dirt and reduced hindquarters for life in tight
surroundings. Its head is even more ingenious, especially the mouth. Its
155

mountains and marshes

incisors are never dull because they grow continually, and its lips close
completely behind them so it can cut roots or break ground without
eating dirt. Fur-lined pouches outside its cheeks (the “pockets” of its
name) allow it to carry food or nesting material while it burrows with
teeth and forepaws. Even gopher reproduction is adapted to tunneling.
The female’s pelvis is too narrow to give birth, so when she becomes
pregnant, ovarian hormones dissolve her pubic bones. She spends the
rest of her life without them.
Gophers used their equipment to make tunnel systems so vast that
startled Great Plains explorers found themselves sinking into dry
ground as though it were quicksand. French trappers called such places
gaufres, “honeycombs,” Anglicized as “gopher.” One individual’s tunnel
system can cover an acre, with a five-hundred-foot main tunnel and
many smaller ones leading to nests, larders, and privies. Soil mounds
pushed from tunnels can be a foot high and ten feet across, although
they’re usually smaller. In some places, strange hillocky prairies may be
relics of exceptionally large or industrious prehistoric gophers.
Of course, such feats are less entertaining when performed in one’s
garden than in the wild. Gopher damage can seem wanton, since they
sometimes destroy plants inadvertently while burrowing. Rows of tomatoes and peppers reduced to wilted hulks during tunnel construction
have driven me to a cold sweat. And of course they eat vegetables too,
especially those in the bean family. A gopher had a burrow entrance at
every patch of beans in one garden of mine—once vigorous plants that
it worried to dejected remnants over the course of a summer. It toppled
some plants and dragged them whole into its burrow. I couldn’t help
feeling that it might just have picked some beans and left the plants.
Fortunately for gardeners, gophers are not colonial like their relatives, the ground squirrels and prairie dogs. Although burrow systems
may get entangled, giving the impression of a colony, each gopher keeps
to its own, sealing it off and defending it against intruders. So having an
established resident gopher has its merits, since much of the damage they
do occurs during tunnel construction. After I had accidentally skewered
the gopher, damage increased markedly as another moved in and started
digging its burrow. Then it decreased again after construction finished.
Except for some egregious insults to flowers and lettuces, there was surprisingly little damage after that. Gophers are supposed to like the onion
family, but a row of leeks went untouched.
156

gardening

The other garden mammals common here, moles, are also solitary,
and are less of a challenge to gardeners since they eat animals instead of
plants. Indeed, they eat many plant-damaging animals like cutworms as
well as beneficial ones like earthworms. They dislike disturbed soil and
do most of their burrowing in lawns—one reason for not having a lawn
in this climate. When I had a small lawn beside one garden, the moles
and gophers never crossed between them. Moles often tunnel just below
the surface, leaving a visible ridge, and they push dirt out of their burrows in conical mounds instead of gophers’ delta-shaped ones.
Gopher and mole burrows shelter many other inhabitants, most of
them garden-friendly insect eaters. Some of the biggest, fattest toads
I’ve seen inhabited garden gopher holes. One would emerge as I was
watering a bean patch every day at sunset: I’m not sure if it liked the
shower or if the water flowing into its hideout disturbed it. The muffled
creaking calls of little toad relatives, western chorus frogs, also came
from the holes. Less noticeable residents may include salamanders, lizards, and snakes—from little sharp-tailed snakes to king snakes and the
eponymous gopher snakes. Other interesting creatures I’ve found in gardens probably benefit from gopher burrows. Sun spiders are cricket-like
arachnids that live mainly in deserts, but they appear here in hot, dry
weather. The purplish local scorpion species can sting, but not dangerously. Jerusalem crickets remind me of little men in Japanese lacquered
armor. Velvet ants are wingless wasps that appear to be wearing peroxide wigs. Little tan praying mantises probably don’t live in burrows,
but they seem part of this menagerie. I’ve never found a tarantula or a
rattlesnake in a garden, probably because I’ve never had one in a previously unoccupied property.
I’ve put kidnapped gopher snakes down garden gopher holes once
or twice, but it’s a pointless exercise, since the snake will leave after it
eats the gopher, and then another gopher will move in. The problem
with such “biological control” is that predators need a constant supply
of prey, which the backyard garden often can’t produce. And if it can,
that usually means there are too many vegetable eaters for the predators to control entirely. Songbirds that spend every hour of the day
relaying bugs to nestlings don’t make a dent in the bug supply, and a
lot of the animals they consume are neutral or beneficial anyway. A pair
of robins at one garden seemed to feed mostly bug-eating centipedes to
their young.
157

mountains and marshes

Invertebrate damage to gardens is less conspicuous than gopher damage,
but of course much more important. Many attack plants at the seedling
stage, which is frustrating because it is so inconspicuous. One day, the seedlings are there; the next, they’re not. I got an insight into seedling-eater
numbers once when I dug up a manure pile that had lain undisturbed for
some time. I involuntarily jumped back in surprise as I pulled up the first
clod. I don’t think I’ve ever seen a greater density of animal life. Representatives of most major invertebrate orders thronged the interface of wild oat
roots and aged manure like diplomats at an OPEC meeting.
The most numerous ones were colored a dull gray appropriate for
diplomats—oval, many-segmented wood lice, land relatives of shrimp
and crabs. They covered every square inch—all ages, from violet-gray
youngsters the size of apple seeds to pumpkin-seed-sized adults. Almost
as numerous were reddish-brown earwigs, slender insects with pincer-like
cerci on their back ends, which they raised threateningly at me. They are
named for the belief that they crawl into ears, which may happen accidentally, although they are more given to destroying vegetable seedlings,
as are the slugs and snails I also found in abundance.
The crustaceans, insects, and mollusks comprised the manure’s grazing
herds. The predators were scarcer but more diverse. Wiry purple-violet
centipedes snaked amid the gray wood lice like flames licking at charcoal briquettes, although their color soon faded to duller reddish brown
in the sunlight. Grayish spiders with jaws adapted to cracking wood
louse carapaces stood among the swarming crustaceans like wolves in
a bison herd. A stout red-and-black jumping spider goggled big-eyed at
the commotion I’d stirred up, but a long-legged orb weaver spider sat
aloof in her web among the oat stems. Another arachnid, a gray-andwhite wolf spider, seemed overwhelmed by my presence, until I looked
closely and saw that a swarm of baby spiders on her abdomen hindered
her movements. Four yellow-and-brown Jerusalem crickets towered
ponderously above the horde, although they belied the elephantine impression by quickly digging themselves into the soil.
Plants that get beyond the seedling stage are easier to defend. Tobacco
hornworms that infest tomato plants reach sausage size, although their
leaf-patterned green color camouflages the caterpillars as they chew languorously on tomatoes. But their dark green feces on leaves are a giveaway, and once found they are easily picked off. Hornworms are named
for the wicked-looking spikes on their tails. When molested, they rear
158

gardening

back, make gnashing sounds, and wriggle as though ready to sink the
“horn” into one’s hand, although I never tested that. They are the larvae
of the Carolina sphinx moth, a handsome species with an orange-banded
abdomen and intricately patterned wings that comes out in the evening
to sip nectar from flowers like a crepuscular hummingbird. I didn’t mind
losing some tomatoes to have sphinx moths in the flower beds.
I’ve lost more tomatoes to frost than hornworms, and such physical
factors are more of an obstacle to gardens than biotic ones. It often
seemed as though tomatoes were just ripening when cold September
nights kept them green on the vine. And backyard soils can be inhospitable, refusing to produce plants even when unmolested by pests. Gophers and insects alike spared some okra I planted, but the plants never
grew more than six inches anyway. The dozen or so pods they produced
were bigger than they were. Weeds can be an advantage in such situations, since they respond to watering more vigorously, loosening the soil
and pumping nutrients to the surface.
Gardens have mysteries as well as surprises. The speed with which
the seedling-eater horde in that old manure pile disappeared into the
ground as I dug it up was as startling as its abundance. The same thing
happened each time I pulled up a clod: a mob scene, then an empty
stage aside from a few loitering spiders. Even the snails and slugs made
themselves scarce somehow. When I transferred the last clod to a wheelbarrow, no sign of life remained on the dry, hard-packed clay under it.
Toads that inhabited derelict backyards where I’ve gardened appeared
and vanished just as mysteriously. Once when I emptied a bucket of stony
soil I’d dug up, one of the “stones” squeaked indignantly, then waddled
off and inserted itself into an inch-long crevice in a pile of boards, an
impressive feat since the toad itself was six inches wide. It just flattened
out and flowed between the boards. I feared my removal of debris under
which I originally found them would discourage the toads, so I built them
some little dugouts in compensation, but I never found a toad in one. I
wondered whether they had moved away to less disturbed places or had
stayed on and adjusted their behavior so I wouldn’t disturb them.
Some mysteries get solved. Once holes started appearing in melons,
and close examination revealed tooth marks. I thought deer or raccoons
might have caused them. But then it dawned on me that the neighbor’s
cat had been spending a lot of time in the melon patch. Coyotes are
known to like melons, so why not cats?
159

mountains and marshes

Many of the things that happened in gardens were not surprising or
mysterious, simply enjoyable. There was no mystery about the flattened
and disheveled state of a catnip patch by the cat-eaten melon bed. I
liked turning a sprinkler on a bed and seeing a goldfinch flock descend
to drink from the wet leaves. I liked finding black swallowtail butterfly
chrysalises on dill or parsley plants, and wolf spiders sunning their eggs
at the mouths of their tunnels under tomato plants. I liked of the cleverness of the big black bees that frequented Nicotiana flowers: unable
to reach into the narrow corolla tubes, they got nectar by piercing the
trumpet-shaped flowers at the base. One spring, I especially liked looking
out the window and seeing four black-headed grosbeaks, two western
tanagers, a lazuli bunting, a golden-crowned sparrow, a white-crowned
sparrow, a Wilson’s warbler, a yellow-rumped warbler, two linnets, and
a robin in the garden at once.
Most of the above creatures were benefiting the garden by eating
pests or weeds, the kind of relationship that stimulated my Yellow Cab
vision of harmony. They weren’t benefiting it enough to stop the pests
and weeds. If they did, they wouldn’t be around anymore, since there’d
be nothing for them to eat. The harmony of songbirds in a garden depends on the disharmony of pests and weeds in it, a disharmony that
arises in its turn from the garden’s disturbances.
Harmony from disturbance doesn’t sound reasonable, but it does reflect what science has learned about the planet’s workings in the past
few centuries. We can no longer regard earth as an orderly hierarchy
as medieval and Renaissance savants did, or as a smoothly functioning
machine, as Enlightenment philosophes did. The fossil record discloses a
biosphere that has existed for over three billion years by being disorderly
and rough. Things get disturbed all the time—mass extinctions wipe out
entire biotas—but, interestingly—and surprisingly—no instance of universal chaos and destruction has occurred so far.
—Country Journal, August 1981

160

leapers and creepers
bay area frogs and toads
Walking in the hills one hot April afternoon, I happened on a nearly
evaporated puddle containing newly hatched tadpoles. Since I had a
newly emptied Peet’s Coffee cup in my hand, a puddle-to-cup tadpole
transfer occurred before mature reflection could intervene. Amphibians
always have fascinated me. The way their strange shapes and colors materialize out of earth and water seems magical. But childhood attempts
to keep them as pets had been smelly failures, and if I’d found a full
puddle on the way back to my car, I would have released the tadpoles.
But I didn’t find one, so I arrived home with a dozen or so pinhead-sized
brown larvae in an inch of diluted adobe mud and cappuccino foam.
I dumped them in a small aquarium and sprinkled some TerraMin
Baby Fish Food for Egglayers in the water. They went after it as though
they’d evolved particularly to eat “fishmeal, torula dried yeast, ground
brown rice, potato products, wheat gluten, dehulled soybean meal, and
natural and artificial colors,” swimming upside down to suck it into
swelling paunches. Their enthusiasm for my largesse was flattering and
their vitality and adaptability were gratifying at a time when frog news
generally concerns imminent death from pollution, climate change, and
habitat loss.
When the water started to smell, I changed it with a turkey baster, but
that was all I did in the way of tadpole cultivation. They responded with
a complexity that seemed disproportionate to my kitchen technology.
They developed daily and with bewildering diversity, displaying a range
of genetic variation that probably contributes to adaptive strategies in
the wild. Some stayed dark brown and pinhead sized. Some stayed dark
161

mountains and marshes

brown but grew within weeks to sunflower seed–sized. Others turned
greenish or beige and also grew quickly.
Hind legs soon appeared on the large brown tadpoles, then on the
green and beige ones. Tails shrank and front legs appeared. By early June,
four-legged individuals lurked near the aquarium lid, ready to bounce
halfway across the room when I lifted it at feeding or basting time. Even
the pinheads had begun to metamorphose into miniatures of their larger
siblings. By the Fourth of July, I had released the bouncing brood in the
backyard, not really expecting to see them again given Berkeley’s house
cat, raccoon, opossum, skunk, jay, and crow populations.
In August, however, I started finding half dollar–sized frogs in flowerpots, some dark brown or greenish, some pinkish or mottled green and
beige. During the first fall rains, when the local termite nests produced
their sparkle-winged wedding flights, happy croaks issued from the
shrubbery. The frogs were such an interesting presence that my wife and
I optimistically built a three-foot-wide “vernal pool” for them beside the
tool shed, hoping they might breed.
My backyard brood belonged to the West Coast’s most common and
adaptable species, which used to be called the Pacific tree frog (Hyla) but
was renamed the Pacific chorus frog (Pseudacris) because it is more like
the chorus frogs elsewhere in North America and less like the tree frogs.
Chorus frogs usually sing on the ground while tree frogs sometimes sing
in trees. (North American frogs all breed on the ground, although some
tropical frogs breed in trees.) Anyway, I’ve never seen a Pacific chorus
frog in a tree, so the name change seems justifiable.
More resistant to pollution and habitat modification than other species—as I discovered with my Peet’s Coffee waifs—Pacific chorus frogs
will breed in most kinds of freshwater. They lived everywhere in the Bay
Area before urbanization destroyed much of their habitat. They’ve even
counterattacked against growth in some cases, invading ornamental
lakes in gated communities, disturbing New Economy slumbers with
clamorous water sports. Philip Northen, professor of biology at Sonoma
State University and a frog expert, told me that he gets phone calls from
subdividers and property managers asking how to exterminate frogs. “I
just tell them they should learn to love nature,” he said.
Pacific chorus frog calls are amazingly loud, as anyone who has heard
a breeding pond knows. (In a sense, they are the calls heard around the
world, since Hollywood has used them as sound effects in thousands
162

leapers and creepers

of movies—they should get royalties.) What is less well-known is that
their calls are not just chaotic screeching but a “language” that organizes breeding. Northen said that their vocabulary’s function is not well
understood but that male Pacific chorus frogs make five kinds of calls,
each adapted to particular functions in attracting females and repelling
rival males.
These pond calls are distinct from ones they make on land, which are
even less well understood. Pacific chorus frogs spend most of their lives
on land, passing the dry season in ground squirrel burrows, wood rat
dens, and other refuges. Their terrestrial adaptability is as remarkable as
their aquatic one. When I lived in Round Valley in northeast Mendocino
County, chorus frogs inhabited a tin-roofed storage shed during summers when ambient temperature often climbed into the 90s.
A melodious chirping sometimes accompanies chorus frog screeching
in breeding ponds. This is the call of western toads (Bufo boreas), the
Bay Area’s second most adaptable species. They have similar ways of
life, staying in burrows and other refuges in dry times and moving to
breeding waters in late winter and spring. The western toad’s black tadpoles are easily distinguished from chorus frogs’ grayish or brownish
ones, and they are often in ponds or creeks after the chorus tadpoles
have metamorphosed and left, since toads tend to breed later. Baby toads
are blackish too, but as they mature they become greenish or brownish
gray, with light dorsal stripes and warts that are often rusty colored.
The warts, and parotid glands behind the eyes, exude a milky toxin
that can poison attackers, although some determined predators, such
as raccoons and ravens, have learned to avoid the skin and eat what’s
inside. Growing to three times chorus frog size, western toads are more
conspicuous as they emerge at twilight to forage. They can cover a lot
of ground, creeping as well as leaping, and will attack formidable prey,
including wasps and scorpions.
Pacific chorus frogs and western toads are the Bay Area’s most numerous anurans now, but in the past the largest native frog, the California red-legged frog, may have been even more so. The species likes to
breed in big wetlands, a habitat more available in the past. Mark Jennings, a herpetologist at the California Academy of Sciences, researched
late-nineteenth-century commercial red-legged frog exploitation. He
said that California diners consumed the legs of an estimated 60,000 to
80,000 a year, until the wild “froggery” collapsed after a record capture
163

mountains and marshes

of 118,000 in 1895. The industry turned to “ranching” imported bullfrogs, and escapees hastened the native frogs’ decline by preying on
them and preempting breeding habitat. The California red-legged frog
declined so markedly that in 1996 it became the first Bay Area anuran
to be federally listed as a threatened species.
Another native anuran, the foothill yellow-legged frog, Rana boylii,
spends its life around permanently flowing streams, not a common Bay
Area habitat now. A medium-sized, mottled, tan or grayish frog, it is
usually seen only briefly as it jumps into the water or hides under a rock.
It is heard even less than it is seen and was once thought to vocalize
very little, which would make sense, given its noisy stream habitat. Professor Northen and a student recently discovered, however, that male
yellow-legged frogs call to females underwater, where sound carries
better than in air, and that they do so volubly. Northen said that male
yellow-leggeds have seven calls that they use to attract females and
repel rivals.
The western spadefoot toad, Spea hammondii, can be quite noisy; its
call has been compared to sawing wood. People here very seldom hear
it because the stout, cat-eyed little creature lives only in isolated areas
along the Central Valley’s western margin. And unlike other Bay Area
anurans, which remain active through the year if weather is not too hot
or cold, spadefoots spend eight to nine months a year dormant in soil,
emerging only to breed and feed when a profuse spell of warm rain
occurs. They may not emerge at all in dry years.
Mainly a desert species, the spadefoot is a relict of drier times in the
Bay Area. Nature documentary makers like desert spadefoots because
they breed explosively in puddles left by summer thunderstorms. In
that situation, they can develop from eggs to baby toads in three weeks,
larger tadpoles supplementing their diet by eating smaller ones. Not surprisingly, they are fast eaters. A spadefoot can gulp prey equivalent to 11
percent of its body mass in one meal.
Summer cloudbursts are rare here, and knowledge about local spadefoot breeding is limited. Robert Stebbins, an emeritus professor at UC–
Berkeley who has been observing local amphibians since the 1940s, said
that the species is most active from April to June, breeding in streams or
ponds as well as ephemeral pools. Mark Jennings said they may breed
after fall rains as well. Larry Serpa, a Nature Conservancy biologist,
found spadefoot tadpoles in stock ponds east of Henry Coe State Park.
164

leapers and creepers

He raised them on fish food and then returned the babies to their natal
pools, where they immediately burrowed into the mud with the spadelike structures on their hind legs for which they are named, disappearing
within a half hour.
A flexible lot, Bay Area frogs and toads resisted civilization better
than the mighty condors, elk, and grizzlies. Urbanization, wetland destruction, and stream diversion reduced some populations, but irrigation and water impoundments may have provided new habitat for
others. Anurans remained fairly common here into the mid-twentieth
century; their main decline here seems to have come after 1970. David
Wake, a leading herpetologist and professor of biology at UC–Berkeley,
sadly watched western toads and Pacific chorus frogs dwindle in the
Oakland and Berkeley Hills. “I haven’t seen a toad there in years,” he
said. Chorus frogs still call in Tilden Regional Park, but Steve Bobzien,
regional services coordinator for the East Bay Regional Park District
(EBRPD), does not have records of western toads in the Berkeley or
Oakland Hills for the past several years. “There’s a strong indication
that toads are losing part of their range,” he said.
Ironically, the Bay Area’s federally listed anuran, the California redlegged frog, is not the rarest species here, remaining widespread if inconspicuous in creeks, stock ponds, and wetlands. Red-legged frogs
have low-pitched calls and spend most of their lives in or around water
so people encounter them less than chorus frogs or toads. The species’s
behavior is unpredictable, as I’ve discovered at Mount Diablo State
Park. Chorus frogs and toads breed in the same ponds and streams
there year after year; red-legged frogs appear and disappear mysteriously. I hiked along Pine Creek in Mount Diablo for years before seeing
one; then I saw a pair in the creek one spring. That summer, a pool
farther upstream was suddenly full of big tadpoles. The next summer,
it was empty again. A few summers later, it was full again. There was
even a red-legged frog in it, although I got only a glimpse before it
hid under a rock. On Wall Ridge above the creek, I often hiked past a
muddy stock pond that showed no signs of frogs. Then, one autumn,
hundreds of half-grown ones leapt into the water at my approach. But
I never saw frogs there again.
Although spadefoot toads and foothill yellow-legged frogs are sparse
here, they aren’t listed, because populations not known to be at risk exist
elsewhere. I’ve heard of only a few streams in the East and South Bay
165

mountains and marshes

where sizable populations of yellow-legged frogs survive, although they
may be doing better in the North Bay. The spadefoot toad’s local situation is even more precarious, since its main population at Corral Hollow
is under pressure from increased traffic, off-road vehicles, and pet collecting. “Spadefoot toads are cute,” Mark Jennings told me. Larry Serpa
said the spadefoot population east of Henry Coe is “pretty minimal.”
Urban sprawl and its attendant habitat destruction, water pollution,
and traffic are obvious factors in anuran decline. But the creatures have
dwindled even in natural areas. Thin-skinned amphibians may be particularly vulnerable to what Robert Stebbins called a “witch’s brew” of
airborne urban and agribusiness chemicals, as suggested by population
declines in places where prevailing winds concentrate it, such as the Sierra
Nevada. Jennings said that medfly spraying in the 1980s may have impacted Bay Area anurans seriously. Introduced fish like trout, bass, and
perch (even the little mosquito fish distributed by insect abatement agencies) can reduce breeding native anurans. Studies in Oregon suggested that
increased ultraviolet radiation caused by atmospheric ozone depletion
could sterilize eggs—although Jennings said that other studies failed to
duplicate those results. Warming and drying climate caused by the global
greenhouse effect will not benefit species that need cool, moist habitat.
The best hope for anurans lies in parks and other protected lands,
and management agencies are looking at ways of helping them. But
doubts about causes of the decline muddy the waters. Stebbins said
that the East Bay Municipal Utility District restored a red-legged frog
population when it fenced cattle out of a creek. Livestock trampling
and overgrazing certainly degrade riparian and wetland habitat. On the
other hand, Steve Bobzien said that cattle don’t seem to be a major
frog-limiting factor on EBRPD land. He said that 75 of the 265 ponds
on EBRPD property support red-legged frogs, 65 of them with breeding
populations, and that the most productive ones weren’t fenced. Gary
Fellers, a research biologist at Point Reyes National Seashore, said that
red-legged frogs inhabited most of the stock ponds at the seashore’s
pastoral-zone dairy farms and that more lived on grazed lands than
others. He thought cows and frogs could coexist with proper management to protect riparian vegetation and control silting.
Red-legged frogs can travel as much as a mile to and from breeding
waters during winter rains. Fellers was conducting radio tracking studies
of their movements to better understand their relationship with cattle.
166

leapers and creepers

He also planned to fit frogs with infrared lights so he could study their
nocturnal behavior. I asked him how he attached gadgets to frogs. “We
have little belts that we put on them,” he said. “You just straighten their
legs out and slip them on.”
Everybody at least agrees that bullfrogs and exotic fish threaten
native anurans. Bobzien told me that EBRPD has restored some redlegged frog populations by removing bullfrogs and exotic fish from
ponds, and “redesigning” the ponds to favor native species. Other park
agencies have implemented similar measures. Agencies seemed less
clear about conserving the four nonlisted species, however. Bobzien
said that EBRPD was trying to link protection of its one substantial
foothill yellow-legged frog population with a steelhead trout restoration project. A stream with water capable of supporting steelhead
breeding presumably can support yellow-legged frog breeding. The
main strategy for protecting the other three species—Pacific chorus
frogs, western toads, and spadefoot toads—seemed to be simply preserving as much habitat as possible.
Bay Area frogs and toads are definitely down in the twenty-first century. But that doesn’t mean they’re out. Anurans are old hands at survival. Fossils show that they appeared in the Jurassic period, the middle
of the dinosaur age, and remained abundant through the next 200 million years, while thousands of bigger, smarter kinds of animals perished
in mass extinctions. As I found at Mount Diablo, anuran demographics
can be deceptive. Populations burgeon or shrink mysteriously and may
reappear where they seemed long gone. The larger species begin to breed
when they are two or three years old and have relatively long life spans.
California red-legged frogs can live up to eight years in the wild, and
western toads have been known to inhabit the same garden for a decade
or more. Chorus frogs have shorter lives but breed faster.
The survival of anurans in remoter parts of the Bay Area doesn’t
really compensate for the absence of chorus frog calls on a rainy night,
or toads snapping up bugs on a summer evening. (A book published in
1961 estimated the value of a single garden toad’s insect control at up
to fifty dollars a year, which might make it about ten times that in the
twenty-first century’s real estate market.) It is not impossible to reestablish native anurans in suburbs. I’ve seen native frogs and toads living in
an Ohio backyard, whose owners told me that American toads, Bufo
americanus, had been returning to breed in a pond there for several
167

mountains and marshes

years. But it’s not easy, as I found with my Pacific chorus frogs. It’s
also illegal in California, for various environmental reasons—although
a hard law to enforce.
Anyway, we were overoptimistic with our vernal pool. One night
I heard raccoons yammering and splashing in it. The next morning, I
found that all the rocks I’d used to floor it had been turned over and
piled in the middle, with proprietary scat on top. Still, at least one of
the frogs—a big brown one—survived in our tool shed for over a year.
We’d see him sometimes on the top shelf and hear him croaking even in
dry weather.
—Bay Nature, April–June 2002

168

megafauna by the bay

If you rode a time machine a million years back to a Bay Area ridge, you
might think that the contraption wasn’t working. You would glimpse
a bay through oak and pine trees like today’s, and a passing songbird
or squirrel would resemble living species. Roars and snarls from the
canyon below might sound like a motocross. But the illusion of modernity would fade as you heard something coming up the hill. Trail
motorcycles don’t breathe in deep, hoarse pants.
When it came into sight, you might not know what to think. You
might think it was a bear, since it would have a similar massive, plantigrade presence. But it would have much longer legs than a modern
bear’s, and a shorter muzzle. Whatever you thought, you’d probably be
scared, and with reason, since the beast, now known as the short-faced
bear (Arctodus simus), was not only very big but probably as swiftly
predatory as it looked.
More roars from below, however, would suggest that Arctodus was in
flight from something, and its departure would be as swift as its arrival.
If curiosity overcame fright and you went downhill to investigate, you
might find that a pair of saber-toothed cats and a pack of dire wolves
were too busy squabbling over the camel carcass from which they’d
driven Arctodus to notice you. You might justifiably be more wary of
some watching mammoths, perhaps like today’s elephants in getting
testy around predators. And the numbers of waiting scavengers—foxes,
coyotes, vultures, condors, and even larger birds called teratorns—might
unnerve you. With so much happening, you might not notice that even

169

mountains and marshes

more beasts were in sight—ground sloths, horses, peccaries, and musk
oxen, as well as ungulates not unlike today’s black-tailed deer and
pronghorns.
Although most of these creatures seem exotic now, we know they
lived here because their bones remain. In fact, the Bay Area contains
North America’s best collection of bones from the time when they lived,
from 1.2 million to five hundred thousand years ago. In 1936, teenage
fossil hunters found a large bone deposit in a gravel pit near the Alameda County town of Irvington near Fremont. Because of its abundance
and diversity, paleontologists refer to the site as the “type locality” for
the period, which they call the Irvingtonian age.
Despite its importance, the Irvington site isn’t well-known even in the
Bay Area, perhaps partly because Los Angeles County’s fossil-rich La
Brea Tar Pits have eclipsed it. The tar pits’ scientific value is similar: they
are the type locality for the Rancholabrean age, which directly followed
the Irvingtonian. (Both were part of the Pleistocene epoch, which lasted
from 1.8 million to fifteen thousand years ago.) But the La Brea animals’
sensational death—trapped in natural tar deposits—made them world
famous, whereas the Irvingtonian bones’ gradual deposition in streambeds was more normal. The George Page Museum in Los Angles County
lavishly displays La Brea’s fossils to the public. UC–Berkeley’s Museum
of Paleontology mostly keeps Irvington’s in drawers (where most fossil
bones end up).
Famous or not, both ages are typical of evolution’s past 200 million
years in that assemblages of big animals—herbivores, carnivores, and
scavengers—dominated them. Biologists call these assemblages megafaunas. Dinosaur megafaunas prevailed until 65 million years ago; then
mammals replaced them, although living megafaunas also include some
large dinosaur relatives—birds and reptiles. About fifteen thousand years
ago, however, diverse megafaunas began to disappear, although relict ones,
like those of East Africa or Yellowstone, remain. The causes of this mass
extinction aren’t well understood, although human population growth
undoubtedly contributed. The effects are even less well understood but
are even more important, because they will affect the planet’s future.
Ecologists worry about the long-term effects of losing megafaunas
because the plants and animals alive today coevolved with them. Daniel
Janzen, a biologist who works in Central America, notes that many
plants have large, hard, tasty fruits and other features adapted for big
170

m e g a fau n a b y t h e bay

mammals like horses, camels, ground sloths, and mammoths to eat. He
thinks that many of these plants have become scarce since megafauna
disappeared because the mammals that lived with them helped to spread
and germinate their seeds by eating them. As such plants become scarcer
or go extinct, many other animals and plants that interact with them (as
pollinators, browsers, nesters, epiphytes. and so on) may die out too.
In the Costa Rican national park where he works, Janzen has tried to
restore some megafaunal influence by allowing controlled browsing by
livestock such as horses (wild horse species inhabited the region before
the mass extinction), which enthusiastically eat fruits of native trees like
guanacaste and jicaro. Many other biologists are thinking about megafauna restoration, including reintroduction of native large wild animals
as well as domestic ones. Some dream of resurrecting extinct species
such as mammoths by cloning them from fossil DNA.
Is some megafauna restoration possible in a megalopolis like the Bay
Area? To be sure, the Bay Area is an unusual megalopolis in having as
much remnant megafauna as it does—not only deer but predators including mountain lions, bobcats, coyotes, foxes, eagles, and falcons. And
that is not to mention the marine megafauna here, which is world class,
on par with East Africa’s land megafauna. No coasts outside the poles
have as diverse a marine megafauna as North America’s Pacific one, and
the Bay Area is at the center of it. Although decimated in the nineteenth
century, the known historic species have recovered to some extent with
the exception of the Steller’s sea cow, which hunters exterminated a few
decades after it was discovered. Still, like Africa, the Pacific is not easy
of access, and humans are physically less adapted to admire gray whales
and orcas than elephants and lions.
We are lucky to have what we do in the way of land animals, a result
of the local tradition of preserving public open space. But could we
have more? Of course, an Irvington-like fauna of more than a dozen
large wild herbivore species supporting as many big predator and
scavenger species would need more space than our largest wild lands
could provide. Still, Bay Area woodlands, chaparral, and grasslands coevolved with such faunas, and restoring them to some extent could help
ameliorate some of the problems in sustaining those ecosystems. Oaks
might reproduce better, for example, if more big kinds of animals were
spreading acorns, and fire might be less of a threat if there were more
browsers and grazers.
171

mountains and marshes

A more diverse megafauna would certainly make local wild lands
more exciting. Although we don’t want big wild animals roaming the
streets (a few occasionally do roam the streets, too excitingly in some
cases), we have an affinity for them, since we coevolved with them too.
As Thoreau wistfully wrote in 1850s Massachusetts, where even deer
were extirpated: “We need to witness our own limits transgressed, and
some life pasturing freely where we never wander. . . . We must be refreshed by the sight of inexhaustible vigor, vast and titanic features.”
If we were to restore some native megafauna to the Bay Area, what
kinds might we hope to see “pasturing freely”? The short-faced bear,
Arctodus, is an unlikely prospect because it has no close living relatives,
but several other Irvingtonian species do. An Irvingtonian-age cheetah
left its bones in the Sacramento Valley. Cheetahs lived throughout the
West then, and they may have evolved on this continent before migrating to the Old World. Paleontologists suspect the fleet cats may be a
reason why pronghorns can run faster than any living North American
predator, forty miles an hour.
Cheetahs haven’t lived here for at least fifteen thousand years, however, which raises the question of exactly what an ecologically functional Bay Area megafauna might be. Would it be the animals that lived
here when humans first arrived, probably between forty thousand and
twelve thousand years ago? Would it be the animals that lived here in
historical times? Could there be some kind of “ideal” megafauna for this
region—maybe a bit closer to the Irvingtonian’s than today’s—that land
managers might try to approximate?
We don’t know exactly when most of the big Pleistocene mammals
disappeared from California, but most were gone by the time Europeans
arrived. The California grizzly was the only real giant, and some big animals common elsewhere in North America were absent or scarce here.
Bison, which had invaded North America from Eurasia during the Rancholabrean age, inhabited only the northeast corner of California in historical times. Wolves, the continent’s top modern predators, the only ones
to habitually tackle bison, don’t seem to have been numerous in the Bay
Area during historical times, although reports of them exist. Besides grizzlies, our historically common megafauna were on the medium-to-small
side of the prehistoric scale.
It impressed European explorers anyway. A journal from Sir Francis
Drake’s expedition described thousands of “very large and fat deer,” in
172

m e g a fau n a b y t h e bay

1579, probably at Point Reyes. Two centuries later, in 1772, Pedro
Fages reported “plentiful game such as deer, antelope, elk, bear” in
the East Bay, while Juan Crespi saw grizzlies and deer in the Oakland
estuary and “many antelopes and tracks of bears” in the San Benito
Valley. Grizzlies thrived on Spanish cattle as carcasses stripped of
their salable hides dotted valleys. A French explorer, A. Duhaut Ceilly,
found bears so abundant in 1827 that “without going farther than five
or six leagues from San Francisco, they are often seen in herds.” A few
years later, Richard Henry Dana, a Harvard student visiting the Bay
Area as a sailor in the hide trade, found elk almost as common as the
Drake expedition had.
“We came to anchor near the mouth of the bay,” he wrote in his
classic memoir, Two Years before the Mast, “under a high and beautifully sloping hill, upon which hundreds and hundreds of red deer, and
the stag, with his high branching antlers, were bounding about, looking
at us for a moment, and then starting off, affrighted at the noises which
we made for the purpose of seeing the variety of their beautiful attitudes
and motions.”
The abundance didn’t last long after American homesteaders replaced
Mexican hide barons. Ranchers and market hunters killed grizzlies, elk,
and pronghorns for meat, skins, and tallow. Miners killed condors just
for their quills, used to store gold dust. By the 1890s, all these large
animals were gone from the Bay Area, along with the gray whales, sea
otters, elephants seals, and fur seals that had abounded a century before.
And while most of the marine mammals have returned to some degree,
fewer of the land mammals have.
On the other hand, with our accidental or deliberate help, other kinds
of wild or semiwild animals invaded, filling ecological niches vacated by
extirpated natives. Mustang herds grew so large that vaqueros massacred them during droughts to save cattle forage. They had disappeared
by the 1900s, but feral domestic pigs and cattle survived in the hills. In
the 1920s, landowners near Monterey released Eurasian wild boars for
hunting, and, with sows bearing litters of a dozen piglets a year, they
had spread to twenty-eight California counties by 1985. In the 1960s,
the California Department of Fish and Game introduced wild turkeys
as game animals. Absent historically, turkeys were common in Pleistocene California, although of a different species than today. Weighing
the same as California condors, turkeys dominate the ground-dwelling
173

mountains and marshes

avian niche. Their gobbling has become a normal spring sound in local
wild lands—even in towns.
Pigs and turkeys have pervaded Bay Area wild lands since I started
frequenting them in the 1970s. Then I went to Henry Coe State Park
to see them. Now I can watch turkeys’ private lives up close at Mount
Diablo, where the mating season renders them oblivious to intruders.
Tom turkeys make theories of birds’ close relationship to dinosaurs
seems glaringly obvious: they are strikingly colorful in their breeding
finery—bright blue and red heads, gold and bronze tail fans. On one
April day, I watched from a few feet away as trios of toms displayed
before hens. (A coyote pair also looked on hopefully from a discreet
distance.) A trio would approach one of the smaller, drab hens, which
would make soft, flutelike calls. This would inspire the toms to gobble in
unison, with such force that it shook their bodies. The toms would then
turn around and strut away, spreading their tail fans, enticing the hen to
follow them. This eventually would lead to mating, although I didn’t see
it. But the results are there: turkey nests and broods are common.
Pigs are less confiding at Mount Diablo because the state keeps trying
to trap them out. The pigs keep coming back, however, and their presence is often evident where they’ve rooted up the ground. When I first
started seeing them there, they were the brown, hairy feral kind, small
and timid. Later I started seeing more of the black, furry wild boars,
which are bigger and bolder. I’ve seen families of them curiously investigating the wire cage traps. (I’ve also seen turkey flocks entering set traps
to eat the bait, although not with sufficient enthusiasm to spring the trap
doors. Evidently they prefer wild foods to pheromone-soaked corn.)
In the 1970s, the state legislature told the Department of Fish and
Game to restore historically native species where feasible. Tule elk, a
subspecies of the genus Cervus (which entered North America from Eurasia in the Rancholabrean age), were the biggest native ungulates in the
historic Bay Area, the ones Drake and Dana admired. Although hunting
reduced the state’s population to a few individuals in the southern San
Joaquin Valley, the elk recovered under protection, and small groups
from those refuges multiplied after reintroduction to fenced Bay Area
sites at Tomales Point in Point Reyes National Seashore, Concord Naval
Weapons Station, and Grizzly Island in the delta.
The Tomales Point herd grew in two decades from eight cows and
two bulls in 1978 to more than four hundred. In 1999, the Park Service
174

m e g a fau n a b y t h e bay

moved twenty-eight animals to the seashore’s Phil Burton Wilderness
Area, where hikers can see them roaming freely. Fish and Game released
elk near Mount Hamilton southeast of San Jose, where they expanded
into three herds, one staying in that vicinity, one moving north to San
Antonio Reservoir, the other east toward the San Joaquin Valley. Tule
elk restoration has succeeded because the species is prolific and adaptable, able to browse on exotic weeds like plantain as well as native food
plants. But attempts to reintroduce other native species have been more
problematic.
No living North American mammal is more native than the graceful
pronghorn, which is not an antelope as explorers assumed but the last
survivor of a group, the antilocaprids, that has inhabited this continent
for at least 15 million years. (No antelopes are native to the Americas.)
Pronghorns have recovered from near extinction in much of the West,
but little of their valley grassland habitat remains in the Bay Area, and
they are less prolific than elk. So although Fish and Game released some
at Mount Hamilton at the same time as elk, the result was inconclusive.
Some drifted north toward Livermore but then disappeared. But I heard
that others had stayed near Mount Hamilton and grown to a herd of
about forty on private land.
With help from a local pilot, I flew for a few minutes over the ranch
where they were said to live. Focusing binoculars from a small plane is
hard, but I saw a scattering of beige specks near a group of larger beigeand-brown ones. I could tell the larger specks were elk, so I guessed
that the smaller specks were pronghorns. A herd of forty isn’t many
compared to the forty-fold elk increase at Tomales Point, however. Point
Reyes is the only other Bay Area site where pronghorns might be restored, but there are no historical records of them there, so restoration
is controversial.
Condor restoration here is also problematic since the closest population is on the central coast. The Ventana Wilderness Society began
reintroducing condors to Big Sur in 1996 and released more at Pinnacles
National Monument in 2003. If this population grows to the goal of
fifty birds, condors might once again inhabit the Bay Area, but it could
take awhile. Condors are very social, and central coast birds prefer to
roam south to visit the population around Santa Barbara. Gaps in the
ridgelines between the Bay Area and central coast also work against
northward movement because they weaken the thermal air currents
175

mountains and marshes

condors like to ride. Some condors have appeared in the Bay Area in
recent years, but only briefly.
All the attention that condors get seems a little unfair to their smaller
cousins, turkey vultures. We reward them for thriving and cleaning
up road kills by ignoring and rather despising them. But the Bay Area
would be diminished without turkey vultures soaring overhead, and the
way they manage to do it virtually everywhere, despite all the urbanization, is admirable. I don’t understand how they do manage. Their
nesting and feeding habits aren’t so different from condors’ and they
are also quite social. While turkeys are doing their mating rituals on the
slopes of Mount Diablo in spring, I sometimes see vultures doing theirs
on ridgetops. A group of birds will land and strut about, evidently males
trying to impress a female, although it’s hard to tell because they aren’t
sexually dimorphic. Turkey vultures can seem pretty casual about where
they lay their eggs—sometimes just on the ground in the woods. On
the other hand, finding a turkey vulture’s ground nest is not easy. The
species seems to have a talent for fading into the background when not
soaring overhead, perhaps one key to its success.
I can’t mention vultures without bringing in the big-three raptors:
ospreys, bald eagles, and golden eagles. Osprey restoration after the
DDT population crash of the 1950s has been so successful that it’s
seldom mentioned now. But I remember the lift I felt when, having
lived away from the Bay Area for awhile, I walked the Bear Valley Trail
at Point Reyes again, heard squeaky noises from the big Douglas firs
overhead, and realized there were osprey nests up there. Bald eagle
restoration seems to have lagged in the Bay Area—at least I’ve never
seen one here—but since the California population is growing, maybe
I will. The Bay Area’s world-class golden eagle population has dodged
DDT and ground squirrel eradication campaigns, although wind farms
aren’t doing it any good. I’ve seen a lot of them in the South Bay ridge
lands, usually soaring but sometimes running around on the ground like
chickens. They’re a regular if infrequent sight at Mount Diablo. One
day, walking on Wall Ridge in the adjacent regional park, I saw a flock
of city rock doves feeding on the cattle pasture there, and, on a power
line above, a pair of eagles. The next time I walked that way, I found
little piles of pigeon feathers here and there.
As of now, there are no further plans to restore native megafauna in
or near the Bay Area. California grizzly restoration in wilderness areas
176

m e g a fau n a b y t h e bay

has enthusiasts, but they don’t suggest releasing half-ton bears here.
Self-restoration of natives is another possibility, however. Jules Evens’s
field guide to Point Reyes described the river otter as extinct in the seashore in 1988, so I had trouble believing my eyes when I saw a pair
cavorting at Five Ponds in 1996. But I saw them again in 1997, and the
species seems to have returned to Point Reyes permanently. Maybe their
marine cousins, sea otters, will come back to Drakes Bay, one of their
population centers before their nineteenth-century extirpation. Elephant
seals have returned on their own, so why not sea otters? Planned designation of Drakes Estero as the state’s first marine wilderness area could
help with that, as designation of the Phil Burton Wilderness in the national seashore doubtless helped river otters. That is what “wilderness”
means: a place for wild beasts, wildeor in Anglo-Saxon. (Congress designated a 141-acre wilderness on parts of the Farallon Islands in 1974,
but not in the water around them.)
Another self-restoration candidate entered the limelight in May 2003,
when newspapers reported a black bear raiding a Dumpster of the Point
Reyes Youth Hostel near Limantour Beach, the first Marin bear sighting
in a century. Further sightings occurred through the summer in a dozen
sites from Tomales Bay State Park to Kirby Cove on the Golden Gate,
and DNA hair and scat samples showed that the bear was a male with a
taste for fruit, seeds, and paper towels. Biologists guessed he had come
from Sonoma County. It’s not clear that black bears occurred in Marin
County historically. A letter to the San Francisco Chronicle maintained
that only grizzlies did, a view held by Tracy I. Storer and Lloyd P. Tevis
in their 1955 classic California Grizzly. On the other hand, a report
of several bears clownishly invading the Marin town of Olema in the
1860s sounds more like the smaller species (seldom weighing more than
three hundred pounds) than the fearsome grizzly. West Marin’s conifer
and hardwood forest would be suitable black bear habitat.
Black bears don’t seem to have lived in the drier East and South Bays
historically, or in the central and south coast generally. Grizzlies may
have excluded them, although the two species coexisted in the Sierra
and north coast. After grizzly extirpation from the state in the 1920s,
black bears spread from the southern Sierra through the Coast Range
north to the Santa Cruz Mountains. Changes in hunting laws and habitat allowed a tripling of the population after the 1980s, so the species
may wander into Bay Area wildlands from the south as well as the north.
177

mountains and marshes

The arrival in northeast California of a wolf from the restored Rocky
Mountain population raised another possibility for self-reintroduction,
although the Bay Area probably lacks enough wild land and large wild
prey for a wolf population. Still, wolves are so wide ranging that their
occasional occurrence can’t be ruled out, although ranchers’ reaction to
the possibility has not been positive.
Ranchers aren’t the only ones to view megafauna restoration with
alarm. Some environmentalists see large introduced animals, whether
native or exotic, as threats to ecosystems already hammered by humans.
Think of Hilda and Alphonse, the gluttonous black bears from Phil
Frank’s comic strip Farley, descending on Marin’s painstakingly restored
salmon and steelhead runs. Turkeys compete for acorns and other foods,
and may eat threatened small animals like red-legged frogs. Native plant
enthusiasts wring their hands as wild boars root up hillsides in search
of food.
Biologists and land managers see boars as the chief villains and often
speak of them as their nineteenth-century counterparts spoke of coyotes
and lions. Farley’s bears are likable Dumpster layabouts; its boars are
nouveau riche, resource-guzzling “Watt Hogs.” I’m not sure that boars
are all bad, though. They may have a part to play. For most of California vegetation’s evolution, as animals such as pronghorns, elk, and
deer grazed or browsed it, others such as mastodons, and ground sloths
“plowed” it, seeking roots, bulbs, truffles, and other buried foods. As
Daniel Janzen observes, the plants are adapted to such treatment and in
some cases depend on it. When those species disappeared about fifteen
thousand years ago, grizzlies continued to occupy the rooting niche. Explorers wrote of entire ridges dug up by bears.
Now boars occupy the niche. In remote areas like Henry Coe State
Park, sizable boar populations coexist with grasslands and savannas
that retain many native plant species. Elsewhere, boars root up mats
of exotic grasses and forbs left by intensive ranching. This is unsightly,
like one recently rooted swale I examined. Formerly thick with exotic
hay grasses like timothy, it now contained mostly exotic weeds—sow
thistle, milk thistle, Canada thistle, and black mustard—with some
native tarweeds mixed in. Yet, on the drier slopes just above the swale,
where the boars had rooted the slopes down to bare soil, the plants
that remained were almost all natives, including purple needlegrass,
wild rye, biscuitroot, soaproot, blue-eyed grass, mule’s ear sunflowers,
178

m e g a fau n a b y t h e bay

tarweeds, and oak seedlings. In contrast, exotic wild oats predominated
on surrounding hillsides. I don’t understand how this happened—but
there it was.
Boars affect small wildlife as well as vegetation, since they’ll eat
anything they can catch. But I haven’t perceived any marked impact
on other species, in contrast to the situation at Point Reyes, where
population explosions of exotic fallow and axis deer that competed
for the browsing niche noticeably decreased the numbers of native
blacktailed deer, even possibly of smaller herbivores. Boars don’t compete with large native rooters, since none remain here except possibly
black bears. Biologists worry about boars impacting bears in Appalachia, but they coexist in wildlands throughout Eurasia. Visiting national parks in Thailand (where I saw a sun bear sitting in a tree like
Baloo in The Jungle Book), I was surprised at park administrations’
positive attitude to boars, especially since so many more charismatic
species live there. One park had a kiosk devoted to boar behavior, including that they sometimes build huts of branches for shelter during
the rainy season. I’ve never seen that. (Farley’s Watt Hogs live in monster homes.)
Mature wild boars definitely are not cute (young ones are), but they
are magnificent beasts, leggy and agile in the woods. Indeed, the gregarious, prolific Old World species would be a more appropriate mascot
for present-day California than the solitary, slow-breeding grizzly. It
would take just one letter to change UC–Berkeley’s Golden Bears into
its Golden Boars. That won’t happen, of course, and wild boar rooting
is certainly no ecological panacea in today’s wildlands. Its erosive potential worries harried water managers. Interestingly, however, there’s not
much we can do to stop boars from influencing the ecosystem. They’re
more a part of it now than we are.
The boar situation has a corollary that may represent a missed opportunity. The Irvingtonian fauna included a peccary of the genus Platygonus that probably rooted for food. Platygonus was long considered
extinct, but in 1972, biologists in the remote Paraguayan Gran Chaco
forest discovered a living genus, Catagonus, very like it. Introducing
Catagonus here might have helped a rare, dwindling species to survive
while filling the rooting niche with more manageable animals than the
wild boars. But the boars now fill the niche, a lesson in the downside of
careless meddling with nature.
179

mountains and marshes

Given such difficulties, could what we have now in the Bay Area be
called a functional megafauna? Nobody sees today’s unplanned mélange
of natives and exotics as ideal. Still, I think Bay Area wildlands are better
for the big animals that survive in them, although that’s hard to prove in
light of our limited understanding of their long-term ecological and evolutionary role. My own experience in decades of local hiking suggests
that they enliven their environment. That may be because such places
are among the most remote and undisturbed, but not necessarily. I’ve
seen more biological exuberance around the elk at Tomales Point and
Limantour than on many walks through the more remote but elk-less
southern part of Phil Burton Wilderness.
One October day in 1994, I saw three long-tailed weasels at Tomales
Point, more than I’ve seen elsewhere in one day. I also saw a burrowing
owl, which I hadn’t seen elsewhere at Point Reyes. One foggy afternoon
after elk reintroduction at Limantour, every coyote bush seemed to have
a young rabbit under it, and one bush had a coyote under it, the first
I’d seen there. That August, I witnessed a mass migration of quail there,
hundreds trooping up an elk-browsed hillside. I’ve seen quail all over
the Bay Area, of course, but not hundreds in one place. Naturalists have
often remarked on an abundance of smaller animals around big ones,
suggesting that they improve habitat for all by renewing and diversifying vegetation with their activities. Daniel Janzen writes that landscapes “moderately and patchily browsed” by a variety of big animals
“may be more like those before megafaunal extinction than were those
present at the time of the Spanish conquest.”
On the other hand, Janzen also observes that large megafaunas may
limit some smaller creatures. He found the reptile populations of East
African national parks—the world’s land megafauna capitals—much
scarcer than those in Central or South American ones. He theorized that
the big game and their predators increased the population of smaller
scavengers like jackals, foxes, and raptors, which then preyed heavily
on snakes, lizards, and turtles at times when scavenging failed, such as
droughts. Still, the Central and South American parks where Janzen
found reptiles abundant have more diverse megafaunas than Bay Area
ones, including reptile eaters like peccaries, jaguars (which relish turtles),
jaguarundis, ocelots, tayras, and a wide range of vultures and raptors.
One thing is certain, anyway. If a place is big enough for elk and
mountain lions, it’s big enough for many other creatures. I’ve seen more
180

m e g a fau n a b y t h e bay

Pacific pond turtles in boar-infested Henry Coe than anywhere else in
the Bay Area. And while reconstituted mammoths are unlikely in the
Bay Area’s foreseeable future, some monster mammals moving around
the landscape would be a good counterpoint to the monster homes
crawling up the hillsides.
—Bay Nature, January–March 2004

181

first impressions

The Bay Area has a long history of flower children. At least, that’s what
a portrait of Adelbert von Chamisso, who gave the California poppy its
scientific name, suggests. His flowing locks and rakish beret wouldn’t
seem out of place on a Family Dog concert poster. In fact, Chamisso
was a pioneer of the romanticism that later evolved into hippie poets
and rock singers. Robert Schumann used his love poems as lyrics for his
famous leider.
Born to French nobles who fled to Germany after the Revolution
of 1789, Chamisso grew up speaking German and even served in the
Prussian army, but he suffered from a sense of cultural alienation and
confused identity. He expressed this in his poetry as well as a classic
short story, “Peter Schlemihl,” about a man who sells his shadow to the
devil. His alienation also motivated him to study natural history. “Shut
off from society by my early guilt,” he wrote, “Nature, which I had ever
loved, was given me for my enjoyment, spread out like a rich garden
before me.”
A romantic poet like Chamisso would be an unlikely expedition
member today, but artists were as liable as scientists to become explorers
in the early nineteenth century. Indeed, scientists per se didn’t exist yet.
The Swedish botanist Carl Linnaeus had only recently founded biology
as a systematic discipline, and the word “scientist” wouldn’t come into
common use for decades. Germany’s greatest poet, Goethe, was among
its leading botanists. The natural world, increasingly accessible and still
largely unknown, was open to anyone with the energy and curiosity to

183

mountains and marshes

explore it. Though the expeditions they accompanied were colonial and
commercial, artistic explorers like Chamisso sought beauty as well as
facts. Early conservationists like Thoreau and Muir would be enthusiastic readers of their accounts.
In 1815, partly to avoid serving in another war against Napoleon, the
thirty-four-year-old poet shipped aboard a Russian expedition led by a
twenty-eight-year-old captain, Otto von Kotzebue. It circled the globe
but paid special attention to western North America because Russia’s
highly profitable sea otter trade was threatened as more hunters competed for a dwindling population. In October 1816, Kotzebue’s ship, the
Rurik, sailed into San Francisco Bay, then so remote that the Spanish
colony’s garrison had never seen a Russian flag. The soldiers also hadn’t
been paid for seven years: they survived by buying food from the Franciscan mission with money made from smuggling.
“We ate on shore in a tent,” Chamisso wrote in his journal, “and our
friends from the Presidio were always promptly on hand. . . . The misery
in which they languished . . . did not permit them to be hosts.”
The orange poppies that are now the state flower were so abundant on
coastal hills then that California was known as Tierra del Fuego. Spanish
colonists called them lyrical names like copa de oro and dormidera,
“little sleeper,” referring to their use as a mild narcotic. But the Bay Area’s
very remoteness, along with Spain’s suspicion of colonial rivals, made the
Rurik’s stay so brief that Chamisso never saw poppies covering the hills,
only stray late-blooming specimens. So, although he collected, described,
and scientifically named it, the poppy’s spring glories never made it into
the romantic poems he wrote after returning to Europe.
Chamisso’s truncated vision of the Bay Area’s showiest flower reflects a paradox about the region. Although it is one of the world’s
largest and loveliest estuarine ecosystems, Old World civilization has
tended to overlook its natural qualities—first because so few civilized
people knew of it, then because so many did as they rushed to exploit it when the 1849 gold rush transformed it from a backwater to a
boomtown.
Indeed, it took civilization more than two centuries to find San Francisco Bay. European ships began sailing up the California coast in the
1500s, but the foggy and seldom pacific Pacific Ocean seems to have
hidden the Golden Gate during all that time, although early natural
history accounts are scanty because conditions were too harrowing for
184

first impressions

educated observers, except the occasional ship’s captain or priest. They
sketch a kind of lost world where forbidding coastal climate hid bucolic conditions inland. The first Spanish expedition, captained by Juan
Rodriguez Cabrillo in 1542, recorded snow on bleak hills above Monterey Bay in November but rich forests and savannas inland, with large
human populations and herds of elk and pronghorns so numerous that
they reminded the adventurers of livestock in Spain. But frequent violent
storms and outbreaks of scurvy decimated the expedition. Wounded in a
fight with native Costonoans, Cabrillo himself died of gangrene.
Although Cabrillo’s ships sailed past the Bay Area, a more famous
expedition probably stopped here to refit in 1579. Sir Francis Drake’s
Golden Hind certainly circumnavigated the globe, but most of what is
known about his alleged stay here is from a book later published by his
nephew. It is probably based on the expedition chaplain’s journal, but
some historians suspect it was partly fabricated to contravene Spain’s
America claims. Still, although some scholars advocate other sites, the
book’s natural history descriptions sound a lot like someplace on the
Bay Area’s coast—possibly Bodega Bay but more likely Drakes Bay at
Point Reyes. It was almost certainly not San Francisco Bay; the crafty
English pirates would have known a good thing if they’d seen it.
The Drake book mentions islands where the crew killed enough seals
and seabirds to supply their voyage to Asia. They sound like the Farallones. It says that the native people made long formal speeches when
the English arrived and later returned gifts they had been offered, while
women wailed and scratched their faces until the blood ran. They sound
like the Coast Miwoks native to Point Reyes, who believed that the
spirits of their dead passed out to sea. When a whale-sized object full of
pale, strangely clad men suddenly appeared offshore, the Miwoks may
well have taken them for ancestral spirits.
Although it was June, the Drake book reports that “nipping cold”
and “most stynkinge fogges” prevailed in the Bay and that “the face of
the earthe itselfe” was “unhandsome and deformed . . . shewing trees
without leaves, and the ground without greenes.” Drakes Bay is often
like that in summer, especially after fires. Inland, however, they found “a
goodly counry” populated by “very large and fat Deere, which we saw
by the thousands, as we supposed, in a hearde.” The book doesn’t describe local wildlife in detail, except “a strange kind of Connies,” of which
“the whole Countrey” was “a warren.” With feet like a mole’s, a tail like a
185

mountains and marshes

rat’s, and food-carrying pouches on either side of its head, the “connie”
sounds like the pocket gopher, of which the Drakes Bay headlands are
still “a warren.”
Two more Spanish expeditions passed along the coast, in 1595 and
1602, but the declining empire then largely ignored Alta California for
almost two centuries. European geographers mapped it as an island for
most of that time. When the overland Gaspar de Portola expedition
finally discovered San Francisco Bay from the East Bay hills in 1769, it
was an accident—they were looking for already-known Monterey Bay.
The de Anza expedition, which arrived a few years later, did include
an observant and articulate naturalist. Pedro Font, a native of Catalonia,
was a missionary in northwest Mexico when his superiors ordered him
to accompany de Anza, with whom he traveled overland, on horseback
or foot, from the Colorado River to the Bay Area, where he spent part of
March and April 1776. Like his predecessors, Font had mixed feelings
about the place. He enjoyed the warm spring weather and wildflowers
but disliked the rugged wildness of it. Grizzly bears terrified him: “There
are many of these beasts in that country, and they often attack and do
damage to the Indians when they go to hunt, of which I have seen horrible examples.”
Coastal redwoods awed Font, but he was less impressed with the
interior valleys’ potential as places to establish missions, his main concern. “This place is one of very level land, well covered with pasturage,”
he wrote of the South Bay, “but it is lacking in firewood, for there is no
timber but that along the river, which is of cottonwoods, sycamores,
ash, and laurel; and in all that region there is not a single stone.” The
expedition ventured east through the Livermore Valley, but although
the Sierra Nevada gleamed invitingly in the distance, the Central Valley
marshes and alkali flats daunted even the intrepid de Anza. Font thought
the country might be uninhabitable, certainly one of the great real estate
misappraisals of all time.
Even after Spain established the San Francisco Presidio later in 1776,
explorers continued to sail right past the Bay. But that was changing.
Voyaging was safer, and the search for colonial wealth had become systematic as empires competed for territory. A British expedition to California under Captain George Vancouver entered the Bay three times
between 1792 and 1794, so unnerving Spanish officials that they restricted the English to the Presidio.
186

first impressions

Naturalists played an integral part in this, since wildlife like the sea
otter could have enormous commercial value. The Vancouver expedition naturalist, Archibald Menzies, was a paragon of the new exploration. He would circumnavigate the globe twice during his career. English
botany’s doyen, Sir Joseph Banks, had enjoined him “to investigate the
whole of the natural history of the countries visited, paying attention
to the nature of the soil, and with the prospect of sending out settlers
from England, whether grains, fruits, etc., cultivated in Europe are likely
to thrive. All trees, shrubs, plants, grasses, ferns, and mosses are to be
enumerated by their scientific names as well as those used in the language of the natives.” Menzies complied energetically, and hundreds of
his specimens—including redwood, California laurel, big-leaf maple,
toyon, madrone (Arbutus menziesii), and Douglas fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii)—were the first of their kind to reach Europe.
Menzies’s job on the expedition was not easy. He was on less than
friendly terms with Vancouver, who turned his botanical assistant before
the mast—made him work as a sailor instead of a plant collector—then
put Menzies himself under arrest when he complained. Most of his live
specimens (including roots and seeds of California poppy) died during
the voyage, perhaps because he was unable to care for them with his
assistant banished to the rigging. Like Chamisso, he missed the Bay
Area’s spring flowering season. “I had little opportunity to augment my
botanical collection,” he wrote of an October 1794 foray into Tomales
Bay. “We saw no fresh water, and the arid aspect of the Country would
indicate its being a scarce article if at all procurable.”
Two decades later, when Chamisso sailed into the Bay on Kotzebue’s
Rurik, he faced similar difficulties, including strained relations with a
domineering captain. He knew that Menzies had collected there—Vancouver’s account of the voyage had appeared in 1798, although little
had been published about its botanical discoveries. The Russians had
aroused Spanish suspicions even more than the English by establishing
Fort Ross north of Bodega Bay, so the authorities restricted the expedition to the Presidio even on its first visit. A trip to Mission Dolores, then
an hour’s ride inland, was the longest that Kotzebue recorded during the
October stay.
“The fogs, which the prevailing sea winds blow over the coast, dissolve
in summer over a heated and parched soil,” Chamisso wrote, echoing Menzies’s frustration, “and the country exhibits in autumn only the prospect
187

mountains and marshes

of bare scorched tracts, alternating with poor stunted bushes, and dazzling wastes of drift sand . . . the Flora of this country is not adorned by
one of those species of plants which are produced by a warmer sun.”
But his poet’s eye helped Chamisso see diversity in apparent monotony. “It however offers much novelty to the botanist,” he continued.
“Well known North American species are found mixed with others
belonging to the country; and most of the kinds are yet undescribed.”
He eventually gave scientific names to more than thirty new plant species in San Francisco, including California wax myrtle, yerba buena,
and California sagebrush, as well as California poppy. He named the
latter Eschscholzia californica, after his friend Johann Eschscholtz, the
expedition surgeon. Chamisso was the first to recognize the species’s
uniqueness—Menzies had placed it in an Old World poppy genus, the
celandines. Again like Menzies, however, Chamisso had little success with
live specimens.
The first botanist to send back many viable live specimens of California plants was David Douglas, a self-taught Scottish horticulturist
who spent nineteen months in what was by then Mexican California,
from 1830 to 1833. An energetic if moody man, Douglas was the first
to climb many peaks in the Cascades and Rockies. California’s unique
vegetation fascinated him. He wrote an English patron: “It would take
at least three years to do anything like justice to the botany.” Douglas
spent relatively little time in the Bay Area, but, characteristically, he saw
much. He apparently climbed Mount Diablo and made discoveries there,
including the endemic Mount Diablo globe lily. He described the redwoods, which he saw in the East Bay hills and on the San Francisco peninsula, as “the great beauty of California vegetation . . . which gives the
mountains a most peculiar, I was almost going to say awful, appearance.”
The 1848 Sutter’s Mill gold discovery marked the end of natural history’s romantic era in California. In its wake, the Bay Area changed in
two years from a wilderness outpost to the West Coast’s major metropolis, and minerals replaced living organisms as the focus of interest. The
era was not inactive in biological research—it saw the founding of the
California Academy of Sciences in 1853. But even a professional botanist like William H. Brewer had to get a job with the State Geological
Survey, founded in 1861, to explore here. Appointed “principal assistant, in charge of the botanical department,” Brewer spent as much time
in the Bay Area investigating coal and mercury deposits as native plants.
188

first impressions

Many native species had already disappeared from the region by that
time. In the valleys west of Mount Diablo, where Font had seen flowery
bunchgrass prairies thronged with wildlife, Brewer described a state of
“high cultivation; farmhouses have sprung up and rich fields of grain
and growing orchards abound. Game was once very abundant—and
deer, antelope, and elk like cattle, in herds. . . . All are now exterminated, but we find their horns by the hundreds.” Only in backcountry
like Corral Hollow east of Livermore Valley did he see grizzlies and
pronghorns, and they soon vanished there.
When John Muir reached San Francisco in 1868, he had heard so
much about the area’s wholesale urbanization that he asked the first
man he met the quickest way out of town, then kept walking until he
got to Yosemite Valley. Indeed, he was a little neglectful of the Bay Area’s
natural qualities after he settled in Martinez in 1880 to manage his
father-in-law’s fruit ranch. Except for jottings in his private journals, he
wrote little about them.
Yet Muir’s classic description of the Central Valley seen from Pacheco
Pass on his way to Yosemite in 1868 shows how romantic natural history
like Chamisso’s had transformed perceptions. Where Font had seen only
desolation a century before, Muir saw a landscape that “after all my wanderings still appears as the most beautiful I have ever beheld . . . glowing
golden in the sunshine . . . one smooth, flowery, lake-like bed of fertile
soil.” Had Muir arrived in the Bay Area a few decades earlier, he could
have described its’ valley floor wildflowers similarly.
Early naturalists’ visions of this place are dimmed, but they survive.
Many of the wildflowers collected by Chamisso and Menzies still grow
in the built-over Presidio. Botanists used explorers’ descriptions to look
for them, although not without difficulty. Alice Eastwood, a botanist
with the California Academy of Sciences, wrote in the 1940s that “very
few” of the species Chamisso described survived in the Presidio because
“the dense forest of cypress, pine and eucalyptus planted years ago”
had replaced them. But Eastwood’s eye seems to have missed on that
occasion. “Fortunately I did not know of these comments when I embarked on a search for these plants,” wrote Ida Geary, another botanist,
in a 1979 issue of Fremontia, the magazine of the California Native
Plant Society. Inspired by the earlier accounts, Geary and her associates
combed the Presidio and made surprising discoveries. “The first year
[1976] we found 48 of the 82 [species that Eschscholtz and Chamisso
189

mountains and marshes

collected] . . . recently, we added more.” Geary’s finds included rarities
like dune tansy, a sunflower relative that grows only in the Bay Area, as
well as survival experts like California poppy.
Today, habitat restoration projects at the Presidio aim to use early records as guides for restoring more of those species, although such efforts
sometimes run up against people’s desire for shady woodlands of exotic
trees instead of natural open dunes—the “bare, scorched tracts” that
Chamisso described. But his descriptions could lead to a better balance
between the world that explorers found here and the world colonists
brought with them.
—Bay Nature, January–March 2006

190

oaklands

I live in the Thousands Oaks district in Berkeley, but I don’t know why
it’s called that. Did someone go around and count the oaks in the early
twentieth century when it was becoming a suburb? I don’t think so, but
it’s a nice round number for real estate promotion. And there must have
been a lot of oaks here, probably well over a thousand, mostly coast live
oaks and valley oaks along the creeks, with perhaps some blue oaks and
interior live oaks on drier spots. Many original coast live oaks remain
in out of the way places, and there may be some valley oaks too. I don’t
recall encountering any original blue oaks or interior live oaks, which
live mainly farther inland.
I know of one very large interior live oak here, however. It’s in the
parking strip in front of my house, and I planted it twenty years ago to
replace a dying ornamental cherry. It is so large, indeed, that I might
have thought twice about planting it if I’d foreseen its size. Interior live
oak tends to be smaller than coast live oak, but maybe that’s because it
mostly grows in drier places. My parking strip tree has found interior
live oak heaven. It has grown bigger than a coast live oak across the
street that was already mature when I planted it, perhaps abetted by the
subterranean plume of sewer leaks that percolates down from the stately
homes in the hills.
The tree has a certain unnerving air of urban legend. It’s like a mutant
monster movie oak, relentlessly reaching toward the house, the power
lines above the street, and the pipes under the ground. It continually
grimes my car with aphid gum and crisp little brown leaves. It repels
the street sweeper with its branches. It lifts the sidewalk, although not
191

mountains and marshes

as high as the exotic sweet gums and camphor trees on the rest of the
block. Pruning just seems to encourage it. Tree removal companies leave
business cards on the porch.
There are compensations. Bush tits build Christmas stocking nests in
it. On late summer evenings, tree crickets sing in it, audible from houses
away. (They don’t sing in the camphor trees or sweet gums.) I don’t
know the half of what goes on in it related to crows, jays, nuthatches,
titmice, woodpeckers, squirrels, bats, and so forth. Another compensation is less rational. In these days of media hand-wringing about sudden
oak death and other tree scourges, I just like having an overgrown native
oak in front of my house, figuratively thumbing its nose at the socioeconomic growth engine that sheds crocodile tears about tree diseases as it
condones their invasion.
For good or ill, not all oaks are so vigorous. Another tree that I planted
in the parking strip at the same time as the live oak seemed likely to be a
fast grower. It came from a big acorn that I found under an oracle oak,
a hybrid of interior live oak and California black oak that appears frequently enough to have a name. Oracle oaks are evergreen like interior
live oaks, but their leaves have spiny lobes like black oaks.
Hybrids tend to be vigorous, and the acorn I picked up certainly was.
When I got home, I dropped it in a pot with some humus and forgot
about it awhile. When I looked again, its taproot had grown around and
around the pot, looking for a way out. So I planted it, and it grew fast at
first, but, although it’s still alive, its trunk is about a quarter of the size
of the interior live oak’s trunk. A fungus attacks its branches and foliage
every year. Anyway, it’s not an oracle oak. It’s deciduous, and although
its lobed leaves are spiny like a black oak’s, the lobes are broader, like a
Garry oak’s. I don’t know what to call it.
But that’s not unusual with oaks. In fact, we’ll probably never be
sure how many kinds of oaks there are. Global estimates of oak species
numbers range from two hundred to one thousand, and just about ever
source I’ve consulted cites a different number. Oaks have been “speciating” for many millions of year, and, as I discovered in my parking
strip, the various species readily hybridize to form crosses that may or
may not be species, depending on taxonomists and geneticists. Even
the genus itself, Quercus, seems shaky. Several decades ago some new
trees turned up in Malaysia, and scientists had trouble deciding if they
belonged in Quercus or not. Some well-known trees in East Asia and
192

oa k l a n d s

North America are classed in different genera but are called oaks, like
the tanoaks in the North Bay. Tanoaks bear odiferous white flowers like
those of chestnuts (genus Castanea), but their nuts are like acorns, not
chestnuts, so we call them oaks, although their genus is Lithocarpus,
“stone seed.” Oak death is hard on tanoaks; another fungus virtually
extirpated American chestnut from Appalachian forests.
All this taxonomy indicates the oaks’ importance. The more something concerns people, the more names they have for it. Oaks are the
hardwoods of temperate forest; no other broadleaf genus is more
widely distributed or abundant. Oaks dominate not only the temperate
deciduous forests of the Northern Hemisphere but the temperate evergreen ones as well. They invaded South America and Africa as land
bridges formed, and they followed Western civilization to Australia and
New Zealand.
Quercus may have a leaf style for every gradation of temperate sunlight; it certainly has one for every Bay Area gradation. At one extreme,
big, soft, floppy leaves absorb every filtered sunbeam on canyon bottoms;
at the other, tiny, hard, waxy leaves resist chaparral’s relentless heat and
light. Individual plants produce a variety of shapes and textures adapted
to conditions. In the full sunlight at the top of deciduous oaks, leaves
are slender and deeply lobed, quite unlike their broad, shallow-lobed
counterparts on lower branches. How the tree “knows” to do this is not
well understood.
Temperate landscapes tend to be mosaics of oak diversity, with one
or more species to a habitat, and the Bay Area is an example. Deciduous
valley oak (Q. lobata) is prima donna, North America’s largest oak,
growing on sites with deep, well-drained soils and plenty of moisture—
canyon bottoms, savannas, foothill flats. In the North Bay, the similar,
slightly smaller Garry oak (Q. garryana) shares the hills with California
black oak (Q. kellogii), Douglas fir, and tanoak. Coast live oak (Q. agrifolia) often shares habitat with these trees but is more adaptable, and it
predominates throughout the ocean-side hills. Black oak also appears at
higher elevations throughout the Bay Area, and if the slopes are steep
and rocky enough, canyon live oak (Q. chrysolepis) does too.
As the habitat gets tougher, the oaks do. Interior live oak (Q. wislilzennii) tends to replace coast live oak on the slopes east of the ocean-side
hills, and as the climate gets steadily hotter and drier toward the Central Valley, blue oak (Q. douglassii) becomes increasingly predominant,
193

mountains and marshes

until it and ghost pine are virtually the only trees for miles. Although
blue oak is winter deciduous like valley and black oak, it is even more
resistant to arid climate than some desert shrubs such as mesquite and
ironwood. During droughts, blue oaks undergo physiological changes
that let them use decreasing amounts of water. When weather becomes
too dry, they drop their leaves in summer and stay dormant until the
next spring.
If conditions are even more stressful, oaks readily trade their archetypical tree status for survival as shrubs. In the Bay Area, several kinds
of shrub oak live happily in dry, windswept chaparral and can be hard
to distinguish from real shrubs like mountain mahogany, silktassel, and
(of course) poison oak. It’s also hard to distinguish them from each
other, not least in that both coast and interior live oak have stunted
forms that grow in chaparral. The University of California Press Native
Shrubs of the Bay Area says, “At least two” local species “can truly be
called shrubs”: leather oak (Q. durata) and scrub oak (Q. berberidifolia).
But I’ve never been very clear about them. Both species are known to
hybridize not only with valley oak and Garry oak but with each other.
The Bay Area’s abundance and diversity of oaks had a lot to do with
the high density of Native American populations here. Acorns were their
staff of life, and if the crops of the most desirable species, tanoak, failed,
there were always valley and coast live oaks, and then black oak and
the other oaks. It’s less clear what the effect of the high human density
on the oaks was. Much of the Bay Area was grassland when Europeans
arrived, with woodland scattered in hills, in canyons, and along streams.
Woods were so scattered in the East and South Bay that there is no historical record of tree squirrels; the native gray squirrel is still confined
to the North Bay. Whether hundreds of generations of people gathering
acorns had something to do with this is impossible to say. Native Americans certainly treasured oaks: a family’s right to gather from specific
groves was passed from generation to generation.
If native people possibly reduced oak woodland gradually, colonists
certainly did so quickly. With no use for acorns except as livestock food,
they had little reason to conserve the trees. As whaling, fur hunting, and
the hide trade between Spanish cattle barons and Yankee merchantmen
burgeoned in the early nineteenth century, coast live oaks disappeared
with accelerating speed into the boilers and stoves of ships as well as of

194

oa k l a n d s

colonial towns. Mission environs described as live oak woodlands by
the founding Franciscans in the late eighteenth century were treeless by
the 1830s.
Spanish and then Mexican colonists used oak for barrels, wagons,
tools, and furniture. They didn’t use much for building. Like the Southwest, California was a land of adobe and brick before loggers pushed
north to the big conifer forests. Valley oak is brittle and relatively soft—
called mush oak by some—and live oak wood, although strong, is generally too knotty for boards. Plenty of strong, straight Garry oaks grew
in the North Bay, but native people there resisted colonization until the
surge of Anglo invasion. Anyway, those oaks grew with such a wealth of
conifers that they were bypassed when logging began in earnest.
Bay Area history since then has been grim for oaks, as ranching,
farming, and urbanization destroyed most of the habitat. Oaks are more
at risk than redwoods, especially valley oaks, which grow in prime subdivision areas. Even if they’re left standing, summer watering of lawns
and gardens kills them through root diseases. Oaks seem to be having
trouble reproducing even in nonurbanized areas. One can walk for
hours through mature oak woodland and see very few saplings. Many
creatures eat the acorns, and many attack the seedlings that manage to
sprout. One study suggested that rodent populations increased by introduction of exotic grasses and forbs were suppressing oak reproduction.
Others blamed deer and livestock. Blue oak seedlings in particular tend
to have a nibbled look about them.
Attempts to help oaks reproduce by planting saplings in plastic
sleeves seem to have limited success. Many of the trees thus protected at
Mount Diablo in the 1990s have not survived, perhaps partly because
the state stopped maintaining them as funding dried up. Sometimes the
sleeves even harmed the trees instead of protecting them, as with a blue
oak sapling I found that had been bowed to the ground when its sleeve
collapsed. I propped it up, but it declined slowly over the next two years.
Oak growth is a lengthy process in this climate.
Considering how oaks reproduce, simply by dropping a large, nutritious seed on the ground, it may seem surprising that Quercus has
survived for millions of years. This suggests that we don’t really understand the dynamics of oak regeneration. Despite the apparently dismal
prospects, oaks are reproducing here. Coast live oaks in particular are

195

mountains and marshes

determined hangers-on in urban areas, coming up in hedges, fence lines,
and so on. They are just as ubiquitous in the hills. The other species are
less resilient, but the more I look, the more seedlings and saplings of
valley oak, blue oak, interior live oak, and black oak I see.
Little Yosemite in Pine Canyon at Mount Diablo is a kind of Bay
Area oak hologram, with valley oaks on the flats; coast live oaks by
the creeks; interior live oaks, black oaks, and blue oaks on the slopes
and ridgelines; and scrub oaks in the chaparral around Castle Crags, although I don’t know if they are the real chaparral species or just stunted
live oaks. But that uncertainty seems typical of oaks too.
I never get tired of the seasonal leaf color changes there: from catkin
pink to yellow-green to dark bluish green to autumn violet and amber
to winter violet. It has a tapestry quality, like the backgrounds of
Italian Renaissance portraits. Pine Canyon really should be called Oak
Canyon—the pines are just scatterings of ghost pines. But almost every
canyon in the Bay Area would be an Oak Canyon if that were the main
naming criterion.
—2008

196

dance of the webspinners

Alien species are so controversial—as with the endless squabbles about
eucalyptus trees—that the idea of exotic organisms invading the Bay
Area and having no discernible environmental impacts seems counterintuitive. But a couple of exotic species here are so ecologically unassuming as to be virtually unnoticed. When Santa Clara University’s
magazine asked me to contribute an article on the subject, I’d never
heard of them.
The editor wanted me to write about a biology professor who studies
webspinners, so I assumed he was talking about spiders. I was wrong.
Webspinners, technically called embiids, are insects, and they comprise
an entire order. Like tent caterpillars, they live colonially in webs that
they spin out of the strong, sticky proteins that we call silk, but the
similarity ends there. Tent caterpillars are the larvae of moths, among
the world’s best-known insects. Embiids may not be the world’s leastknown insects, but they are serious contenders for the title. Their closest
relatives, according to Janice Edgerly-Rooks, who studies them at Santa
Clara, are the stick insects that weirdly mimic branches or leaves. But
embiids don’t look or behave quite like anything else.
“Their bodies are very elongated because they spend most of their
lives in their colonies,” Edgerly-Rooks said. “Earwigs are about the only
common insects I can think of to compare them to, but that’s terrible because people hate earwigs, and embiids don’t act like earwigs, infesting
houses and pinching. Embiids are about as inoffensive as insects get.”
Until scientists got interested in them, humans virtually ignored embiids. They don’t eat anything we want or otherwise interfere with us.
197

mountains and marshes

Various species feed directly on lichens, leaf litter, soil detritus, and other
humble plant materials. We haven’t found much use for embiids either.
Their silk isn’t woven into fabric as with silkworm moth cocoons or
some tropical spiderwebs. Even where people eat insects, embiids aren’t
on the menu. The only use Edgerly-Rooks knew about is in Central
America, where people make bandages from embiid webs. (Antibiotic
chemicals in the silk may help to prevent infections.)
Of course, embiids’ economic unimportance to humans doesn’t mean
they are unimportant in nature. “The first thing people usually ask me
about embiids is what they are good for,” Edgerly-Rooks said. “I could
ask what humans are good for compared to embiids, which play a big
ecological role in converting plant detritus into soil. If they all disappeared, we don’t know what would happen.”
Embiids are an ancient order, occurring on every continent except
Antarctica, but they seem never to have adapted to cool climates, and
most species live in the tropics. The few species native to the United
States occur in the Southeast or along the Mexican border. Civilization
is changing that, however, as climate warms and some embiids hitch
rides on ships and other transport. Although the Bay Area has no native
embiids, two genera have colonized it within the past century. The
nimble, cryptic insects take advantage of suburban growth: “They spin
their webs in mulch or other stuff used in landscaping,” Edgerly-Rooks
said, “so the more people move the stuff around, the more embiids they
get. I just found webs in the mulch around a new parking lot outside
the lab here.”
One genus, Haploembia, is from the Mediterranean and is now common
here, spinning bluish webs under rocks. The other genus, Oligotoma,
comes from the Middle East and is scarcer than Haploembia, suggesting
that it arrived later. But it reproduces faster, so it will probably increase.
It has colonized many other countries, sometimes to Edgerly-Rooks’s chagrin when she travels in search of new embiids and finds that Oligotoma
has arrived before her.
Embiids are indeed inconspicuous. My own attempts to find wild Bay
Area colonies by turning over rocks were flops. Even when Edgerly-Rooks
showed me captive colonies in her laboratory, the clear plastic containers
just seemed full of dead leaves until she pointed out networks of tubular
webs on their sides. When she opened a canister, it looked lifeless inside
until she began lifting leaves and revealing slender brown shapes with
198

da n c e o f t h e w e b s p i n n e rs

oddly enlarged front legs that swiftly scurried out of sight. “Embiid” derives from the Greek for “lively.” Their cryptic grace made them seem
elfin, like something in A Midsummer Night’s Dream.
She had pinned a sliver of persimmon to the leaves as a treat, although
the embiids can live on just leaf litter. When I asked how many were in the
canister, she shook her head: “I don’t know. Hundreds.” The lab’s dozens
of canisters doubtless contained many thousands of embiids, all munching
happily on dead leaves and a little persimmon and lettuce. Some colonies
have thrived for years since she collected them in the wild.
She had about thirty species from many bioregions, and they demonstrated what is perhaps most unusual about the order. Her species all
looked pretty much alike, and in fact all the world’s embiid species look
pretty much alike: “You can look at females of five different species together and not see any differences except maybe in the color. There may
be subtle variations, and the eggs can be shaped differently, but on the
whole there’s an amazing uniformity of appearance. They’re the only
insect order like that.”
On the other hand, Edgerly-Rooks said, embiid behavior may be unusually diverse and complex. “When I sent embiid behavioral data to a
software specialist, he told me it was the ‘longest repeating pattern’ he’d
ever seen. They’re not machines. If something happens to their web,
they go with their antennae and evaluate the situation and find out what
needs to be done and start doing it.”
Embiids are also unusual in that they spin their silk from multiple
glands in their enlarged front feet instead of from their mouths like caterpillars. A David Attenborough documentary, Life in the Undergrowth,
shows an embiid on a rain forest tree on the Caribbean island of Trinidad spinning silk to repair a hole in her colony. Again, there is something elfin about this—it’s like Jack Frost painting a windowpane. “You
can’t really see it on the screen, but she was literally bending over backwards to spin,” Edgerly-Rooks, who helped with the film, said. “Embiids
appear to do yoga. Most adult insects are built like tanks and have limited or no flexibility. It’s kind of like wearing a coat of armor. It would
be hard to do yoga with that kind of body.”
All embiids, male and female, adult and immature, spin the silken tubes
wherein they spend most of their lives, but spinning behavior varies. Some
species spin more silk than others, and different species have different
spinning patterns. Edgerly-Rooks called the patterns “choreographies,”
199

mountains and marshes

and the intricate, rhythmic ways that the little insects waved their legs to
produce and distribute the silk did seem like dancing. Embiid species that
live in soil or leaf litter tend to spin just enough silk to make their tubes
and form small colonies. Species that live aboveground on tree trunks
or rocks may spin protective sheet webs over their tubes, and the sheets
can shield large colonies. Embiid silk varies in color from brilliant white
to blue or pink, and large above ground colonies can be easily visible to
people who know about embiids. People who don’t know about embiids
tend not to notice even large colonies, or to assume that spiders spin them.
As with most insects, embiid females are the main players in the life
cycle. Wingless and sedentary, they make the colonies. Female care of
eggs and young, generally uncommon among insects, is a basic trait of
the Embiidina. Unlike termites or ants, however, embiid colonies don’t
have hierarchies and division of labor. They are groups of females that
live together because it helps them to guard their eggs and babies (called
nymphs, since they hatch resembling small adults instead of as wormlike larvae). On reaching maturity, young individuals usually leave their
natal colony and join another or establish one of their own.
Edgerly-Rooks wrote her PhD dissertation on female natal care at the
Asa Wright Field Station on Trinidad. “Because the British had owned
the island, there was a big natural history literature, so it seemed like a
good place to study them. When I got to the field station, I found colonies all over the trees. But nobody knew much about them, so I’d take
an umbrella into the rain forest and watch embiids all day. And I soon
found out one reason why the females guard their eggs in colonies.
“There are little wasps that parasitize embiid eggs by laying their
own eggs inside them. Whenever I was at an embiid colony, the wasps
were waiting around within the silk. And whenever the web got torn for
any reason, the wasps mobilized to attack the embiid eggs, because the
mother embiid was distracted by her repair work. So if the female embiids weren’t guarding their eggs all the time, they lost them. And it took
six weeks for the eggs to hatch; that whole time the maternal females
had little time to feed themselves, because they were always on guard
duty. So I could see one ‘why’ of embiid social behavior. As soft-bodied,
sedentary animals, embiids are very vulnerable to predators.”
Edgerly-Rooks paused, then clarified: “Actually, the adults aren’t all
that vulnerable, because they can run really fast, and they can run backward even faster than forward. They can do incredibly fast inside-out
200

da n c e o f t h e w e b s p i n n e rs

U-turns. But the eggs and nymphs are easy targets. So there’s a selective
advantage for females to join with each other because something like a
wasp is less likely to get into a colony if many females are maintaining
it than if just a few are.” There are trade-offs to forming big colonies,
though. “The bigger the embiid colonies get, and the longer they last, the
more wasps and other predators they attract.”
Embiid males resemble male ants, in that they exist mainly to mate.
They search for colonies of females with chemoreceptors on their elongated antennae, and when they find one, they try to get inside the silk
tubes, often facing resistance from the female residents, as well as competition from other males. A male that finds a willing female performs
a courtship ritual that involves twining his body around her. Embiid
males are winged in some species, wingless in others. Winged males
don’t feed after maturity, so their lives are brief. Wingless males continue to feed and may move into colonies to keep other males away. In
some species, such males have enlarged heads, which may help them
guard the females. Some other males of such species are slimmer and
may mimic females as a way to get around the big-headed males in
competition for mates.
Some embiid species have dispensed with males altogether and are
parthenogenetic—a Greek and Latin cognate word meaning “virgin
birth.” The females produce nymphs—always female—without mating.
Entomologists once thought that the commoner Bay Area immigrant
embiid, Haploembia, was a single parthenogenetic species, but then
males turned up in Palo Alto and Mountain View. So Edgerly-Rooks
thinks there may be two Haploembia species here—one with males and
one without.
Embiid males are vital to science because the shapes of their genitalia are among the few features by which taxonomists can distinguish
at least the sexual species. “Another reason that embiids are obscure,”
Edgerly-Rooks wryly complained, “is that most field guides just illustrate them with a squashed male on a slide.”
Although embiids aren’t especially diverse by insect standards,
there may be as many as two thousand species in fourteen families.
Edgerly-Rooks has found a lot of species in the three decades she’s
been studying them. One of her main problems has been that ones she
wanted to study weren’t classified: “I’d take specimens to Ed Ross, a
ninety-three-year-old taxonomist at the California Academy of Science
201

mountains and marshes

who has named most of the embiid species known today. And he’d say:
‘Oh, that’s a can of worms. I haven’t gotten to that yet.’ So I wound up
describing and naming species myself.”
Edgerly-Rooks has embarked on a “life-changing” study of the relationship between embiid behavior and evolution funded by the National
Science Foundation. Collaborating with a taxonomist and a molecular
biologist, she has been observing embiids from all over the world: “The
evolution of a group of organisms has usually been studied through
its morphology,” she said, “through is physical organization. But since
embiids all look so similar, but have such complex behavior, it raises the
question as to whether we can look at an organism’s evolution through
its behavior as well as its morphology.
“For example, how have all the different web-spinning choreographies that embiids perform evolved? Can we categorize groups of embiids by their spinning choreographies and perhaps see how spinning
behavior might have affected evolution from one group to another—
what we call phylogeny? And then, how has spinning affected the evolution of their social behavior? Embiids are a ‘primitively social’ order,
so they may show us a lot about how organisms evolve social behavior
in the first place.”
As she scurried around her lab—from the embiid colonies to a computer, to another computer and back to the colonies—demonstrating the
vast array of films, charts, statistics, and other data that she and her coworkers have amassed, Edgerly-Rooks began to seem a little embiid-like
herself, using a technological choreography to spin a complex web of
ideas and information. The concept of a human with embiid qualities
wasn’t new to her:
“Spider Man is really Embiid Man, you know,” she said. “He spins
his silk from his front appendages like an embiid.” She waved her hands
to demonstrate the embiid technique. “If he spun it from the tip of his
abdomen like a spider, it would look pretty weird in the movies.”
—Santa Clara Magazine, Spring 2009

202

salamander land
the marvelous caudata
In the 1980s, the BBC produced a nature series about North America
called Land of the Eagle. The title is charismatic, but it makes little sense
biologically. Our two eagle species belong to genera common elsewhere:
Europe alone has four genera and ten species of resident and migratory
eagles, including both of North America’s genera. The BBC series should
have been called Land of the Salamander, because North America has
more kinds of salamanders—the tailed, mostly four-legged amphibians
of the order Caudata—than any other continent, and some of our species are very like ancient ones, suggesting that the order may have arisen
on some ancestral version of our continent.
I wasn’t aware of our salamander supremacy when growing up in
New England, but they were my favorites in the Golden Nature Guide
to Reptiles and Amphibians. Finding such secretive but colorful little
creatures under logs or in ponds fascinated me. Local red-backed salamanders and red-spotted newts were like old friends, while distant
kinds seemed exotic. Down south, blind salamanders inhabited caves,
and other species with outlandish names—hellbenders, mud puppies,
sirens, congo eels—lurked in streams and swamps. Out west lived giant,
worm, tiger, and tree salamanders, the last of which particularly caught
my imagination.
“The Tree Salamander of the Pacific Coast frequently lives in water
soaked cavities of trees,” said the guide. “Sometimes a whole colony is
found in one of these holes, where eggs are laid, also.” A picture showed
elfin creatures climbing around in hilly oak savanna. Another book said
they been found sixty feet up in red tree vole nests and that as many as
203

mountains and marshes

twenty-five lived in one colony. Another said they had prehensile tails,
like opossums. They seemed marvelous.
Childhood fascinations can be disappointing in adulthood, but this
one wasn’t. I first arrived in on the Pacific Coast one rainy night in December 1968. Driving from San Francisco Airport north through Marin
County, I saw little creatures crossing the road. When I pulled over for a
closer look, I saw that they were tree salamanders just like those in the
Golden Guide, only better: the headlights showed iridescent gold-andsilver mottling on their skins, where the book had shown drab brown.
I was immediately sold on a place where an early fascination could
be so quickly fulfilled—or partly fulfilled. In the past decades I’ve seen
many tree salamanders, now more commonly called arboreal salamanders (Aneides lugubris). They inhabit my garden in Berkeley. I’ve never
actually seen one in a tree, but that would involve climbing the hollow,
rotten ones they frequent on rainy nights. I prefer to take their arboreal
side on faith. The idea of salamanders in trees still seems marvelous.
Salamander marvels go back a long way. Ancient European legends
hold that Salamandra salamandra, a species related to newts, can live
in fire because of its bright black-and-yellow markings and because individuals sometimes crawl out of logs in fireplaces. Asian lore says that
salamanders of mountain lakes can control the weather—a source of
dragon legends. California Native American mythology also ascribes
magical power to mountain lake salamanders. Some are thought to protect water purity. Not all Bay Area species have acquired such mythic
grandeur, but their evolutionary adaptations are pretty marvelous.
Arboreal salamanders belong to a family called the Plethodontidae,
“many-toothed,” because they have so many tiny teeth. They are also
called lung-less salamanders because, unlike other kinds, they have lost
their lungs in the course of their evolution. (The lobe-finned fish from
which amphibians evolved had lungs.) Many of these lung-less species
live entirely terrestrial lives, which may seem odd, since salamanders
that do have lungs spend part or all of their lives in water. But plethodontids thrive on land by absorbing oxygen through their moist skins
and mouths.
Plethodontids are like most other kinds of salamanders in that they
mate by internal fertilization—of a specialized sort. Instead of injecting
sperm into a female, a male secretes it into a gelatinous packet called a
spermatophore, which he deposits in front of the female after attracting
204

salamander land

her by doing little dances (called leibspiel) or rubbing a sexually stimulating gland on his chin against her snout. If this foreplay is adequate,
she picks up the spermatophore with her cloaca and it dissolves inside
her and fertilizes her eggs. (It isn’t always adequate. I’ve seen breeding
places dotted with rejected spermatophores.)
Plethodontids differ from all other salamanders, however, in the way
their young develop after fertilization. Like most frog tadpoles, the gilled
larvae of most salamander families need to live in water as they develop
into adults after hatching. But plethodontids go through the gilled larval
stage in the egg and hatch as tiny versions of their lung-less, gill-less parents. Some plethodontid genera are semiaquatic, living on the edges of
streams and springs: the females lay their eggs in water. Some are fully
terrestrial: the females lay their eggs underground, often guarding them
until they hatch. This uniquely terrestrial group is the most numerous
and diverse one in North America, and it has produced the planet’s
only tropical salamanders by invading Central and South America and
evolving over a hundred species there. Some of these take their arboreal
lifestyle to extremes, spending their lives in the rain forest canopy.
Since the group overran America so successfully, it would seem
logical that they’d overrun Eurasia too. But Old World plethodontids
are rare. One genus known from Italy and southern France, Hydromantes, is related to species halfway across the globe here in the Sierra
Nevada and Cascades. Herpetologists scratch their heads about that.
UC–Berkeley professor David Wake, an authority on salamander evolution, has posited from genetic evidence that plethodontids originated in
North America and spread into Eurasia during the Cretaceous period,
the late dinosaur age. Hydromantes may have evolved in Eurasia, then
spread back into western North America.
Hydromantes was the only known Eurasian plethodontid until 2005,
when an Illinois high school teacher, Stephen Karsen, turned over a rock
in South Korea and found a completely new one, named Karsenia koreana. Herpetologists really scratch their heads about that. Finding a
new vertebrate species is always unusual; finding a rare new genus in
such a strangely isolated location is almost unprecedented. David Wake,
who described the species, calls it “the most exciting and unexpected
discovery of my career.” Other new plethodontids keep turning up in
America. The same year as Karsenia’s discovery, herpetologists described a new species, the Scott’s Bar salamander, Plethodon asupak, in
205

mountains and marshes

northern California. Wake and his colleagues described two new species
in the southern Sierra Nevada in 2012.
All Bay Area plethodontid species are fully terrestrial, which is why,
unlike water-breeding amphibians, some of them survive in my garden.
Arboreal salamanders aren’t even the most numerous ones there. The
California slender salamander, Batrachoseps attenuatus, is almost as
ubiquitous as the earthworm. It is also called the worm salamander because of its elongated body and tiny legs. Both arboreals and slenders
prefer to keep out of sight, but I know they’re here during winter rains
when I put out recycling bins for collection. Arboreals sometimes hide
underneath, and I often find several slenders coiled there like tiny snakes.
Given their numbers just in my yard, arboreal and slender salamander numbers in the region must be staggering. A 1956 study of
geographic variation in both species on islands in the Bay estimated
populations of seven thousand slender salamanders and nineteen hundred arboreals per acre on little Red Rock Island just south of the Richmond Bridge. (Sea level’s rise after the last ice age probably isolated
the salamanders on the islands—arboreals inhabit even the Farallones
twenty-seven miles offshore—although they may have arrived by “waif
disperal” on floating debris.)
Our superabundant plethodontids play a big part in the ecosystem,
particularly since they are edible. Predators from bears to shrews eat
them; I once found an arboreal salamander faced off against a robin
on a Berkeley doorstep. Arboreals can bite hard with their tiny teeth,
so I don’t know which would have won if my arrival hadn’t scared the
robin away. Like lizards, salamanders can escape predators by losing
their tails. They then grow new ones, and, unlike other vertebrates, they
can even grow new limbs.
Like all salamanders, plethodontids are predators and eat incalculable
numbers of invertebrates. Salamanders hunt mainly by sight, which is
surprising considering their mainly nocturnal habits. They have color
vision and can see into the ultraviolet end of the spectrum. Aquatic species also detect prey with a vibration-sensing lateral line organ inherited
from fish ancestors. Salamander hearing is probably not good. They lack
external ears and have only vestigial inner ears.
Not all Bay Area plethodontids are easy to find. Another Aneides
subspecies, the Santa Cruz black salamander (A. flavipunctatus niger),
occurs in the South Bay, but its habitat needs are more specialized: it
206

salamander land

prefers moist forest environments such as stream sides. Probably because
of this specialization, the Santa Cruz subspecies is isolated from another
black salamander, A. f. flavipunctatus, which occurs from Sonoma to
Del Norte County. I’ve never seen it.
I have seen members of the other plethodontid genus that lives here,
Ensatina, although never in urban areas. But they can be persistent in
natural areas. There was a certain log beside the creek in Redwood Regional Park under which, for several years, I could be sure of greeting one
Ensatina individual. Nobody knows why Ensatina shuns urbanization—
or why slender and arboreal salamanders don’t.
David Wake suspects that despite its distaste for civilization, the local
Ensatina subspecies, the yellow-eyed salamander (E. escholtzi xanthopicta), is second only to the slender salamander in Bay Area numbers.
A unique trait may help explain this. Its coloring, brown on top and
orange underneath with yellow eye markings, is very like that of the
California newt (Taricha torosa), which has highly toxic skin. When
disturbed, yellow-eyed salamanders even mimic newt behavior by assuming postures that display their orange undersides. This may be an
example of Batesian mimicry, whereby an edible animal evolves through
natural selection to resemble a poisonous one.
Taricha newt skin is lethal because it contains an alkaloid called tetrodotoxin, which is more poisonous than cyanide. The story of campers
who died from accidentally boiling one in their morning coffeepot is an
urban legend that happens to be true. Mature Taricha’s only known
predator is the garter snake, Thamnophis, some individuals of which
can metabolically neutralize the poison. Taricha newt toxicity varies by
location: the Bay Area is a hot spot, perhaps because local garter snakes
developed an unusual immunity to the toxins, touching off a biological
“arms race.”
A student of Wake’s, Shawn Kuchta, studied Ensatina mimicry on lands
owned by the East Bay Municipal Utility District, putting out several hundred plasticine models of the yellow-eyed salamander and of another Ensatina subspecies, the Oregon salamander (E. e. oregonensis), which lives
farther north and has a beige belly and black eyes—nothing like a newt.
The experiment showed that, although the Oregon salamander’s coloration makes it less conspicuous than the yellow-eyed, predators attacked
twice as many of the Oregon models as the yellow-eyed ones. In other
experiments, captive scrub jays prudently preferred Oregon salamanders
207

mountains and marshes

to yellow-eyed ones. Several other Ensatina subspecies overlap with the
California newt’s range, but none mimic the newt in the same way. That
is something else herpetologists scratch their heads about.
Batesian mimics tend to be shyer than the toxic organisms they imitate, and yellow-eyed salamanders follow this rule. They largely come
out at night, whereas California newts are a frequent daytime sight
here in the rainy season. The newt family, the Salamandridae, is the
world’s most widely distributed salamander family, occurring in North
America, Eurasia, and North Africa. California newts live along the
coast, from Humboldt to San Diego Counties and in the Sierra Nevada.
The Bay Area also has another species, the rough-skinned newt (T.
granulosa), which occurs from British Columbia south to Santa Cruz
County.
Poisonous skin probably has a lot to do with newt success because,
unlike plethodontids, they need water for breeding. Our newts are
adaptable and occupy a variety of waters, from vernal pools to lakes
and streams. At higher altitudes, they winter underground and summer
in water: some mountain lake populations have learned to prey on backpackers by biting abraded skin cells from waders’ feet. (It just tickles.)
Bay Area newt adults spend the dry summer months underground in
places like ground squirrel burrows and move to water during winter
rains. Males enter first and develop aquatic features—their skin gets
smoother; their tails broaden and get more fin-like. As females arrive,
the males are ready to compete for them and do so vigorously. Ponds
teem with “newt balls” as gangs of sex-crazed males engulf females. A
winner clasps a female behind her front legs and strokes her snout with
his sexual stimulant gland, then swims in front of her and deposits his
spermatophore. She lays her fertilized eggs in clusters that she attaches
to water plants or submerged twigs. The gilled larvae hatch, grow, and
move to land within a few months.
Newt larvae are shyer than adults because their skin poison hasn’t
developed. (Some biologists think adults acquire the toxin by ingesting
bacteria that metabolize it.) The only place in the Bay Area where I’ve
seen newt larvae was a shady, sandy-bottomed corner of a vernal pond at
Henry Coe State Park. The pale, red-gilled creatures seemed fragile compared to their robust, lascivious parents, but newts remain common, so
the larvae must be good at catching aquatic invertebrates and avoiding
predators like giant water beetles and dragonfly nymphs. Introducing
208

salamander land

game fish into ponds or lakes can extirpate newt populations, however,
along with other amphibians.
The Bay Area’s two other salamander families occur only in North
America. They depend on water for reproduction and are not poisonous;
they survive by staying out of sight. Our most spectacular species, classified in a family by itself, is the Pacific giant salamander (Dicamptodon
ensatus), which can grow to twelve inches. Santa Cruz County is at the
southern extent of its range, since it prefers heavy forest, and adults are
a rare sight in daytime. Their sexual privacy policy is the opposite of
that of the newts. They mate largely in underground springs, where they
also lay their eggs. On the other hand, their gilled larvae can be easy to
see in clear forest streams, since they may grow to adult length before
they mature and move underground.
The other Bay Area family is the Ambystomidae, which is our most
vulnerable group because local species have special habitat needs. The
tiger salamander, named for its yellow-and-black blotches, occurs in
much of North America, but the California species (Ambystoma californiense) is isolated from the others. It favors grassland, breeding in
vernal pools and stream oxbows, which are increasingly rare in the Bay
Area. Remaining populations live mainly in nature preserves and wildlife refuges. The Sonoma County population is listed as endangered,
and populations in the East Bay and Santa Clara County are considered
threatened.
My Golden Guide didn’t mention the rarest of all salamander species
here—the long-toed salamander (Ambystoma macrodactylum). Various
subspecies occurring from British Columbia to northeast California are
fairly common, but the Santa Cruz salamander (A. m. croceum) breeds
in only twenty or so sites in northern Monterey and southern Santa Cruz
County. It wasn’t discovered until 1954, and CALTRANS threatened it
in the 1960s by bulldozing an important breeding pond while widening
Highway 1. Surviving near a major highway and other developments, it
too is on the endangered list.
Natural climate change probably caused the isolation of the California tiger salamander, Santa Cruz black salamander, and Santa Cruz
long-toed salamander. During the cooler, wetter ice age, suitable habitat would have connected Bay Area populations with others to the east
and north. As weather warmed and dried, habitat loss presumably extirpated populations in between. David Wake thinks changing climates
209

mountains and marshes

caused the spotty distribution of many other salamander species. He
fears that rapid human-caused climate change will combine with habitat
destruction, pollution, and other factors to extirpate more salamander
populations.
On the other hand, salamanders have been around hundreds of
millions of years, whereas civilization has existed for five thousand.
According to some computer models, global civilization’s resource demands will exceed supply in about a hundred years, a dim prospect for
“sustainable growth.” So I wouldn’t count salamanders out. If, as prophesied, the world ends in fire instead of flood next time, their mythic reputation for creeping out of the flames alive may prove true.
—Bay Nature, January–March 2013

Author’s note: A reader who had worked for UC–Berkeley’s grounds crew
noted that they often found arboreal salamanders in campus trees.

210

