Buy the way you want and save
Buy the way you want and save

Get the best grade in the shortest time possible!
Get the best grade in the shortest time possible!

Now that you’ve bought the textbook . . .

Get a break on the study materials designed for your 
course! Visit CengageBrain.com and search for your 
textbook to ﬁ nd discounted print, digital and audio 
study tools that allow you to:

•   Study in less time to get the grade you  
    want using online resources such as chapter
     quizzing, ﬂ ashcards, and interactive study tools.
•   Prepare for tests anywhere, anytime
•   Practice, review, and master course 
    concepts using printed guides and manuals that 
     work hand-in-hand with each chapter of your 
     textbook. 

www.CengageBrain.com

 Your First Study Break

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Source Code 13M-MA0021

EDITION 6

APPLIED MATHEMATICS
FOR THE MANAGERIAL, LIFE, 
AND SOCIAL SCIENCES

SOO T. TAN
STONEHILL COLLEGE

Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

       This is an electronic version of the print textbook. Due to electronic rights restrictions,
some third party content may be suppressed. Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed 
content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. The publisher reserves the right 
to remove content from this title at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it. For
valuable information on pricing, previous editions, changes to current editions, and alternate 
formats, please visit www.cengage.com/highered to search by ISBN#, author, title, or keyword for 
materials in your areas of interest.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Applied Mathematics for the Managerial,
Life, and Social Sciences,
Sixth Edition
Soo T. Tan

Publisher: Richard Stratton
Senior Development Editor: Laura Wheel
Senior Editorial Assistant: Haeree Chang
Media Editor: Andrew Coppola
Senior Marketing Manager: Barb Bartoszek
Marketing Coordinator: Michael Ledesma
Marketing Communications Manager: 
Mary Anne Payumo
Content Project Manager: Cheryll Linthicum
Senior Art Director: Vernon Boes
Print Buyer: Becky Cross
Rights Acquisitions Specialist: 
Dean Dauphinais
Production Service: Martha Emry
Text Designer: Diane Beasley
Photo Researcher: Bill Smith Group
Copy Editor: Barbara Willette
Illustrator: Jade Myers, Matrix Art Services
Cover Designer: Irene Morris
Cover Images: Reza Estakhrian/Stone/
GettyImages; Diverse Images/Universal
Images Group/GettyImages; 
Thomas Jackson/Stone/GettyImages
Applied Example Images: Business and 
Economics: © istockphoto.com/H-Gall; 
Social Sciences: Image copyright AVAVA
2010/Shutterstock.com; Life Sciences: 
Ryan McVay/Getty Images; General 
Interest: © istockphoto.com/Stouffer
Compositor: Graphic World

© 2013, 2010 Brooks/Cole, Cengage Learning

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright herein
may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form or by any means
graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited to photocopying,
recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, Web distribution, information networks,
or information storage and retrieval systems, except as permitted under Section
107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without the prior written
permission of the publisher.

For product information and technology assistance, contact us at
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706.

For permission to use material from this text or product, 

submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions.

Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to 

permissionrequest@cengage.com.

Library of Congress Control Number: 2011927800

Student Edition:
ISBN-13: 978-1-133-10894-8
ISBN-10: 1-133-10894-6

Brooks/Cole 
20 Davis Drive
Belmont, CA 94002-3098
USA

Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning solutions with
office locations around the globe, including Singapore, the United Kingdom,
Australia, Mexico, Brazil, and Japan. Locate your local office at
www.cengage.com/global.

Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by Nelson Education, Ltd.

To learn more about Brooks/Cole, visit www.cengage.com/brookscole.
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our preferred
online store www.cengagebrain.com.

Printed in the United States of America
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 15 14 13 12 11

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

TO PAT, BILL, AND MICHAEL

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CONTENTS

Preface xi

CHAPTER 1

Fundamentals of Algebra 1

1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9

Real Numbers 2
Polynomials 7
Factoring polynomials 15
Rational Expressions 20
Integral Exponents 27
Solving Equations 31
Rational Exponents and Radicals 37
Quadratic Equations 46
Inequalities and Absolute Value 55
Chapter 1 Summary of Principal Formulas and Terms 64
Chapter 1 Concept Review Questions 65
Chapter 1 Review Exercises 65
Chapter 1 Before Moving On  67

CHAPTER 2

Functions and Their Graphs 69

2.1
2.2

2.3

2.4
2.5

2.6

2.7

The Cartesian Coordinate System and Straight Lines 70
Equations of Lines 76
Using Technology: Graphing a Straight Line 86
Functions and Their Graphs 89
Using Technology: Graphing a Function 101
The Algebra of Functions 105
Linear Functions 113
Using Technology: Linear Functions 123
Quadratic Functions 126
PORTFOLIO: Todd Kodet 130
Using Technology: Finding the Points of Intersection of Two Graphs 135
Functions and Mathematical Models 137
PORTFOLIO: Melissa Rich 141
Using Technology: Constructing Mathematical Models from Raw Data 149
Chapter 2 Summary of Principal Formulas and Terms 152
Chapter 2 Concept Review Questions 153
Chapter 2 Review Exercises 154
Chapter 2 Before Moving On 156

CHAPTER 3

Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 157

3.1

3.2

Exponential Functions 158
Using Technology
Logarithmic Functions 166

164

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

v

vi

CONTENTS

3.3

Exponential Functions as Mathematical Models 175
PORTFOLIO: Carol A. Reeb, Ph.D. 176
Using Technology: Analyzing Mathematical Models 184
Chapter 3 Summary of Principal Formulas and Terms 186
Chapter 3 Concept Review Questions 186
Chapter 3 Review Exercises 187
Chapter 3 Before Moving On 188

CHAPTER 4

Mathematics of Finance 189

4.1

4.2

4.3

4.4

Compound Interest 190
Using Technology: Finding the Accumulated Amount of an Investment, the Effective Rate

of Interest, and the Present Value of an Investment 205

Annuities 208
Using Technology: Finding the Amount of an Annuity 217
Amortization and Sinking Funds 220
Using Technology: Amortizing a Loan
Arithmetic and Geometric Progressions 234
Chapter 4 Summary of Principal Formulas and Terms 243
Chapter 4 Concept Review Questions 243
Chapter 4 Review Exercises 244
Chapter 4 Before Moving On 245

232

CHAPTER 5

Systems of Linear Equations and Matrices 247

5.1
5.2

5.3

5.4

5.5

5.6

Systems of Linear Equations: An Introduction 248
Systems of Linear Equations: Unique Solutions 255
Using Technology: Systems of Linear Equations: Unique Solutions 270
Systems of Linear Equations: Underdetermined and Overdetermined Systems 272
Using Technology: Systems of Linear Equations: Underdetermined and Overdetermined

Systems 281

Matrices 282
Using Technology: Matrix Operations 292
Multiplication of Matrices 295
Using Technology: Matrix Multiplication 307
The Inverse of a Square Matrix 309
Using Technology: Finding the Inverse of a Square Matrix 321
Chapter 5 Summary of Principal Formulas and Terms 324
Chapter 5 Concept Review Questions 325
Chapter 5 Review Exercises 325
Chapter 5 Before Moving On 327

CHAPTER 6

Linear Programming 329

6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4

Graphing Systems of Linear Inequalities in Two Variables 330
Linear Programming Problems 338
Graphical Solution of Linear Programming Problems 346
The Simplex Method: Standard Maximization Problems 359
Using Technology: The Simplex Method: Solving Maximization Problems 380

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CONTENTS

vii

6.5

The Simplex Method: Standard Minimization Problems 384
PORTFOLIO: Chad Smith 386
Using Technology: The Simplex Method: Solving Minimization Problems 397
Chapter 6 Summary of Principal Terms 400
Chapter 6 Concept Review Questions 400
Chapter 6 Review Exercises 401
Chapter 6 Before Moving On 403

CHAPTER 7

Sets and Probability 405

7.1
7.2
7.3
7.4

7.5
7.6
7.7

Sets and Set Operations 406
The Number of Elements in a Finite Set 415
The Multiplication Principle 422
Permutations and Combinations 427
PORTFOLIO: Lara Solanki 431
Using Technology: Evaluating n!, P(n, r), and C(n, r)
Experiments, Sample Spaces, and Events 441
Definition of Probability 449
Rules of Probability 459
Chapter 7 Summary of Principal Formulas and Terms 468
Chapter 7 Concept Review Questions 469
Chapter 7 Review Exercises 469
Chapter 7 Before Moving On 472

440

CHAPTER 8

Additional Topics in Probability 473

8.1
8.2
8.3
8.4

8.5

8.6

Use of Counting Techniques in Probability 474
Conditional Probability and Independent Events 481
Bayes’ Theorem 495
Distributions of Random Variables 505
Using Technology: Graphing a Histogram 513
Expected Value 516
PORTFOLIO: Robert H. Mason 523
Variance and Standard Deviation 529
Using Technology: Finding the Mean and Standard Deviation 540
Chapter 8 Summary of Principal Formulas and Terms 542
Chapter 8 Concept Review Questions 542
Chapter 8 Review Exercises 543
Chapter 8 Before Moving On 544

CHAPTER 9

The Derivative 547

9.1

9.2

9.3

Limits 548
Using Technology: Finding the Limit of a Function 566
One-Sided Limits and Continuity 568
Using Technology: Finding the Points of Discontinuity of a Function 582
The Derivative 584
Using Technology: Graphing a Function and Its Tangent Line 600

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

viii

CONTENTS

9.4

9.5

9.6

9.7

9.8

Basic Rules of Differentiation 603
Using Technology: Finding the Rate of Change of a Function 614
The Product and Quotient Rules; Higher-Order Derivatives 616
Using Technology: The Product and Quotient Rules 629
The Chain Rule 632
Using Technology: Finding the Derivative of a Composite Function 643
Differentiation of Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 645
Using Technology
Marginal Functions in Economics 657
Chapter 9 Summary of Principal Formulas and Terms 666
Chapter 9 Concept Review Questions 667
Chapter 9 Review Exercises 668
Chapter 9 Before Moving On 671

655

CHAPTER 10

Applications of the Derivative 673

10.1

10.2
10.3

10.4

10.5

Applications of the First Derivative 674
Using Technology: Using the First Derivative to Analyze a Function 691
Applications of the Second Derivative 694
Curve Sketching 711
Using Technology: Analyzing the Properties of a Function 723
Optimization I 726
Using Technology: Finding the Absolute Extrema of a Function 739
Optimization II 740
Chapter 10 Summary of Principal Terms 751
Chapter 10 Concept Review Questions 751
Chapter 10 Review Exercises 752
Chapter 10 Before Moving On 755

CHAPTER 11

Integration 757

11.1
11.2
11.3
11.4

11.5

11.6

11.7

Antiderivatives and the Rules of Integration 758
Integration by Substitution 771
Area and the Definite Integral 781
The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus 790
PORTFOLIO: Molly H. Fisher, David C. Royster, Diandra Leslie-Pelecky 791
Using Technology: Evaluating Definite Integrals 801
Evaluating Definite Integrals 802
Using Technology: Evaluating Definite Integrals for Piecewise-Defined Functions 813
Area Between Two Curves 814
Using Technology: Finding the Area Between Two Curves 825
Applications of the Definite Integral to Business and Economics 826
Using Technology: Business and Economic Applications/Technology Exercises 838
Chapter 11 Summary of Principal Formulas and Terms 839
Chapter 11 Concept Review Questions 840
Chapter 11 Review Exercises 841
Chapter 11 Before Moving On 844

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CONTENTS

ix

CHAPTER 12

Calculus of Several Variables 845

12.1
12.2

Functions of Several Variables 846
Partial Derivatives 856
PORTFOLIO: Karthik Ramachandran 857
Using Technology: Finding Partial Derivatives at a Given Point 869

12.3 Maxima and Minima of Functions of Several Variables 870

Chapter 12 Summary of Principal Terms 880
Chapter 12 Concept Review Questions 880
Chapter 12 Review Exercises 881
Chapter 12 Before Moving On 882

Answers 883
Index 937
How-To Technology Index 950

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PREFACE

Math is an integral part of our increasingly complex life. Applied Mathematics for the
Managerial, Life, and Social Sciences attempts to illustrate this point with its applied
approach to mathematics. In preparing the Sixth Edition, I have kept in mind three
longstanding goals: (1) to write an applied text that motivates students while provid-
ing the background in the quantitative techniques necessary to better understand and
appreciate the courses normally taken in undergraduate training, (2) to lay the foun-
dation  for  more  advanced  courses,  such  as  statistics  and  operations  research,  and 
(3) to make the book a useful teaching tool for instructors.

One of the most important lessons I learned from my experience teaching mathe-
matics to non-mathematics majors is that many of the students come into these courses
with some degree of apprehension. This awareness led to the intuitive approach I have
adopted in all of my texts. As you will see, I try to introduce each abstract mathemat-
ical concept through an example drawn from a common, real-life experience. Once the
idea has been conveyed, I then proceed to make it precise, thereby assuring that no
mathematical rigor is lost in this intuitive treatment of the subject.

Another lesson I learned from my students is that they have a much greater appre-
ciation of the material if the applications are drawn from their fields of interest and
from situations that occur in the real world. This is one reason you will see so many
exercises in my texts that are modeled on data gathered from newspapers, magazines,
journals, and other media. Whether it be the market for cholesterol-reducing drugs,
financing a home, bidding for cable rights, broadband Internet households, or Star-
bucks’ annual sales, I weave topics of current interest into my examples and exercises
to keep the book relevant to all of my readers.

This text offers more than enough material for a two-semester or three-semester
course. The following chart on chapter dependency is provided to help the instructor
design a course that is most suitable for the intended audience.

1
Fundamentals
of Algebra

2
Functions and
Their Graphs

3
Exponential and 
Logarithmic
Functions

7
Sets and
Probability

4
Mathematics
of Finance

5
Systems of
Linear Equations 
and Matrices

6
Linear Program-
ming

9
The Derivative

8
Additional Topics
in Probability

10
Applications
of the
Derivative

11
Integration

12
Calculus of
Several Variables

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xi

xii

PREFACE

THE APPROACH

Level of Presentation
My approach is intuitive, and I state the results informally. However, I have taken spe-
cial care to ensure that this approach does not compromise the mathematical content
and accuracy.

Problem-Solving Approach
A problem-solving approach is stressed throughout the book. Numerous examples and
applications  illustrate  each  new  concept  and  result.  Special  emphasis  is  placed  on
helping students formulate, solve, and interpret the results of the problems involving
applications. Because students often have difficulty setting up and solving word prob-
lems, extra care has been taken to help students master these skills:

■ Very early on in the text, students are given practice in solving word problems (see

Example 7, Section 1.8).

■ Guidelines are given to help students formulate and solve word problems (see Section

2.7).

■ One entire section is devoted to modeling and setting up linear programming prob-

lems (see Section 6.2).

■ In Chapter 10, optimization problems are covered in two sections. First, students 
solve problems in which the function to be optimized is given (Section 10.4); sec-
ond, students solve problems in which the function to be optimized must first be for-
mulated (Section 10.5).

Intuitive Introduction to Concepts
Mathematical  concepts  are  introduced  with  concrete,  real-life  examples,  wherever
appropriate.  These  examples  and  other  applications  have  been  chosen  from  current
topics and issues in the media and serve to answer the question often posed by stu-
dents: “What will I ever use this for?” An illustrative list follows.

■ The Algebra of Functions: The U.S. Budget Deficit

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

PREFACE

xiii

■ Mathematical Modeling: Social Security Trust Fund Assets
■ Limits: The Motion of a Maglev
■ The Chain Rule: The Population of Americans Aged 55 Years and Older
■ Increasing and Decreasing Functions: The Fuel Economy of a Car
■ Concavity: U.S. and World Population Growth
■ Inflection Points: The Point of Diminishing Returns
■ Curve Sketching: The Dow-Jones Industrial Average on “Black Monday”
■ Exponential functions: Income Distribution of American Families
■ Area Between Two Curves: Petroleum Saved with Conservation Measures

Connections
One example (the maglev) is used as a common thread throughout the development
of calculus—from limits through integration. The goal here is to show students the
connections between the concepts presented: limits, continuity, rates of change, the
derivative, the definite integral, and so on.

Motivation
Illustrating the practical value of mathematics in applied areas is an objective of my
approach. Many of the applications are based on mathematical models (functions)
that  I  have  constructed  using  data  drawn  from  various  sources,  including  current
newspapers,  magazines,  and  the  Internet.  Sources  are  given  in  the  text  for  these
applied problems.

Modeling
I believe that one of the important skills that a student should acquire is the ability to
translate a real problem into a mathematical model that can provide insight into the
problem. In Section 2.7, the modeling process is discussed, and students are asked to
use models (functions) constructed from real-life data to answer questions. Students
get hands-on experience constructing these models in the Using Technology sections.

NEW TO THIS EDITION

Motivating Real-World Applications
Among the many new and updated applied examples and exercises are
global warming, the solvency of the U.S. Social Security trust fund,
the Case-Shiller Home Price Index, treasury bills, Roth IRAs, smart-
phone sales, bounced-check charges, home affordability, and sleeping
with cell phones.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xiv

PREFACE

Modeling with Data
As in the previous edition,
Modeling with Data exer-
cises are found in many of
the Using Technology sec-
tions throughout the text.
Here students can actually
see how some of the func-
tions found in the exercises
are constructed. Many of
these applications have
been updated and some new
exercises have been added.
(See Social Security Trust
Fund Assets, Example 2,
page 139, and the corre-
sponding exercise in which
the model is derived in
Exercise 14, page 152.)

Making Connections with Technology
All of the art in the Using Technology sections has been redone. The graphing calculator
screens now show a numbered scale for both axes, making it easier for students to use and
understand these graphs. In addition, Microsoft Excel 2010 examples and exercises now
appear in the technology sections. Step-by-step instructions (including keystrokes), all
new dialog boxes, graphs, and spreadsheets for Excel 2010 are given in the text. Instruc-
tions for solving these examples and exercises with Microsoft Excel 2007 are provided on
CourseMate.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

PREFACE

xv

Variety of Problem
Types
Additional rote questions, true
or false questions, and concept
questions have been added
throughout the text to enhance
the exercise sets. (See, for
example, Concept Question
2.4, Exercise 1, page 109.)

Carefully Crafted Solutions
The solutions manual has been completely
revamped. All new art has been created for the
manual, and the solutions have been copyedited
and streamlined for ease of use. As in previous
editions, the solutions to all of the exercises
have been written by the author.

Enhanced Graphics
The three-dimensional artwork
in Chapter 12 has been redone
with an emphasis on making it
easier for students to see the
concepts being described in 
3-space. For example, Figure 7
in Section 12.1 now shows 
the trace of the graph of 
z ⫽ f (x, y) and the plane z ⫽ k
and its projection onto the 
xy-plane (Figure 7a) and the
corresponding level curve
(Figure 7b).

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xvi

PREFACE

Specific Content Changes
■ Chapter 1: Sixteen new applications have been added to the exercise sets and one

applied example has been added to Section 1.4.

■ Chapter 2: A new model has been constructed for Applied Example 4 in the Using
Technology in Section 2.3. The budget-deficit graphs that are used as motivation to
introduce Section 2.4, “The Algebra of Functions,” have been redone to reflect the
current deficit figures. A new graphical concept exercise has been added to Section
2.4.  In  Section  2.5,  a  new  applied  example,  Bounced-Check  Charges,  has  been
added. In Section 2.7, “Functions and Mathematical Models,” new models for three
applied examples—Global Warming, Social Security Trust Fund Assets, and Driv-
ing Costs—have been added.

■ Chapter  4: The  formulas  given  in  this  chapter  form  the  basis  for  understanding
many of the complex financial instruments in the market today. New examples were
added in this chapter to help students better understand how these formulas can be
applied to solve problems involving investments, mortgages, and retirement plan-
ning. In Section 4.1, a new example illustrating an application of simple interest to
treasury bills has been added. In Section 4.2, an example has been added to show
the after-tax effect of saving in tax-sheltered accounts. Another example that illus-
trates the difference between Roth IRAs and traditional IRAs has also been added.
In Section 4.3, a new example has been added comparing mortgage payments for a

7>1 ARM and an interest-only loan. Here, students can see how the interest-only

loans  were  used  to  make  homes  appear  more  affordable.  Another  application  of
sinking funds was also added; in Example 8, Section 4.3, the monthly contributions
needed  to  meet  a  retirement  goal  of  monthly  withdrawals  of  a  fixed  amount  are
computed.

■ Chapter 5: In Section 5.2, the pivoting process is now explained in greater detail.
In Section 5.3, an introductory example using a 2 ⫻ 2 system of equations with infi-
nitely many solutions has been added. In Section 5.4, an example illustrating the use
of the associative and commutative laws for matrices has been added.

■ Chapter 6: In Section 6.5, a new example has been added in which a primal prob-
lem and its associated dual problem are first solved graphically. Then these prob-
lems are solved algebraically using the simplex method. This provides students with
a graphical justification of the method of duality.

■ In Chapters 7 through 11, a number of new and unique applications have been
added to the exercise sets. Among these are Pharmaceutical Theft, Federal Lobby-
ing,  Total  Knee  Replacement  Procedures,  Mexico’s  Hedging  Tactics,  and  the
British Deficit.

■ Chapter 10: The budget curves used to motivate relative extrema were updated to
reflect the current deficit. Seven new graphical exercises were added to Exercise Set
10.2, including the applications Rumors of a Run on a Bank and the Case-Shiller

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

TRUSTED FEATURES

PREFACE

xvii

Home Price Index. The Average Age of Cars example that is used to motivate the
concept of absolute extrema in Section 10.4 was updated.

■ Chapter 12: The three-dimensional artwork in this chapter has been redone. The
new  graphics  make  it  easier  for  students  to  see  the  concepts  being  described  in 
3-space.

■ Many new rote exercises have been added throughout the text.

In addition to the new features, we have retained many of the following hallmarks that
have made this series so usable and well-received in past editions:

■ Review material to reinforce prerequisite algebra skills
■ Section exercises to help students understand and apply concepts
■ Optional technology sections to explore mathematical ideas and solve problems
■ End-of-chapter review sections to assess understanding and problem-solving skills
■ Features to motivate further exploration

Algebra Review Where Students
Need It Most
Well-placed algebra review notes, keyed to the
review chapter, appear where students need them
most throughout the text. These are indicated by
the
icon. See this feature in action on pages
556 and 591.

(x2)

Self-Check Exercises
Offering students immediate
feedback on key concepts,
these exercises begin each
end-of-section exercise set.
Fully worked-out solutions can
be found at the end of each
exercise section.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xviii

PREFACE

Concept Questions
Designed to test students’
understanding of the basic
concepts discussed in the sec-
tion, these questions encourage
students to explain learned
concepts in their own words.

Exercises
Each exercise section contains
an ample set of problems of a
routine computational nature
followed by an extensive set
of application-oriented 
problems.

Using Technology
These optional features appear after
the section exercises. They can be
used in the classroom if desired or
as material for self-study by the stu-
dent. Here, the graphing calculator
and Microsoft Excel 2010 are used
as tools to solve problems. (Instruc-
tions for Microsoft Excel 2007 are
online on CourseMate.) These sec-
tions are written in the traditional
example-exercise format, with
answers given at the back of the
book. Illustrations showing graphing
calculator screens and spreadsheets
are extensively used. In keeping
with the theme of motivation
through real-life examples, many
sourced applications are again
included. Students can construct
their own models using real-life data
in many of the Using Technology
sections. These include models for growth of the Indian gaming industry, health-care
spending, worldwide PC shipments, and the federal debt, among others.

A How-To Technology Index is included at the back of the book for easy reference.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

PREFACE

xix

Exploring with Technology
Designed to explore mathematical concepts and to
shed further light on examples in the text, these
optional questions appear throughout the main body of
the text and serve to enhance the student’s understand-
ing of the concepts and theory presented. Often the
solution of an example in the text is augmented with a
graphical or numerical solution. Complete solutions to
these exercises are given in Solution Builder.

Summary of Principal
Formulas and Terms
Each review section begins
with the Summary highlight-
ing important formulas and
terms with page numbers
given for quick review.

Concept Review
Questions
These questions give students
a chance to check their knowl-
edge of the basic definitions
and concepts given in each
chapter.

Review Exercises
Offering a solid review of the
chapter material, the Review
Exercises contain routine com-
putational exercises followed
by applied problems.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xx

PREFACE

Before Moving On . . .
Found at the end of each chap-
ter review, these exercises
give students a chance to see
if they have mastered the basic
computational skills devel-
oped in each chapter. If stu-
dents need step-by-step help,
they can use the CourseMate
tutorials that are keyed to text
and work out similar problems
at their own pace.

Explore & Discuss
These optional questions can be discussed in class or
assigned as homework. These questions generally
require more thought and effort than the usual 
exercises. They may also be used to add a writing
component to the class or as team projects. Complete
solutions to these exercises are given in Solution
Builder and in the instructor’s Complete Solutions
Manual.

Portfolios
The real-life experiences of
a variety of professionals
who use mathematics in the
workplace are related in
these interviews. Among
those interviewed are the
Senior Vice-President of
Supply at Earthbound Farm
and a software engineer at
Iron Mountain who uses 
statistics and calculus to
develop document manage-
ment tools.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

PREFACE

xxi

Example Videos
Available through CourseMate and Enhanced
WebAssign, these videos offer hours of instruc-
tion from award-winning teacher Deborah
Upton of Molloy College. Watch as she walks
students through key examples from the text,
step by step, giving them a foundation in the
skills that they need to have. Each example
available online is identified by the video icon
located in the margin.

Action-Oriented
Study Tabs
Convenient color-coded study
tabs, similar to Post-it® flags,
make it easy for students to
tab pages that they want to
return to later, whether it be
for additional review, exam
preparation, online explo-
ration, or identifying a topic 
to be discussed with the
instructor.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xxii

PREFACE

TEACHING AIDS

LEARNING AIDS

CCOOMMPPLLEETTEE  SSOOLLUUTTIIOONNSS  MMAANNUUAALL   (ISBN 978-1-133-36434-4) by Soo T. Tan
The  Complete  Solutions  Manual contains  fully  worked-out  solutions  to  all  section
exercises in the text, including Technology Exercises in Using Technology, Explore
& Discuss activities, and Exploring with Technology activities.

SSOOLLUUTTIIOONN  BBUUIILLDDEERR (www.cengage.com/solutionbuilder)
This online instructor database offers complete worked-out solutions to all exercises
in the text, including Exploring with Technology and Explore & Discuss questions.
Solution Builder allows you to create customized, secure solutions printouts (in PDF
format) matched exactly to the problems you assign in class.

PPOOWWEERRLLEECCTTUURREE (ISBN 978-1-133-49041-8)
This  comprehensive  CD-ROM  includes  Solution  Builder,  PowerPoint  slides,  and
ExamView® Computerized Testing featuring algorithmically generated questions to
create, deliver, and customize tests.

(www.webassign.net)

EENNHHAANNCCEEDD  WWEEBBAASSSSIIGGNN
Exclusively from Cengage Learning, Enhanced WebAssign offers an extensive online
program to encourage the practice that’s so critical for concept mastery. Instant feed-
back and ease of use are just two reasons why it is the most widely used homework
system in higher education. Enhanced WebAssign allows you to assign, collect, grade,
and  record  homework  assignments  via  the  Web,  and  includes  links  to  text-specific
content, video examples, and problem-specific tutorials. Now this proven homework
system  has  been  enhanced  to  include  YouBook,  a  customizable  eBook  with  high-
lighting, note-taking, and search features, as well as links to multimedia resources.

CCEENNGGAAGGEE  YYOOUUBBOOOOKK
YouBook is an interactive and customizable eBook. Containing all the content from
the Sixth Edition of Tan’s Applied Mathematics for the Managerial, Life, and Social Sci-
ences, YouBook features a text edit tool that allows instructors to modify the textbook
narrative as needed. With YouBook instructors can quickly reorder entire sections and
chapters,  or  hide  any  content  they  don’t  teach,  to  create  an  eBook  that  perfectly
matches their syllabus. Instructors can further customize the text by publishing Web
links.  Additional  media  assets  include  animated  figures,  video  clips,  highlighting,
notes, and more. YouBook is available in Enhanced WebAssign.

SSTTUUDDEENNTT  SSOOLLUUTTIIOONNSS  MMAANNUUAALL (ISBN 978-1-133-10932-7) by Soo T. Tan
Giving  you  more  in-depth  explanations,  this  insightful  resource  includes  fully
worked-out solutions for the answers to select exercises included at the back of the
textbook, as well as problem-solving strategies, additional algebra steps, and review
for selected problems.

CCOOUURRSSEEMMAATTEE
The  more  you  study,  the  better  the  results.  Make  the  most  of  your  study  time  by
accessing everything you need in one place. Read your textbook, take notes, review
flashcards, watch videos, and take practice quizzes—online with CourseMate.

(www.cengagebrain.com)

CCEENNGGAAGGEEBBRRAAIINN..CCOOMM
Visit  www.cengagebrain.com  to  access  additional  course  materials  and  companion
resources.  At  the  CengageBrain.com  home  page,  search  for  the  ISBN  of  your  title
(from the back cover of your book) using the search box at the top of the page. This
will take you to the product page where free companion resources can be found.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

PREFACE

xxiii

I wish to express my personal appreciation to each of the following reviewers of the
Sixth Edition, whose many suggestions have helped make a much improved book.

Richard Baslaw
York College of CUNY

Denis Bell
University of North Florida

Debra Carney
University of Denver

James Eby
Blinn College—Bryan Campus

Edna Greenwood
Tarrant County College—Northwest Campus

Velma Hill
York College of CUNY

Jiashi Hou
Norfolk State University

Xingde Jia
Texas State University

Kristi Karber
University of Central Oklahoma

Rebecca Leefers
Michigan State University

James Liu
James Madison University

Theresa Manns
Salisbury University

Michael Paulding
Kapiolani Community College

Armando Perez
Laredo Community College

Donald Stengel
California State University—Fresno

Beimnet Teclezghi
New Jersey City University

I also thank the following reviewers whose comments and suggestions for the pre-

vious edition have greatly shaped the current form of this edition.

Paul Abraham
Kent State University—Stark

James Adair
Missouri Valley College

Jill Britton
Camosun College

Debra D. Bryant
Tennessee Technological University

Michelle Dedeo
University of North Florida

Scott L. Dennison
University of Wisconsin—Oshkosh

Christine Devena
Miles Community College

Andrew Diener
Christian Brothers University

Mike Everett
Santa Ana College

Kevin Ferland
Bloomsburg University

Tao Guo
Rock Valley College

Mark Jacobson
Montana State University—Billings

Sarah Kilby
North Country Community College

Murray Lieb
New Jersey Institute of Technology

Lia Liu
University of Illinois at Chicago

Rebecca Lynn
Colorado State University

Mary T. McMahon
North Central College

Daniela Mihai
University of Pittsburgh

Kathy Nickell
College of DuPage

Carol Overdeep
Saint Martin’s University

Mohammed Rajah
Miracosta College

Dennis H. Risher
Loras College

Brian Rodas
Santa Monica College

Dr. Arthur Rosenthal
Salem State College

Abdelrida Saleh
Miami Dade College

Stephanie Anne Salomone
University of Portland

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xxiv

PREFACE

Mohammed Siddique
Virginia Union University

Jennifer Strehler
Oakton Community College

Ray Toland
Clarkson University

Justin Wyss-Gallifent
University of Maryland at College Park

I also wish to thank Tao Guo for the superb job he did as the accuracy checker for
this text and on the Complete Solutions Manual that accompanies the text. I also thank
the  editorial,  production,  and  marketing  staffs  of  Brooks/Cole—Richard  Stratton,
Laura Wheel, Haeree Chang, Andrew Coppola, Cheryll Linthicum, Vernon Boes, and
Barb Bartoszek—for all of their help and support during the development and pro-
duction of this edition. I also thank Martha Emry and Barbara Willette who both did
an excellent job of ensuring the accuracy and readability of this edition. Simply stated,
the team I have been working with is outstanding, and I truly appreciate all their hard
work and efforts.

S. T. Tan

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

SOO T. TAN received his S.B. degree from Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, his M.S. degree from the University 
of Wisconsin–Madison, and his Ph.D. from the University of 
California at Los Angeles. He has published numerous papers in
optimal control theory, numerical analysis, and mathematics of
finance. He is also the author of a series of calculus textbooks.

i

g
n
n
r
a
e
L
e
g
a
g
n
e
C
©

 

 

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1

FUNDAMENTALS 
OF ALGEBRA

© Yuri Arcurs 2010/Shutterstock.com

THIS CHAPTER CONTAINS a brief review of the algebra you

will use in this course. In the process of solving many

practical problems, you will need to solve algebraic equations. You

will also need to simplify algebraic expressions. This chapter also

contains a short review of inequalities and absolute value; their

uses range from describing the domains of functions to

formulating applied problems.

How much money is needed to purchase

at least 100,000 shares of the Starr

Communications Company? Corbyco, a

giant conglomerate, wishes to purchase

a minimum of 100,000 shares of the

company. In Applied Example 8, page

59, you will see how Corbyco’s

management determines how much

money they will need for the

acquisition.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1

2

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

1.1

Real Numbers

The Set of Real Numbers
We use real numbers every day to describe various quantities such as temperature,
salary, annual percentage rate, shoe size, and grade point average. Some of the sym-
bols we use to represent real numbers are

3, ⫺17,

0.666. . . ,

113,

3.9,

0.12875

22

,

To construct the set of real numbers, we start with the set of natural numbers

(also called counting numbers)

N ⫽ {1, 2, 3, . . .}

and adjoin other numbers to it. The set

W ⫽ {0, 1, 2, 3, . . .}

of whole numbers is obtained by adjoining the single number 0 to N. By adjoining
the negatives of the natural numbers to the set W, we obtain the set of integers

I ⫽ {. . . , ⫺3, ⫺2, ⫺1, 0, 1, 2, 3, . . .}

Next, we consider the set Q of rational numbers, numbers of the form  , where

a
b

a and b are integers, with b ⫽ 0. Using set notation, we write
Q ⫽ { 兩 a and b are integers, b ⫽ 0}

a
b

Observe that I is contained in Q, since each integer may be written in the form  , with 
b ⫽ 1.  For  example,  the  integer  6  may  be  written  in  the  form  .  Symbolically,  we
express the fact that I is contained in Q by writing

6
1

a
b

I 傺 Q

1
However, Q is not contained in I, since fractions such as  and 
2
show the relationships of the sets N, W, I, and Q, we write

23
25

are not integers. To

This says that N is a proper subset of W, W is a proper subset of I, and so on.*

N 傺 W 傺 I 傺 Q

Finally, we obtain the set of real numbers by adjoining the set of rational numbers
to the set of irrational numbers (Ir)—numbers that cannot be expressed in the form
a
, where a, b are integers (b ⫽ 0). Examples of irrational numbers are 
, ␲,
b
and so on. Thus, the set

23

22

, 

comprising all rational numbers and irrational numbers is called the set of real num-
bers. (See Figure 1.)

R ⫽ Q 傼 Ir

Q

W
N

Ir

Q =
I =
W =
N =
Ir =

Rationals
Integers
Whole numbers
Natural numbers
Irrationals

FIGURE 1
The set of all real numbers consists of the
set of rational numbers plus the set of
irrational numbers.

*A set A is a proper subset of a set B if every element of a set A is also an element of a set B and there exists at least one ele-
ment in B that is not in A.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

1.1 REAL NUMBERS

3

Representing Real Numbers as Decimals
Every real number can be written as a decimal. A rational number can be represented
as either a repeating decimal or a terminating decimal. For example, 
is represented
by the repeating decimal

2
3

0.66666666. . .

Repeating decimal; note that the integer 6 repeats.

which may also be written 0.6苶, where the bar above the 6 indicates that the 6 repeats
indefinitely. The number 

is represented by the terminating decimal

1
2

0.5

Terminating decimal

When an irrational number is represented as a decimal, it neither terminates nor

repeats. For example,

22

⫽ 1.41421. . .

and ␲ ⫽ 3.14159. . .

Table 1 summarizes this classification of real numbers.

Description

Examples

Decimal Representation

Counting numbers
Counting numbers and 0
Natural numbers, their nega-

tives, and 0

Numbers that can be written
in the form  , where a and 
b are integers and b ⬆ 0

a
b

Numbers that cannot be writ-
ten in the form  , where a
and b are integers and b ⬆ 0

a
b

Rational and irrational

numbers

1, 2, 3, . . .
0, 1, 2, 3, . . .
. . . , ⫺3, ⫺2, ⫺1, 0, 1, 2,

3, . . .
3
4

5
6

⫺3, ⫺ , ⫺0.222苶, 0,  ,
2, 4.3111苶
22
23

, 

, ␲
1.414213. . . ,
1.732050. . .
All of the above

Terminating decimals
Terminating decimals
Terminating decimals

Terminating or 

repeating decimals

Nonterminating, non-
repeating decimals

All types of decimals

TABLE 1
The Set of Real Numbers
Set

Natural numbers
Whole numbers
Integers

Rational numbers

Irrational numbers

Real numbers

Representing Real Numbers on a Number Line
Real numbers may be represented geometrically by points on a line. This real num-
ber, or  coordinate,  line is  constructed  as  follows:  Arbitrarily  select  a  point  on  a
straight line to represent the number 0. This point is called the origin. If the line is hor-
izontal, then choose a point at a convenient distance to the right of the origin to rep-
resent the number 1. This determines the scale for the number line.

The point representing each positive real number x lies x units to the right of 0,
and  the  point  representing  each  negative  real  number  x lies  ⫺x units  to  the  left 
of 0. Thus, real numbers may be represented by points on a line in such a way that cor-
responding to each real number there is exactly one point on a line, and vice versa. In
this way, a one-to-one correspondence is set up between the set of real numbers and
the set of points on the number line, with all the positive numbers lying to the right of
the origin and all the negative numbers lying to the left of the origin (Figure 2).

FIGURE 2
The real number line

Origin

Negative direction

– 4

– 3

– 2

– 1

0

1

冑
⫺
2

1
2

x

4

2
冑3

3

␲

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.
Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

Operations with Real Numbers
Two real numbers may be combined to obtain a real number. The operation of addition,
written ⫹, enables us to combine any two numbers a and b to obtain their sum, denoted
by a ⫹ b. Another operation, multiplication, written ⭈, enables us to combine any two real
numbers a and b to form their product, the number a ⭈ b (more simply written ab). These
two operations are subject to the rules of operation given in Table 2.

TABLE 2
Rules of Operation for Real Numbers
Rule

Under addition
1. a ⫹ b ⫽ b ⫹ a

2. a ⫹ 1b ⫹ c2 ⫽ 1a ⫹ b2 ⫹ c
3. a ⫹ 0 ⫽ a
4. a ⫹ 1⫺a2 ⫽ 0

Under multiplication
1. ab ⫽ ba

2. a1bc2 ⫽ 1ab2c
3. a ⭈ 1 ⫽ 1 ⭈ a

4.

aa 1
ab

⫽ 1

1a ⫽ 02

Under addition and multiplication

1. a1b ⫹ c2 ⫽ ab ⫹ ac

Commutative law of addition

Associative law of addition

Identity law of addition

Inverse law of addition

Commutative law of multiplication

Associative law of multiplication

Identity law of multiplication

Inverse law of multiplication

Distributive law for multiplication with respect to addition

Illustration

2 ⫹ 3 ⫽ 3 ⫹ 2
4 ⫹ 12 ⫹ 32 ⫽ 14 ⫹ 22 ⫹ 3
6 ⫹ 0 ⫽ 6
5 ⫹ 1⫺52 ⫽ 0

3 ⭈ 2 ⫽ 2 ⭈ 3
413 ⭈ 22 ⫽ 14 ⭈ 322
4 ⭈ 1 ⫽ 1 ⭈ 4

3a 1
3b

⫽ 1

314 ⫹ 52 ⫽ 3 ⭈ 4 ⫹ 3 ⭈ 5

The operation of subtraction is defined in terms of addition. Thus,

a ⫹ 1⫺b2

where  ⫺b is  the  additive  inverse  of  b, may  be  written  in  the  more  familiar  form 
a ⫺ b, and we say that b is subtracted from a. Similarly, the operation of division is
defined in terms of multiplication. Recall that the multiplicative inverse of a nonzero
real number b is  , also written b⫺1. Then,
aa 1
bb

1
b

is written  , and we say that a is divided by b. Thus, 4 ⫽ . Remember, zero does
not have a multiplicative inverse since division by zero is not defined.

a
b

A1
3B

4
3

Do  the  operations  of  associativity  and  commutativity  hold  for  subtraction  and

division? Looking first at associativity, we see that the answer is no, since 
7 ⫺ 14 ⫺ 22 ⫽ 17 ⫺ 42 ⫺ 2, or 5 ⫽ 1

and

a ⫺ 1b ⫺ c2 ⫽ 1a ⫺ b2 ⫺ c
a ⫼ 1b ⫼ c2 ⫽ 1a ⫼ b2 ⫼ c

Similarly, commutativity does not hold because

8 ⫼ 14 ⫼ 22 ⫽ 18 ⫼ 42 ⫼ 2, or 4 ⫽ 1

and

a ⫺ b ⫽ b ⫺ a

7 ⫺ 4 ⫽ 4 ⫺ 7, or 3 ⫽ ⫺3

a ⫼ b ⫽ b ⫼ a

8 ⫼ 4 ⫽ 4 ⫼ 8, or 2 ⫽ 1
2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 1 State the real number property that justifies each statement.

1.1 REAL NUMBERS

5

Statement

b.

a. 4 ⫹ 1x ⫺ 22 ⫽ 4 ⫹ 1⫺2 ⫹ x2
1a ⫹ 2b2 ⫹ c ⫽ a ⫹ 12b ⫹ c2
c. x1y ⫺ z ⫹ 22 ⫽ 1y ⫺ z ⫹ 22 x
d. 41xy22 ⫽ 14x2y2
e. x1y ⫺ 22 ⫽ xy ⫺ 2x

Property

Commutative law of addition
Associative law of addition
Commutative law of multiplication
Associative law of multiplication
Distributive law for multiplication 
under addition

Using the properties of real numbers listed earlier, we can derive all other alge-
braic properties of real numbers. Some of the more important properties are given in 
Tables 3–5.

TABLE 3
Properties of Negatives
Property

1. ⫺1⫺a2 ⫽ a
2. 1⫺a2b ⫽ ⫺1ab2 ⫽ a1⫺b2
3.
4.

1⫺a21⫺b2 ⫽ ab
1⫺12a ⫽ ⫺a

TABLE 4
Properties Involving Zero
Property

1. a ⭈ 0 ⫽ 0
2. If ab ⫽ 0, then a ⫽ 0, b ⫽ 0, or both.

TABLE 5
Properties of Quotients
Property

Illustration

⫺1⫺62 ⫽ 6
1⫺324 ⫽ ⫺13 ⭈ 42 ⫽ 31⫺42
1⫺321⫺42 ⫽ 3 ⭈ 4
1⫺125 ⫽ ⫺5

Illustration

⫽

if ad ⫽ bc

because 3 ⭈ 12 ⫽ 9 ⭈ 4

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

⫽

c
d
a
b
⫺a
b

⫽

a
b
ca
cb

a
⫺b
a
b

 #  

⫽

c
d

ac
bd

⫽ ⫺

a
b

ad
bc

a
b

a
b

a
b

⫼

⫹

⫺

c
d

c
d

c
d

⫽

⫽

⫽

 #  

⫽

d
c

a
b
ad ⫹ bc

bd

ad ⫺ bc

bd

1b, d ⫽ 02
1b, c ⫽ 02
1b ⫽ 02
1b, d ⫽ 02
1b, c, d ⫽ 02
1b, d ⫽ 02
1b, d ⫽ 02

⫽

3
4

 #  

⫽ ⫺4
3

⫽ 9
12
4 #  3
⫽ 3
4 #  8
8
⫺4
3
⫽ 15
8
 #  
⫽ 3
⫽ 3
4
10
⫽ 3 #  2 ⫹ 4 #  5
⫽ 3 #  2 ⫺ 4 #  5

5
2
⫼ 5
2
⫹ 5
2
⫺ 5
2

4
⫺3
3
4
3
4
3
4
3
4

2
5

8

8

⫽ 13
4
⫽ ⫺7
4

In the rest of this book, we will assume that all variables are restricted so that

Note
division by zero is excluded.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 2 State the real number property that justifies each statement.

b. If  4x ⫺ 1 x ⫹ 3 ⫽ 0, then x ⫽ or x ⫽ ⫺3.

1
4

Statement

2

a. ⫺ ⫺4 ⫽ 4
12

1
1
2
1x ⫺ 121x ⫹ 12
1x ⫺ 121x ⫺ 32 ⫽
y ⫹ 1
x ⫺ 1

⫼

y

⫹

x
y

x

y ⫹ 1

c.

d.

e.

x ⫹ 1
x ⫺ 3
x ⫺ 1

y

⫽

 #  
x1y ⫹ 12 ⫹ xy
y1y ⫹ 12
y1y ⫹ 12 ⫽

xy ⫹ x ⫹ xy

x

⫽

⫽

x

y ⫹ 1

⫽

x1x ⫺ 12
y1y ⫹ 12

2xy ⫹ x
y1y ⫹ 12

Property

Property 1 of negatives

Property 2 of zero properties

Property 2 of quotients

Property 5 of quotients

Property 6 of quotients

Distributive law

1.1 Self-Check Exercises

State the property (or properties) that justify each statement.
1. 3√ ⫹ 2 ⫺ w ⫽ 3√ ⫹ 2 ⫺ w
2. 3s 4t ⫽ 3 s 4t 42

12

1
1

1

2

2

1

3

2

3. ⫺ ⫺s ⫹ t ⫽ s ⫺ t

1
⫺1u ⫺ √2 ⫽ ⫺ 2
u ⫺ √

4.

2

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 1.1 can be found on page 7.

2

1

1.1 Concept Questions

1. What is a natural number? A whole number? An integer?
A rational number? An irrational number? A real number?
Give examples.

3. What can you say about a and b if ab ⬆ 0? How about a,

b, and c if abc ⬆ 0?

2. a. The associative law of addition states that 

a ⫹ b ⫹ c ⫽

.

2

b. The distributive law states that ab ⫹ ac ⫽

.

1.1 Exercises

In Exercises 1–10, classify the number as to type. (For example, 
is rational and real, whereas 

is irrational and real.)

25

1. ⫺3

5.

211
9. 2.4苶2苶1苶

2. ⫺420

⫺25

6.

3.

7.

3
8

p
2

4.

8.

⫺ 4
125

2
p

10. 2.71828. . .

1
2

In  Exercises  11–16,  indicate  whether  the  statement  is  true  or
false.
11. Every integer is a whole number.

12. Every integer is a rational number.

13. Every natural number is an integer.

14. Every rational number is a real number.

15. Every natural number is an irrational number.

16. Every irrational number is a real number.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1

1

2

1

2
1

In Exercises 17–36, state the real number property that justifies
the statement.
17. 2x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⫽ z ⫹ 2x ⫹ y
2

2
18. 3x ⫹ 2y ⫹ z ⫽ 3x ⫹ 2y ⫹ z
2
19. u 3√ ⫹ w ⫽ 3√ ⫹ w u
20. a2 b2c ⫽ a2b2 c
21. u 2√ ⫹ w ⫽ 2u√ ⫹ uw
22. 2u ⫹ √ w ⫽ 2uw ⫹ √w
2
23. 2x ⫹ 3y ⫹ x ⫹ 4y ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3y ⫹ x ⫹ 4y

1

2

2

1

2

2

1

2

1

1

24. a ⫹ 2b a ⫺ 3b ⫽ a a ⫺ 3b ⫹ 2b a ⫺ 3b

1

1
1
1

25. a ⫺ ⫺ c ⫹ d ⫽ a ⫹ c ⫹ d

2
12
1

3

2

3

2

1
1

12

1

2

1

1

26. ⫺ 2x ⫹ y [⫺ 3x ⫹ 2y ] ⫽ 2x ⫹ y 3x ⫹ 2y

42
2

2

2

42

2

2

1

1
27. 0 2a ⫹ 3b ⫽ 0

2

1

1
1

2

12
12

28. If  x ⫺ y x ⫹ y ⫽ 0, then x ⫽ y or x ⫽ ⫺y.
⫺5
29. If  x ⫺ 2 2x ⫹ 5 ⫽ 0, then x ⫽ 2 or x ⫽ .
2

9
30. If x 2x ⫺ 9 ⫽ 0, then x ⫽ 0 or x ⫽ .
2

2

1
1x ⫹ 121x ⫺ 32
12x ⫹ 121x ⫺ 32 ⫽

31.

x ⫹ 1
2x ⫹ 1

1.1 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. Associative law of addition: a ⫹ b ⫹ c ⫽ a ⫹ b ⫹ c

2
2. Associative law of multiplication: a bc ⫽ ab c

2

1

1

3. Distributive law for multiplication: a b ⫹ c ⫽ ab ⫹ ac
Properties 1 and 4 of negatives: ⫺ ⫺a ⫽ a; (⫺1 a ⫽ ⫺a

1

1

2

1
2

1

2

2

2

1.2 POLYNOMIALS

7

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

12x ⫹ 121x ⫹ 32
12x ⫺ 121x ⫹ 32 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 1
2x ⫺ 1
a1a ⫹ b2

a ⫺ b

a ⫹ b

⫼

⫽

b

ab

a ⫺ b

x ⫹ 2y
3x ⫹ y

⫼

x

6x ⫹ 2y

⫽

x ⫹ 2y
3x ⫹ y

213x ⫹ y2
 #  

x

21x ⫹ 2y2

x

⫽

a

b ⫹ c

x ⫹ y
x ⫹ 1

⫹

⫺

⫽

⫽

c
b

y
x

ab ⫹ bc ⫹ c2

b1b ⫹ c2
x1x ⫹ 12

x2 ⫺ y

In  Exercises  37–42,  indicate  whether  the  statement  is  true  or
false.
37. If ab ⫽ 1, then a ⫽ 1 or b ⫽ 1.

38. If ab ⫽ 0 and a ⫽ 0, then b ⫽ 0.

39. a ⫺ b ⫽ b ⫺ a

40. a ⫼ b ⫽ b ⫼ a

41. a ⫺ b ⫺ c ⫽ a ⫺ b ⫺ c

42. a ⫼ b ⫼ c ⫽ a ⫼ b ⫼ c

2

1

2

1

2

1

2

1

4. Property 3 of quotients: 

a
⫺b

⫽

⫺a
b

⫽ ⫺

a
b

1.2

Polynomials

Exponents
Expressions such as 25,  ⫺3 2, and 
are exponential expressions. More generally,
if n is a natural number and a is a real number, then an represents the product of the
real number a and itself n times.

4B4
A1

2

1

Exponential Notation
If a is a real number and n is a natural number, then

an ⫽ a ⭈ a ⭈ a ⭈ . . . ⭈ a
(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:5)

n factors

34 ⫽ 3 ⭈ 3 ⭈ 3 ⭈ 3
(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:5)

4 factors

The natural number n is called the exponent, and the real number a is called the
base.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

c.

EXAMPLE 1
a. 44 ⫽ 4 4 4 4 ⫽ 256
2
b. ⫺5 3 ⫽ ⫺5 ⫺5 ⫺5 ⫽ ⫺125
2b ⫽ 1
3b ⫽ 1

12
1
12
12
2
12
1
2
1
12
2b 3
⫽ a 1
2b a 1
2b a 1
a 1
3b 2
3b a⫺1
⫽ a⫺1
d. a⫺1
When we evaluate expressions such as 32 ⭈ 33, we use the following property of

8

9

exponents to write the product in exponential form.

Property 1
If m and n are natural numbers and a is any real number, then

a m ⭈ a n ⫽ a m⫹n

32 ⭈ 33 ⫽ 32⫹3 ⫽ 35

To verify that Property 1 follows from the definition of an exponential expression, we
note that the total number of factors in the exponential expression

am ⭈ an ⫽ a ⭈ a ⭈ a ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ a
(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:5)

⭈ a ⭈ a ⭈ a ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ a
(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:5)

m factors

n factors

is m ⫹ n.

EXAMPLE 2
a. 32 ⭈ 33 ⫽ 32⫹3 ⫽ 35 ⫽ 243
b. ⫺2 2 ⭈ ⫺2 5 ⫽ ⫺2 2⫹5 ⫽ ⫺2 7 ⫽ ⫺128
1
c. 3x ⭈ 3x 3 ⫽ 3x 1⫹3 ⫽ 3x 4 ⫽ 81x 4

1
1

1
2

2

2

1

2

2

2

1

2

1

2

1

Be careful to apply the exponent to the indicated base only. Note that

4 ⭈ x 2 ⫽ 4x 2 ⫽ 4x 2 ⫽ 42 ⭈ x 2 ⫽ 16x2

앗— The exponent applies to 4x.

1

2

앖
— The exponent applies only to the base x.

and

앗— The exponent applies to ⫺3.

⫺32 ⫽ ⫺9 ⫽ ⫺3 2 ⫽ 9

앖
—The exponent applies only to the base 3.

1

2

Polynomials
Recall that a variable is a letter that is used to represent any element of a given set.
However, unless specified otherwise, variables in this text will represent real numbers.
Sometimes physical considerations impose restrictions on the values a variable may
assume. For example, if the variable x denotes the number of LCD television sets sold
daily  in  an  appliance  store,  then  x must  be  a  nonnegative  integer.  At  other  times,
restrictions must be imposed on x in order for an expression to make sense. For exam-
, x cannot take on the value ⫺2, since division by 0 is not
ple, in the expression 
permitted. We call the set of all real numbers that a variable is allowed to assume the
domain of the variable.

x ⫹ 2

1

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1.2 POLYNOMIALS

9

In  contrast  to  a  variable,  a  constant is  a  fixed  number  or  letter  whose  value
remains fixed throughout a particular discussion. For example, in the expression  tt2,
which gives the distance in feet covered by a free-falling body near the surface of the
earth, t seconds from rest, the letter t represents the constant of acceleration due to
gravity (approximately 32 feet/second/second), whereas the letter t is a variable with
domain consisting of nonnegative real numbers.

1
2

By combining constants and variables through addition, subtraction, multiplica-
tion, division, exponentiation, and root extraction, we obtain algebraic expressions.
Examples of algebraic expressions are

3x ⫺ 4y

2x 2 ⫺ y ⫹

1
xy

ax ⫺ b
1 ⫺ x 2

3xy⫺2 ⫹ p
x2 ⫹ y2 ⫹ z2

where a and b are constants and x, y, and z are variables. Intimidating as some of these
expressions might be, remember that they are just real numbers. For example, if x ⫽ 1
and y ⫽ 4, then the second expression represents the number

1
2 1 2 ⫺ 4 ⫹

2

1

112142

or ⫺ , obtained by replacing x and y in the expression by the appropriate values.

7
4
Polynomials are an important class of algebraic expressions. The simplest poly-

nomials are those involving one variable.

Polynomial in One Variable
A polynomial in x is an expression of the form

anx n ⫹ an⫺1x n⫺1 ⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⫹a 1x ⫹ a0

where  n is  a  nonnegative  integer  and  a0,  a1,  .  .  .  ,  an are  real  numbers,  with 
an ⫽ 0.

The expressions akx k in the sum are called the terms of the polynomial. The numbers
a0, a1, . . . , an are called the coefficients of 1, x, x 2, . . . , x n, respectively. The coeffi-
cient an of x n (the highest power in x) is called the leading coefficient of the polyno-
mial. The nonnegative integer n gives the degree of the polynomial. For example, con-
sider the polynomial

⫺2x 5 ⫹ 8x 3 ⫺ 6x 2 ⫹ 3x ⫹ 1

1. The terms of the polynomial are ⫺2x 5, 8x 3, ⫺6x 2, 3x, and 1.
2. The coefficients of 1, x, x 2, x 3, x 4, and x 5 are 1, 3, ⫺6, 8, 0, and ⫺2, respectively.
3. The leading coefficient of the polynomial is ⫺2.
4. The degree of the polynomial is 5.

A polynomial that has just one term (such as 2x 3) is called a monomial; a poly-
nomial that has exactly two terms (such as x 3 ⫹ x) is called a binomial; and a poly-
nomial that has only three terms (such as ⫺2x 3 ⫹ x ⫺ 8) is called a trinomial. Also,
a polynomial consisting of one (constant) term a0 (such as the monomial ⫺8) is called
a  constant  polynomial. Observe  that  the  degree  of  a  constant  polynomial  a0,  with 
a0 ⫽ 0, is 0 because we can write a0 ⫽ a0 x 0 and see that n ⫽ 0 in this situation. If all
the coefficients of a polynomial are 0, it is called the zero polynomial and is denoted
by 0. The zero polynomial is not assigned a degree.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

Most of the terminology used for a polynomial in one variable carries over to the
discussion of polynomials in several variables. But the degree of a term in a polyno-
mial in several variables is obtained by adding the powers of all variables in the term,
and the degree of the polynomial is given by the highest degree of all its terms. For
example, the polynomial

2x 2y 5 ⫺ 3xy 3 ⫹ 8xy 2 ⫺ 3y ⫹ 4

is a polynomial in the two variables x and y. It has five terms with degrees 7, 4, 3, 1,
and 0, respectively. Accordingly, the degree of the polynomial is 7.

Adding and Subtracting Polynomials
Constant terms and terms that have the same variable and exponent are called like or
similar terms. Like terms may be combined by adding or subtracting their numerical
coefficients. For example,

3x ⫹ 7x ⫽ 3 ⫹ 7 x ⫽ 10x

Add like terms.

1

2

and

1
2

m2 ⫺ 3m2 ⫽

a 1

2

⫺ 3b

m2 ⫽ ⫺ ᎏ5
ᎏ m2
2

Subtract like terms.

The distributive property of the real number system,
ab ⫹ ac ⫽ a b ⫹ c

1

2

is used to justify this procedure.

To add or subtract two or more polynomials, first remove the parentheses and then
combine like terms. The resulting expression is then written in order of decreasing
degree from left to right.

1

1

2

EXAMPLE 3
a. 3x 3 ⫹ 2x 2 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 5 ⫹ ⫺2x 3 ⫺ 2x 2 ⫺ 2

2
⫽ 3x 3 ⫹ 2x 2 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 5 ⫺ 2x 3 ⫺ 2x2 ⫺ 2
⫽ 3x 3 ⫺ 2x 3 ⫹ 2x2 ⫺ 2x 2 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 5 ⫺ 2
⫽ x 3 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 3
2

b. 2x 4 ⫹ 3x 3 ⫹ 4x ⫹ 6 ⫺ 3x 4 ⫹ 9x 3 ⫹ 3x 2

2

1

1

⫽ 2x 4 ⫹ 3x 3 ⫹ 4x ⫹ 6 ⫺ 3x 4 ⫺ 9x 3 ⫺ 3x 2

Remove parentheses.

Group like terms together.

Combine like terms.

Remove parentheses. Note that the
minus sign preceding the second
polynomial changes the sign of each
term of that polynomial.

⫽ 2x 4 ⫺ 3x 4 ⫹ 3x 3 ⫺ 9x 3 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫹ 4x ⫹ 6
⫽ ⫺x 4 ⫺ 6x 3 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫹ 4x ⫹ 6

Group like terms.

Combine like terms.

Multiplying Polynomials
To find the product of two polynomials, we again use the distributive property for real
numbers. For example, to compute the product 3x(4x ⫺ 2), we use the distributive law
to obtain

1
3x 4x ⫺ 2 ⫽ 3x 4x ⫹ 3x ⫺2

1
2
⫽ 12x 2 ⫺ 6x

12

12

1

2

2

a b ⫹ c ⫽ ab ⫹ ac

1

2

Observe that each term of one polynomial is multiplied by each term of the other. The
resulting expression is then simplified by combining like terms. In general, an alge-
braic expression is simplified if none of its terms are similar.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
EXAMPLE 4 Find the product of  3x ⫹ 5 2x ⫺ 3 .

1

12
2

Solution

1

2

12

1
1
3x ⫹ 5 2x ⫺ 3 ⫽ 3x 2x ⫺ 3 ⫹ 5 2x ⫺ 3
12
2
1
⫽ 3x) 2x ⫹ 3x ⫺3
12
1
2
1
⫹ 5 2x ⫹ 5 ⫺3
⫽ 6x 2 ⫺ 9x ⫹ 10x ⫺ 15
⫽ 6x 2 ⫹ x ⫺ 15

12

1

2

1

2

1.2 POLYNOMIALS

11

2

Distributive property

Distributive property

Multiply terms.

Combine like terms.

2
EXAMPLE 5 Find the product of  2t 2 ⫺ t ⫹ 3 2t 2 ⫺ 1 .

12

1

Solution

1

2

12
12

1

1

2t 2 ⫺ t ⫹ 3 2t 2 ⫺ 1
2
1
2

1
⫽ 2t 2 2t 2 ⫺ 1 ⫺ t 2t 2 ⫺ 1 ⫹ 3 2t 2 ⫺ 1
12
1
2
⫽ 2t 2 2t 2 ⫹ 2t 2 ⫺1 ⫹ ⫺t 2t 2
12
2
2
1
⫹ ⫺t ⫺1 ⫹ 3 2t 2 ⫹ 3 ⫺1
⫽ 4t 4 ⫺ 2t 2 ⫺ 2t 3 ⫹ t ⫹ 6t 2 ⫺ 3
⫽ 4t 4 ⫺ 2t 3 ⫹ 4t 2 ⫹ t ⫺ 3

12
12

12

1
1

2

2

2

1

2

Distributive property

Distributive property

Multiply terms.

Combine terms.

Alternative Solution We can also find the product by arranging the polynomials
vertically and multiplying:

2t 2 ⫺ t ⫹ 3
2t 2 ⫺ 1           
4t 4 ⫺ 2t 3 ⫹ 6t 2

⫺ 2t 2 ⫹ t ⫺ 3
4t 4 ⫺ 2t 3 ⫹ 4t 2 ⫹ t ⫺ 3

The polynomials in Examples 4 and 5 are polynomials in one variable. The oper-
ations  of  addition,  subtraction,  and  multiplication  are  performed  on  polynomials  of
more than one variable in the same way as they are for polynomials in one variable.

VIDEO

2
EXAMPLE 6 Multiply  3x ⫺ y 4x 2 ⫺ 2y .

12

1

Solution

1

12

3x ⫺ y 4x 2 ⫺ 2y ⫽ 3x 4x 2 ⫺ 2y ⫺ y 4x 2 ⫺ 2y

2

1

2

1

⫽ 12x 3 ⫺ 6xy ⫺ 4x 2y ⫹ 2y 2
⫽ 12x 3 ⫺ 4x 2y ⫺ 6xy ⫹ 2y 2

2

Distributive property

Distributive property

Arrange terms in order of 
descending powers of x.

Several  commonly  used  products  of  polynomials  are  summarized  in  Table  6.
Since products of this type occur so frequently, you will find it helpful to memorize
these formulas.

TABLE 6
Special Products
Formula

Illustration

1
1
1

2
2
12

1. a ⫹ b 2 ⫽ a2 ⫹ 2ab ⫹ b2

2. a ⫺ b 2 ⫽ a2 ⫺ 2ab ⫹ b2

3. a ⫹ b a ⫺ b ⫽ a2 ⫺ b2

2

1
1
1

2
2

2
2
1
2x ⫹ 3y 2 ⫽ 2x 2 ⫹ 2 2x 3y ⫹ 3y 2
⫽ 4x 2 ⫹ 12xy ⫹ 9y 2
1
2
2
4x ⫺ 2y 2 ⫽ 4x 2 ⫺ 2 4x 2y ⫹ 2y 2
⫽ 16x 2 ⫺ 16xy ⫹ 4y 2
2x ⫹ y 2x ⫺ y ⫽ 2x 2 ⫺ y 22

2
2
12

1
1
⫽ 4x 2 ⫺ y2

12
12

1
1
2

1
1

2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

EXAMPLE 7 Use the special product formulas to compute:

2
a. 2x ⫹ y 2

1

2
b. 3a ⫺ 4b 2

1

c.

a 1

2

 x ⫺ 1b a 1

2

 x ⫹ 1b

2

2

Solution
a. 2x ⫹ y 2 ⫽ 2x 2 ⫹ 2 2x y ⫹ y 2
2
1
⫽ 9a2 ⫺ 24ab ⫹ 16b2

2
1
12
⫽ 4x 2 ⫹ 4xy ⫹ y 2
12

2
b. 3a ⫺ 4b 2 ⫽ 3a 2 ⫺ 2 3a 4b ⫹ 4b 2

1
1

2

1

2

1

1

Formula 1

Formula 2

c.

a 1

2

 x ⫺ 1b a 1

2

 x ⫹ 1b ⫽ a 1

2

 xb 2

⫺ 1 ⫽ 1
4

 x2 ⫺ 1

Formula 3

Order of Operations
The common steps in Examples 1–7 have been to remove parentheses and combine
like terms. If more than one grouping symbol is present, the innermost symbols are
removed first. As you work through Examples 8 and 9, note the order in which the
grouping symbols are removed: parentheses ( ) first, brackets [ ] second, and finally
braces { }. Also, note that the operations of multiplication and division take precedence
over addition and subtraction.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 8 Perform the indicated operations:

2t 3 ⫺ t 2 ⫺ t ⫺ 2t ⫺ 1 ⫹ 4

42

6

5

3

1

Solution

3

1

3
3

42

5
5
5
5

6
5
2t 3 ⫺ t 2 ⫺ t ⫺ 2t ⫺ 1 ⫹ 4
4
⫽ 2t 3 ⫺ t 2 ⫺ t ⫺ 2t ⫹ 1 ⫹ 4
6
4
⫽ 2t 3 ⫺ t 2 ⫺ ⫺t ⫹ 1 ⫹ 4
⫽ 2t 3 ⫺ t 2 ⫹ t ⫺ 1 ⫹ 4
⫽ 2t 3 ⫺ t 2 ⫹ t ⫹ 3
⫽ 2t 3 ⫺ t 2 ⫺ t ⫺ 3
3

6

5

6

1

EXAMPLE 9 Simplify 2 3 ⫺ 2 x ⫺ 2x 3 ⫺ x

642

.

6

Remove parentheses.

Combine like terms within the brackets.

Remove brackets.

Combine like terms within the braces.

Remove braces.

Solution

3

5
2 3 ⫺ 2 x ⫺ 2x 3 ⫺ x ⫽ 2 3 ⫺ 2 x ⫺ 6x ⫹ 2x 2
64

642

3
3

1

5
5
5

⫽ 2 3 ⫺ 2 ⫺5x ⫹ 2x 2
6
⫽ 2 3 ⫹ 10x ⫺ 4x 2
⫽ 6 ⫹ 20x ⫺ 8x 2
⫽ ⫺8x 2 ⫹ 20x ⫹ 6

64

Remove parentheses.

Combine like terms.

Remove brackets.

Remove braces.

Write answer in order of 
descending powers of x.

1.2 Self-Check Exercises
1. Find the product of  2x ⫹ 3y 3x ⫺ 2y .2

12

1

6
2. Simplify 3x ⫺ 2 2x ⫺ x ⫺ 2 x ⫺ 2 ⫹ 1 .

42

5

1

3

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 1.2 can be found on 
page 14.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1.2 Concept Questions

1. Describe a polynomial of degree n in x. Give an example

2. Without looking at the formulas in the text, complete the

1.2 POLYNOMIALS

13

of a polynomial of degree 4 in x.

1.2 Exercises

4.

3.

5. ⫺34

3b 3
a 2

In Exercises 1–12, evaluate the expression.
2
1
2. ⫺2 5
1. 34
4b 2
a⫺3
5b 3
⫺a⫺4
3b 2a⫺3
4b 3
a⫺2
2
2
1
10. ⫺3 2 ⭈ ⫺3 3
1
2
12. ⫺2x 3 ⫺2x 2

5b 3
⫺3a 3

11. 3y 2 3y 3

9. 23 ⭈ 25

7.

8.

6.

2

1

2

1

2

1

1

2

2

In  Exercises  13–56,  perform  the  indicated  operations  and  sim-
plify.
13. 2x ⫹ 3 ⫹ 4x ⫺ 6
1

2
16. 3x 2 ⫹ 5xy ⫹ 2y ⫹ 4 ⫺ 3xy ⫺ 2x 2

15. 7x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫹ 5 ⫹ 2x 2 ⫹ 5x ⫺ 4

14. ⫺3x ⫹ 2 ⫺ 4x ⫺ 3

2

1

2

1

2

2

1

2

2

1

17. 5y 2 ⫺ 2y ⫹ 1 ⫺ y 2 ⫺ 4y ⫺ 8

2
18. 2x 2 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 4 ⫺ ⫺x 2 ⫹ 2x ⫺ 6

2
2

1
1

19. 2.4x 3 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫹ 1.7x ⫺ 6.2 ⫺ 1.2x 3 ⫹ 1.2x 2 ⫺ 0.8x ⫹ 2

2
1
2
20. 1.4x 3 ⫺ 1.2x 2 ⫹ 3.2 ⫺ ⫺0.8x 3 ⫺ 2.1x ⫺ 1.8
12
2
22. ⫺2rs2 4r 2s2 2s

21. 3x 2 2x 3

2

2

1

12
1

23. ⫺2x x 2 ⫺ 2 ⫹ 4x 3
1

25. 2m 3m ⫺ 4 ⫹ m m ⫺ 1

1

2
2

1

12
24. xy 2y ⫺ 3x
2

1

2

1

2
27. 3 2a ⫺ b ⫺ 4 b ⫺ 2a

26. ⫺3x 2x 2 ⫹ 3x ⫺ 5 ⫹ 2x x 2 ⫺ 3
1

2

1

2

1
28. 2 3m ⫺ 1 ⫺ 3 ⫺4m ⫹ 2n

1
30. 3r ⫺ 1 2r ⫹ 5

2

1
29. 2x ⫹ 3 3x ⫺ 2

2
2
31. 2x ⫺ 3y 3x ⫹ 2y
2

33. 3r ⫹ 2s 4r ⫺ 3s

2
12
12
12

37. 2x ⫺ y 3x 2 ⫹ 2y

12
2
39. 2x ⫹ 3y 2

2

35. 0.2x ⫹ 1.2y 0.3x ⫺ 2.1y

34. 2m ⫹ 3n 3m ⫺ 2n
2
36. 3.2m ⫺ 1.7n 4.2m ⫹ 1.3n

12
12

32. 5m ⫺ 2n 5m ⫹ 3n

1
1
1

12

12
12

2

2
2

2
12
38. 3m ⫺ 2n2 2m2 ⫹ 3n
40. 3m ⫺ 2n 22

1
1

2

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

1
1
1
1
1
1
1

following:
a. 1 ⫹ b 2 ⫽ ______
b. a ⫺ b 2 ⫽ ______
c. a ⫹ b a ⫺ b ⫽ ______

2
2
12

1
1
1

2

1

1
1
1
1
1
1

1
1

2

1
41. 2u ⫺ √ 2u ⫹ √
43. 2x ⫺ 1 2 ⫹ 3x ⫺ 2 x 2 ⫹ 1 ⫹ 3

42. 3r ⫹ 4s 3r ⫺ 4s
2
44. 3m ⫹ 2 2 ⫺ 2m 1 ⫺ m ⫺ 4

12
2

12

1

2

2

1

12

1
45. 2x ⫹ 3y 2 ⫺ 2y ⫹ 1 3x ⫺ 2 ⫹ 2 x ⫺ y
2
46. x ⫺ 2y y ⫹ 3x ⫺ 2xy ⫹ 3 x ⫹ y ⫺ 1
12

47.

1

2

1

2

2

50. 3m ⫺ 2 m ⫺ 3 2m ⫺ m ⫺ 5 ] ⫹ 4

1

5

12
3

t 2 ⫺ 2t ⫹ 4 2t 2 ⫹ 1

2
49. 2x ⫺ 3x ⫺ x ⫺ 2x ⫺ 1
1
51. x ⫺ 2x ⫺ ⫺x ⫺ 1 ⫹ x
1

1
3

5

5

5

3

3

642

52. 3x 2 ⫺ x 2 ⫹ 1 ⫺ x x ⫺ 2x ⫺ 1 ⫹ 2

1
1

12
12

53. 2x ⫺ 3 2 ⫺ 3 x ⫹ 4 x ⫺ 4 ⫹ 2 x ⫺ 4 ⫹ 1

54. x ⫺ 2y 2 ⫹ 2 x ⫹ y x ⫺ 3y ⫹ x 2x ⫹ 3y ⫹ 2

3

5

62
55. 2x 3x 2x ⫺ 3 ⫺ x ⫹ x ⫹ 1 2x ⫺ 3
12

56. ⫺3 x ⫹ 2y 2 ⫺ 3x ⫺ 2y 2 ⫹ 2x ⫺ y 2x ⫹ y

12
1

1
2

42

13

1

2

1

42

2

2

2

2

2

6

642
1

1

2
2
12

2
2

48. 3m2 ⫺ 1 2m2 ⫹ 3m ⫺ 4
642

2

2

2

57. PROFIT OF A COMPANY The total revenue realized in the sale

of x units of the LectroCopy photocopying machine is

⫺0.04x 2 ⫹ 2000x

dollars/week, and the total cost incurred in manufacturing 
x units of the machines is

0.000002x 3 ⫺ 0.02x 2 ⫹ 1000x ⫹ 120,000

dollars/week (0 ⱕ x ⱕ 50,000). Find an expression giving
the total weekly profit of the company.
Hint: The profit is revenue minus cost.

58. PROFIT OF A COMPANY A  manufacturer  of  tennis  rackets
finds that the total cost of manufacturing x rackets/day is
given by

0.0001x 2 ⫹ 4x ⫹ 400

dollars.  Each  racket  can  be  sold  at  a  price  of  p dollars,
where

p ⫽ ⫺0.0004x ⫹ 10

Find an expression giving the daily profit for the manufac-
turer, assuming that all the rackets manufactured can be sold.
Hint: The  total  revenue  is  given  by  the  total  number  of  rackets
sold multiplied by the price of each racket. The profit is given by
revenue minus cost.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

59. REVENUE OF A COMPANY Jake owns two gas stations in town.
The  total  revenue  of  the  first  gas  station  for  the  next 
12 months is projected to be

0.2t 

2 ⫹ 150t    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 122

thousand dollars t months from now. The total revenue of
the second gas station for the next 12 months is projected
to be

0.5t 

2 ⫹ 200t    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 122

thousand  dollars  t months  from  now.  Find  an  expression
that gives the total revenue realized by Jake’s gas stations
in month 

.

t 10 ⱕ t ⱕ 122

60. REVENUE OF A COMPANY Refer  to  Exercise  59.  Find  an
expression that gives the amount by which the revenue of
the second gas station will exceed that of the first gas sta-
tions in month 

t 10 ⬍ t ⱕ 122.

61. PRISON OVERCROWDING The  1980s  saw  a  trend  toward  old-
fashioned punitive deterrence as opposed to the more liberal
penal policies and community-based corrections popular in
the 1960s and early 1970s. As a result, prisons became more
crowded,  and  the  gap  between  the  number  of  people  in
prison and prison capacity widened. Based on figures from
the U.S. Department of Justice, the number of prisoners (in
thousands) in federal and state prisons is approximately

3.5t 2 ⫹ 26.7t ⫹ 436.2

1

0 ⱕ t ⱕ 10

2

and the number of inmates (in thousands) for which prisons
were designed is given by

24.3t ⫹ 365

1

0 ⱕ t ⱕ 10

2

where t is measured in years and t ⫽ 0 corresponds to 1984.
Find an expression giving the gap between the number of
prisoners  and  the  number  for  which  the  prisons  were
designed at any time t.
Source: U.S. Department of Justice.

1.2 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises
12x ⫹ 3y213x ⫺ 2y2 ⫽ 2x13x ⫺ 2y2 ⫹ 3y13x ⫺ 2y2

1.

⫽ 6x 2 ⫺ 4xy ⫹ 9xy ⫺ 6y 2
⫽ 6x 2 ⫹ 5xy ⫺ 6y 2

62. HEALTH-CARE SPENDING Health-care  spending  per  person
(in  dollars)  by  the  private  sector  includes  payments  by
individuals,  corporations,  and  their  insurance  companies
and is approximated by

2.5t 2 ⫹ 18.5t ⫹ 509

1

0 ⱕ t ⱕ 6

2

where t is measured in years and t ⫽ 0 corresponds to the
beginning of 1994. The corresponding government spend-
ing  (in  dollars),  including  expenditures  for  Medicaid  and
other  federal,  state,  and  local  government  public  health
care, is

⫺1.1t 2 ⫹ 29.1t ⫹ 429

1

0 ⱕ t ⱕ 6

2

where t has the same meaning as before. Find an expres-
sion  for  the  difference  between  private  and  government
expenditures per person at any time t. What was the differ-
ence  between  private  and  government  expenditures  per
person at the beginning of 1998? At the beginning of 2000?
Source: Health Care Financing Administration.

bers, then am ⭈ bn ⫽ ab m⫹n.

2

1

12

12

1

In Exercises 63–66, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
63. If m and n are natural numbers and a and b are real num-

64. a16 ⫺ b16 ⫽ a8 ⫹ b8 a4 ⫹ b4 a2 ⫹ b2 a ⫹ b a ⫺ b

12

12

2

65. The degree of the product of a polynomial of degree m and

a polynomial of degree n is mn.

66. Suppose p and q are polynomials of degree n. Then p ⫹ q

is a polynomial of degree n.

67. Suppose p is a polynomial of degree m and q is a polyno-
mial  of  degree  n, where  m ⬎ n. What  is  the  degree  of 
p ⫺ q?

2. 3x ⫺ 252x ⫺ 3x ⫺ 21x ⫺ 224 ⫹ 16
⫽ 3x ⫺ 252x ⫺ 3x ⫺ 2x ⫹ 44 ⫹ 16
⫽ 3x ⫺ 252x ⫺ 3⫺x ⫹ 44 ⫹ 16
⫽ 3x ⫺ 252x ⫹ x ⫺ 4 ⫹ 16
⫽ 3x ⫺ 253x ⫺ 36
⫽ 3x ⫺ 6x ⫹ 6
⫽ ⫺3x ⫹ 6

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1.3

Factoring Polynomials

1.3 FACTORING POLYNOMIALS

15

Factoring
Factoring a polynomial is the process of expressing it as a product of two or more
polynomials. For example, by applying the distributive property, we may write

2
3x 2 ⫺ x ⫽ x 3x ⫺ 1
and we say that x and 3x ⫺ 1 are factors of 3x 2 ⫺ x.

1

How do we know whether a polynomial is completely factored? Recall that an
integer greater than 1 is prime if its only positive integer factors are itself and 1.
For  example,  the  number  3  is  prime  because  its  only  factors  are  3  and  1.  In  the
same  way,  a  polynomial  is  said  to  be  prime  over  the  set  of  integral  coefficients 
if  it  cannot  be  expressed  as  a  product  of  two  or  more  polynomials  of  positive
degree with integral coefficients. For example, x 2 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 2 is a prime polynomial
relative  to  the  set  of  integers,  whereas  x 2 ⫺ 9  is  not  a  prime  polynomial,  since 
x 2 ⫺ 9 ⫽ (x ⫹ 3)(x ⫺ 3). Finally, a polynomial is said to be completely factored
over the set of integers if it is expressed as a product of prime polynomials with
integral coefficients.

Note Unless otherwise mentioned, we will consider only factorization over the set of
integers in this text. Hence, when the term factor is used, it will be understood that the
factorization is to be completed over the set of integers.

Common Factors
The first step in factoring a polynomial is to check whether it contains any common
factors. If it does, the common factor of highest degree is then factored out. For exam-
ple, the greatest common factor of 2a2x ⫹ 4ax ⫹ 6a is 2a because
2a2x ⫹ 4ax ⫹ 6a ⫽ 2a ⭈ ax ⫹ 2a ⭈ 2x ⫹ 2a ⭈ 3

⫽ 2a ax ⫹ 2x ⫹ 3

1

EXAMPLE 1 Factor out the greatest common factor.
a. ⫺3t 2 ⫹ 3t

b. 6a4b4c ⫺ 9a2b2

Solution

a. Since 3t is a common factor of each term, we have

⫺3t 2 ⫹ 3t ⫽ 3t ⫺t ⫹ 1 ⫽ ⫺3t t ⫺ 1

1

b. Since 3a2b2 is the common factor of highest degree, we have

2

1

2

2

6a4b4c ⫺ 9a2b2 ⫽ 3a2b2 2a2b2c ⫺ 3

2

1

Some Important Formulas
Having  checked  for  common  factors,  the  next  step  in  factoring  a  polynomial  is 
to  express  the  polynomial  as  the  product  of  a  constant  and/or  one  or  more  prime 
polynomials.  The  formulas  given  in  Table  7  for  factoring  polynomials  should  be
memorized.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

16

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

TABLE 7
Factoring Formulas
Formula

Difference of two squares

a2 ⫺ b2 ⫽ 1a ⫹ b21a ⫺ b2

Perfect square trinomial

a2 ⫹ 2ab ⫹ b2 ⫽ 1a ⫹ b22
a2 ⫺ 2ab ⫹ b2 ⫽ 1a ⫺ b22

Sum of two cubes

a3 ⫹ b3 ⫽ 1a ⫹ b21a2 ⫺ ab ⫹ b22

Difference of two cubes

a3 ⫺ b3 ⫽ 1a ⫺ b21a2 ⫹ ab ⫹ b22

Illustration

⫽ 2(2x ⫹ y2(2x ⫺ y2

x 2 ⫺ 36 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 621x ⫺ 62
8x 2 ⫺ 2y 2 ⫽ 214x 2 ⫺ y 22 ⫽ 2312x22 ⫺ y 24
9 ⫺ a6 ⫽ 32 ⫺ 1a322 ⫽ 13 ⫹ a3213 ⫺ a32
x 2 ⫹ 8x ⫹ 16 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 422
4x 2 ⫺ 4xy ⫹ y 2 ⫽ 12x22 ⫺ 212x21y2 ⫹ y 2

⫽ 12x ⫺ y22

z 3 ⫹ 27 ⫽ z 3 ⫹ 1323

⫽ 1z ⫹ 321z2 ⫺ 3z ⫹ 92

8x 3 ⫺ y 6 ⫽ 12x23 ⫺ 1y 223

⫽ 12x ⫺ y 2214x 2 ⫹ 2xy 2 ⫹ y 42

Note Observe that a formula is given for factoring the sum of two cubes, but none is
given  for  factoring  the  sum  of  two  squares,  since  x 2 ⫹ a2 is  prime  over  the  set  of 
integers.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 2 Factor:
a. x 2 ⫺ 9

b. 16x 2 ⫺ 81y 4

c. (a ⫺ b22 ⫺ (a2 ⫹ b22

Solution Observe that each of the polynomials in parts (a)–(c) is the difference of
two squares. Using the formula given in Table 7, we have

a. x 2 ⫺ 9 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 32 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 321x ⫺ 32
b. 16x 2 ⫺ 81y 4 ⫽ 14x22 ⫺ 19y 222 ⫽ 14x ⫹ 9y 2214x ⫺ 9y 22

1a ⫺ b22 ⫺ 1a2 ⫹ b22 ⫽ 31a ⫺ b2 ⫹ 1a2 ⫹ b2431a ⫺ b2 ⫺ 1a2 ⫹ b24

c.

⫽ 3a ⫺ b ⫹ a2 ⫹ b43a ⫺ b ⫺ a2 ⫺ b4
⫽ 1a ⫹ a221⫺a2 ⫹ a ⫺ 2b2
⫽ a11 ⫹ a21⫺a2 ⫹ a ⫺ 2b2

Remove parentheses.
Combine like terms.

EXAMPLE 3 Factor:
a. x 2 ⫹ 4xy ⫹ 4y 2

b. 4a2 ⫺ 12ab ⫹ 9b2

Solution Recognizing each of these polynomials as a perfect square trinomial, we
use a formula given in Table 7 to factor each polynomial. Thus,

a. x 2 ⫹ 4xy ⫹ 4y 2 ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 2x12y2 ⫹ 12y22 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 2y21x ⫹ 2y2 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 2y22
b. 4a2 ⫺ 12ab ⫹ 9b2 ⫽ 12a22 ⫺ 212a213b2 ⫹ 13b22

⫽ 12a ⫺ 3b212a ⫺ 3b2 ⫽ 12a ⫺ 3b22

EXAMPLE 4 Factor:
a. x 3 ⫹ 8y 3

b. 27a3 ⫺ 64b3

Solution

a. This polynomial is the sum of two cubes. Using the formula given in Table 7, we

have

1
1
2
x 3 ⫹ 8y 3 ⫽ x 3 ⫹ 2y 3 ⫽ x ⫹ 2y x 2 ⫺ x 2y ⫹ 2y 2
⫽ x ⫹ 2y x 2 ⫺ 2xy ⫹ 4y 22
1

32
12

1

2

1

2

4

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1.3 FACTORING POLYNOMIALS

17

b. Using the formula for the difference of two cubes given in Table 7, we have

2

4
2
27a3 ⫺ 64b3 ⫽ 3a 3 ⫺ 4b 3
2
2
3a 2 ⫹ 3a 4b ⫹ 4b 2

13
1
2
⫽ 3a ⫺ 4b
1
⫽ 3a ⫺ 4b 9a2 ⫹ 12ab ⫹ 16b2
Trial-and-Error Factorization
The factors of the second-degree polynomial px 2 ⫹ qx ⫹ r, where p, q, and r are inte-
gers, have the form

1
132
12

12

2

1

1

4

where ac ⫽ p, ad ⫹ bc ⫽ q, and bd ⫽ r. Since only a limited number of choices are
possible, we use a trial-and-error method to factor polynomials having this form.

For example, to factor x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 3, we first observe that the only possible first-

degree terms in each factor in the product are

1

x

12

x

Since the coefficient of x 2 is 1

Next, we observe that the product of the constant terms is (⫺3). This gives us the fol-
lowing possible factors:

1

ax ⫹ b cx ⫹ d

12

2

2

1
1

x ⫺ 1 x ⫹ 3
x ⫹ 1 x ⫺ 3

12
12

2
2

Looking once again at the polynomial x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 3, we see that the coefficient of x is
⫺2. Checking to see which set of factors yields ⫺2 for the coefficient of x, we find that

Coefficients of inner terms

Coefficients of outer terms

앚
앗

12

2

1

⫺1 1 ⫹ 1 3 ⫽ 2

앗

12

1

2

Coefficients of outer terms

Coefficients of inner terms

앚
앗
12
1 1 ⫹ 1 ⫺3 ⫽ ⫺2

12

앗

2

1

2

1

Factors

Outer terms
앗
앗

1x ⫺ 121x ⫹ 32

앖 앖
Inner terms

Outer terms
앗
앗

1x ⫹ 121x ⫺ 32

앖 앖
Inner terms

and we conclude that the correct factorization is

x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 3 ⫽ x ⫹ 1 x ⫺ 3

12

2

With practice, you will soon find that you can perform many of these steps mentally,
and you will no longer need to write out each step.

1

1

EXAMPLE 5 Factor:
a. 3x 2 ⫹ 4x ⫺ 4

b. 3x 2 ⫺ 6x ⫺ 24

Solution

a. Using trial and error, we find that the correct factorization is

b. Since each term has the common factor 3, we have

Using the trial-and-error method of factorization, we find that

3x 2 ⫹ 4x ⫺ 4 ⫽ 3x ⫺ 2 x ⫹ 2

12

2

3x 2 ⫺ 6x ⫺ 24 ⫽ 3 x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 8)

1

1

x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 8 ⫽ x ⫺ 4 x ⫹ 2

2
3x 2 ⫺ 6x ⫺ 24 ⫽ 3 x ⫺ 4 x ⫹ 22

12

12

1

Thus, we have

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

18

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

Factoring by Regrouping
Sometimes a polynomial may be factored by regrouping and rearranging terms so that
a common term can be factored out. This technique is illustrated in Example 6.

EXAMPLE 6 Factor:
a. x 3 ⫹ x ⫹ x 2 ⫹ 1

Solution

b. 2ax ⫹ 2ay ⫹ bx ⫹ by

a. We begin by rearranging the terms in order of descending powers of x. Thus,

x 3 ⫹ x ⫹ x 2 ⫹ 1 ⫽ x 3 ⫹ x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 1
⫽ x 2 x ⫹ 1 ⫹ x ⫹ 1
2
1
⫽ x ⫹ 1 x 2 ⫹ 1

12

2

1

Factor the first two terms.
Factor the common term x ⫹ 1.

b. First, factor the common term 2a from the first two terms and the common term

b from the last two terms. Thus,

2ax ⫹ 2ay ⫹ bx ⫹ by ⫽ 2a x ⫹ y ⫹ b x ⫹ y

1

2

1

2

Since (x ⫹ y) is common to both terms of the polynomial on the right, we can
factor it out. Hence,

1
More Examples on Factoring

2

1
2a x ⫹ y ⫹ b x ⫹ y ⫽ x ⫹ y 2a ⫹ b

12

1

2

2

EXAMPLE 7 Factor:
a. 4x 6 ⫺ 4x 2

b. 18x 4 ⫺ 3x 3 ⫺ 6x 2

Solution

a. 4x 6 ⫺ 4x 2 ⫽ 4x 21x4 ⫺ 12
⫽ 4x21x2 ⫺ 121x 2 ⫹ 12
⫽ 4x 21x ⫺ 121x ⫹ 121x 2 ⫹ 12
b. 18x 4 ⫺ 3x 3 ⫺ 6x 2 ⫽ 3x 216x 2 ⫺ x ⫺ 22
⫽ 3x 213x ⫺ 2212x ⫹ 12

Common factor
Difference of two squares
Difference of two squares
Common factor
Trial-and-error factorization

EXAMPLE 8 Factor:
a. 3x 2y ⫹ 9x 2 ⫺ 12y ⫺ 36

Solution

b. x ⫺ at 3 ⫺ x ⫹ at 3

2

1

2

1

b.

a. 3x 2y ⫹ 9x 2 ⫺ 12y ⫺ 36 ⫽ 31x 2y ⫹ 3x 2 ⫺ 4y ⫺ 122
⫽ 33x 21y ⫹ 32 ⫺ 41y ⫹ 324
⫽ 31y ⫹ 321x2 ⫺ 42
⫽ 31y ⫹ 321x ⫺ 221x ⫹ 22
⫽ 31x ⫺ at2 ⫺ 1x ⫹ at24
⭈ 31x ⫺ at22 ⫹ 1x ⫺ at21x ⫹ at2 ⫹ 1x ⫹ at224
⫽ ⫺2at1x 2 ⫺ 2atx ⫹ a2t 2 ⫹ x 2 ⫺ a2t 2 ⫹ x 2 ⫹ 2atx ⫹ a2t 22
⫽ ⫺2at13x 2 ⫹ a2t 22

1x ⫺ at23 ⫺ 1x ⫹ at23

Common factor
Regrouping
Common factor
Difference of two squares

Difference of two cubes

Be  sure  you  become  familiar  with  the  factorization  methods  discussed  in  this
chapter because we will be using them throughout the text. As with many other alge-
braic techniques, you will find yourself becoming more proficient at factoring as you
work through the exercises.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1.3 Self-Check Exercises

1. Factor: a. 4x 3 ⫺ 2x 2

b. 3 a2 ⫹ 2b2 ⫹ 4 a2 ⫹ 2b2 22

2

1

1

1.3 FACTORING POLYNOMIALS

19

2. Factor: a. 6x 2 ⫺ x ⫺ 12

b. 4x 2 ⫹ 10x ⫺ 6

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 1.3 can be found on 
page 20.

1.3 Concept Questions

1. What  is  meant  by  the  expression  factor  a  polynomial?

2. Without looking at the formulas in the text, complete the fol-

Illustrate the process with an example.

lowing formulas:
a. a3 ⫹ b3 ⫽ ______

b. a3 ⫺ b3 ⫽ ______

1.3 Exercises

In Exercises 1–10, factor out the greatest common factor.
1. 6m2 ⫺ 4m

2. 4t 4 ⫺ 12t 3

3. 9ab2 ⫺ 6a2b

4. 12x 3y 5 ⫹ 16x 2y 3

5. 10m2n ⫺ 15mn2 ⫹ 20mn

6. 6x 4y ⫺ 4x 2y 2 ⫹ 2x 2y 3

2

1
1

2

1

7. 3x 2x ⫹ 1 ⫺ 5 2x ⫹ 1
8. 2u 3√ 2 ⫹ w ⫹ 5√ 3√ 2 ⫹ w
2
1
9. 3a ⫹ b 2c ⫺ d ⫹ 2a 2c ⫺ d 2
10. 4u√ 2 2u ⫺ √ ⫹ 6u2√ √ ⫺ 2u

12

2

1

2

1

2

1

2

1

2

In  Exercises  11–54,  factor  the  polynomial.  If  the  polynomial  is
prime, state it.
11. 2m2 ⫺ 11m ⫺ 6

13. x 2 ⫺ xy ⫺ 6y 2

15. x 2 ⫺ 3x ⫺ 1

17. 4a2 ⫺ b2
19. u2√ 2 ⫺ w 2
21. z 2 ⫹ 4

23. x 2 ⫹ 6xy ⫹ y 2

25. x 2 ⫹ 3x ⫺ 4

27. 12x 2y ⫺ 10xy ⫺ 12y

29. 35r 2 ⫹ r ⫺ 12

31. 9x 3y ⫺ 4xy 3

33. x 4 ⫺ 16y 2
2
37. 8m3 ⫹ 1

2
35. a ⫺ 2b 2 ⫺ a ⫹ 2b 2

1

1

12. 6x 2 ⫺ x ⫺ 1
14. 2u2 ⫹ 5u√ ⫺ 12√2
16. m2 ⫹ 2m ⫹ 3

18. 12x 2 ⫺ 3y 2

20. 4a2b2 ⫺ 25c2
22. u2 ⫹ 25√ 2
24. 4u2 ⫺ 12u√ ⫹ 9√ 2
26. 3m3 ⫹ 3m2 ⫺ 18m

28. 12x 2y ⫺ 2xy ⫺ 24y
30. 6u√ 2 ⫹ 9u√ ⫺ 6√
32. 4u4√ ⫺ 9u2√3
34. 16u4√ ⫺ 9√3
2
36. 2x x ⫹ y 2 ⫺ 8x x ⫹ y 2 2

2
38. 27m3 ⫺ 8

1

1

39. 8r 3 ⫺ 27s3

40. x 3 ⫹ 64y 3

42. r 6s6 ⫹ 8s3

41. u2√ 6 ⫺ 8u2
43. 2x 3 ⫹ 6x ⫹ x 2 ⫹ 3

44. 2u4 ⫺ 4u2 ⫹ 2u2 ⫺ 4
46. 6ux ⫺ 4uy ⫹ 3√x ⫺ 2√y
48. u4 ⫺ u2√ 2 ⫺ 6√ 4

45. 3ax ⫹ 6ay ⫹ bx ⫹ 2by
47. u4 ⫺ √ 4
49. 4x 3 ⫺ 9xy 2 ⫹ 4x 2y ⫺ 9y 3 50. 4u4 ⫹ 11u2√ 2 ⫺ 3√ 4
51. x 4 ⫹ 3x 3 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 6

52. a2 ⫺ b2 ⫹ a ⫹ b

1

2

1

2

53. au2 ⫹ a ⫹ c u ⫹ c

54. ax 2 ⫺ 1 ⫹ ab xy ⫹ by 2

55. SIMPLE INTEREST The  accumulated  amount  after  t years
when a deposit of P dollars is made in a bank and earning
interest  at  the  rate  of  r/year  is  A ⫽ P ⫹ Prt.  Factor  the
expression on the right-hand side of this equation.

56. WORKER EFFICIENCY An  efficiency  study  conducted  by
Elektra Electronics showed that the number of Space Com-
mander  walkie-talkies  assembled  by  the  average  worker 
t hr after starting work at 8 A.M. is

⫺t 

3 ⫹ 6t 

2 ⫹ 15t    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

Factor the expression.

57. REVENUE Williams  Commuter  Air  Service  realizes  a

monthly revenue of

8000x ⫺ 100x 

2    10 ⱕ x ⱕ 802

dollars when the price charged per passenger is x dollars.
Factor the expression.

58. CHEMICAL REACTION In  an  autocatalytic  chemical  reaction,
the product that is formed acts as a catalyst for the reaction.
If Q is the amount of the original substrate present initially
and  x is  the  amount  of  catalyst  formed,  then  the  rate  of
change of the chemical reaction with respect to the amount
of catalyst present in the reaction is

R ⫽ kQx ⫺ kx 

2    10 ⱕ x ⱕ Q2

where k is a constant. Factor the expression on the right-
hand side of the equation.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

20

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

59. SPREAD OF AN EPIDEMIC The  incidence  (number  of  new
cases/day) of a contagious disease spreading in a popula-
tion  of  M people,  where  k is  a  positive  constant  and  x
denotes the number of people already infected, is given by
kMx ⫺ kx2. Factor this expression.

60. REVENUE The total revenue realized by the Apollo Company
from the sale of x smartphones is given by R ⫽ ⫺0.1x2 ⫹
500x dollars. Factor the expression on the right-hand side of
this equation.

61. CHARLES’  LAW Charles’  Law  for  gases  states  that  if  the
pressure  remains  constant,  then  the  volume  V that  a  gas
occupies is related to its temperature T in degrees Celsius
by the equation

1.3 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

V ⫽ V0 ⫹

V0
273  T

Factor the expression on the right-hand side of the equation.

62. REACTION TO A DRUG The strength of a human body’s reac-
tion to a dosage D of a certain drug, where k is a positive
constant, is given by

kD2
2

⫺

D3
3

Factor this expression.

1. a. The common factor is 2x 2. Therefore,

b. We first factor out the common factor 2. Thus,

4x 3 ⫺ 2x 2 ⫽ 2x 2 2x ⫺ 1

1

2

b. The common factor is a2 ⫹ 2b2. Therefore,

2

1
1
3 a2 ⫹ 2b2 ⫹ 4 a2 ⫹ 2b2 2 ⫽ a2 ⫹ 2b2 3 ⫹ 4 a2 ⫹ 2b2
2
1
⫽ a2 ⫹ 2b2 3 ⫹ 4a2 ⫹ 8b2

32
12

1

1

2

42

2. a. Using  the  trial-and-error  method  of  factorization,  we

find that

6x 2 ⫺ x ⫺ 12 ⫽ 3x ⫹ 4 2x ⫺ 32

12

1

4x 2 ⫹ 10x ⫺ 6 ⫽ 2 2x 2 ⫹ 5x ⫺ 3

1

2

Using  the  trial-and-error  method  of  factorization,
we find that

2x 2 ⫹ 5x ⫺ 3 ⫽ 2x ⫺ 1 x ⫹ 3

1

12

2

and, consequently,

4x 2 ⫹ 10x ⫺ 6 ⫽ 2 2x ⫺ 1 x ⫹ 32

12

1

1.4

Rational Expressions

Quotients  of  polynomials  are  called  rational  expressions. Examples  of  rational
expressions are

⫺
⫺
ᎏ and ᎏ3x 2
ᎏ6
2xyᎏ
x
y
⫹
⫺
2
4
x
x

1
3

y

3

Because division by zero is not allowed, the denominator of a rational expression must not
be equal to zero. Thus, in the first example, x ⫽ ⫺ , and in the second example, y ⫽ 4x.
Since rational expressions are quotients in which the variables represent real num-
bers, the properties of real numbers apply to rational expressions as well. For this rea-
son, operations with rational fractions are performed in the same way as operations
with arithmetic fractions.

3
2

Simplifying Rational Expressions
A rational expression is simplified, or reduced to lowest terms, if its numerator and
denominator have no common factors other than 1 and ⫺1. If a rational expression
does contain common factors, we use the properties of the real number system to write

ac
bc

⫽

a
b

 #  

c
c

⫽

a
b

 #  1 ⫽

a
b

(a, b, c are real numbers, and bc ⫽ 0.)

This process is often called “canceling common factors.” To indicate this process, we
often write

a
b

 

c
c

⫽

a
b

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

where a slash is shown through the common factors. As another example, the rational
expression

1.4 RATIONAL EXPRESSIONS

21

is simplified by canceling the common factors (x ⫺ 3) and writing

1

1x ⫹ 221x ⫺ 32
1x ⫺ 221x ⫺ 32
1x ⫹ 221x ⫺ 32
1x ⫺ 221x ⫺ 32 ⫽

x ⫽ 2, 3

2

x ⫹ 2
x ⫺ 2

3 ⫹ 4x

3

⫽ 1 ⫹ 4x

is an example of incorrect cancellation. Instead, we write 

3 ⫹ 4x

3

⫽ 3
3

⫹ 4x
3

⫽ 1 ⫹ 4x
3

EXAMPLE 1 Simplify:

a.

x2 ⫹ 2x ⫺ 3
x2 ⫹ 4x ⫹ 3

b.

3 ⫺ 4x ⫺ 4x2

2x ⫺ 1

1k ⫹ 42 21k ⫺ 12

k2 ⫺ 16

c.

Factor numerator and denominator, and cancel
common factors.

Solution

x2 ⫹ 2x ⫺ 3
x2 ⫹ 4x ⫹ 3

3 ⫺ 4x ⫺ 4x2

2x ⫺ 1

x ⫺ 1
x ⫹ 1

⫽ 1x ⫹ 321x ⫺ 12
1x ⫹ 321x ⫹ 12 ⫽
⫽ 11 ⫺ 2x213 ⫹ 2x2
⫽ ⫺12x ⫺ 1212x ⫹ 32

2x ⫺ 1

a.

b.

c.

Rewrite the term 1 ⫺ 2x in the 
equivalent form ⫺12x ⫺ 12.

Cancel common factors.

2x ⫺ 1
1
2
⫽ ⫺ 2x ⫹ 3
1k ⫹ 421k ⫺ 42 ⫽ 1k ⫹ 421k ⫺ 12
⫽ 1k ⫹ 42 21k ⫺ 12

k ⫺ 4

1k ⫹ 42 21k ⫺ 12

k2 ⫺ 16

Multiplication and Division
The operations of multiplication and division are performed with rational expressions
in the same way they are with arithmetic fractions (Table 8).

TABLE 8
Multiplication and Division of Rational Expressions
Operation

If P, Q, R, and S are polynomials, then

Multiplication

 #  

P
Q

R
S

⫽

PR
QS

1Q, S ⫽ 02

Illustration

2x
y

 #  1x ⫹ 12
1y ⫺ 12 ⫽

2x1x ⫹ 12
y1y ⫺ 12

Division
P
Q

R
S

⫼

⫽

 #  

S
R

P
Q

⫽

PS
QR

1Q, R, S ⫽ 02

x2 ⫹ 3

y

⫼

y2 ⫹ 1

x

⫽

x2 ⫹ 3

y

  #  

x

y2 ⫹ 1

⫽

x1x2 ⫹ 32
y1y2 ⫹ 12

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

22

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

When  the  operations  of  multiplication  and  division  are  performed  on  rational

expressions, the resulting expression should be simplified.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 2 Perform the indicated operations and simplify.
x2 ⫺ 9

x2 ⫺ 6x ⫹ 9

x2 ⫹ 4x ⫹ 4

 #  

2x ⫺ 8
x ⫹ 2

a.

x2 ⫺ 16

b.

⫼

3x ⫹ 12

6x2 ⫹ 18x

Solution

a.

2x ⫺ 8
x ⫹ 2

⫽

⫽

⫽

 #  

x2 ⫺ 16

 #  
x2 ⫹ 4x ⫹ 4
21x ⫺ 42
1x ⫹ 22 2
1x ⫹ 421x ⫺ 42
x ⫹ 2
21x ⫺ 421x ⫹ 221x ⫹ 22
1x ⫹ 221x ⫹ 421x ⫺ 42
21x ⫹ 22
x ⫹ 4

b.

x2 ⫺ 6x ⫹ 9

3x ⫹ 12

⫼

x2 ⫺ 9

x2 ⫺ 6x ⫹ 9

⫽

6x2 ⫹ 18x

3x ⫹ 12

1x ⫺ 32 2
6x1x ⫹ 32
31x ⫹ 42  #  
1x ⫹ 321x ⫺ 32
1x ⫺ 321x ⫺ 3216x21x ⫹ 32
31x ⫹ 421x ⫹ 321x ⫺ 32
2x1x ⫺ 32
x ⫹ 4

⫽

⫽

⫽

Factor numerators and denominators.

Cancel the common factors 1x ⫹ 221x ⫺ 42.

 #  

6x2 ⫹ 18x

x2 ⫺ 9

Addition and Subtraction
For rational expressions the operations of addition and subtraction are performed by
finding a common denominator for the fractions and then adding or subtracting the
fractions. Table 9 shows the rules for fractions with common denominators.

TABLE 9
Adding and Subtracting Fractions with Common Denominators
Operation

Illustration

If P, Q, and R are polynomials, then

Addition
P
R

Q
R

⫹

⫽

P ⫹ Q

R

1R ⫽ 02

2x

x ⫹ 2

⫹ 6x
x ⫹ 2

⫽ 2x ⫹ 6x
x ⫹ 2

⫽ 8x
x ⫹ 2

Subtraction
P
R

Q
R

⫺

⫽

P ⫺ Q

R

1R ⫽ 02

3y

y ⫺ x

⫺

y

y ⫺ x

⫽

3y ⫺ y
y ⫺ x

⫽

2y

y ⫺ x

To add or subtract fractions that have different denominators, first find the least
common denominator (LCD). To find the LCD of two or more rational expressions,
follow these steps:

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1.4 RATIONAL EXPRESSIONS

23

1. Find the prime factors of each denominator.
2. Form  the  product  of  the  different  prime  factors that  occur  in  the  denominators.
Raise each prime factor in this product to the highest power of that factor appear-
ing in the denominators.

After finding the LCD, carry out the indicated operations following the procedure for
adding and subtracting fractions with common denominators.

EXAMPLE 3 Simplify:

a.

3x ⫹ 4

4x

⫹

4y ⫺ 2

3y

b.

2x

x2 ⫺ 1

⫹ 3x ⫹ 1

2x2 ⫺ x ⫺ 1

c.

1

x ⫹ h

⫺ 1
x

Solution

a.

3x ⫹ 4

4x

⫹

4y ⫺ 2

3y

⫽

⫽

⫽

3x ⫹ 4

4x

 #  

3y
3y

⫹

4y ⫺ 2

3y

 #  

4x
4x

9xy ⫹ 12y

12xy

⫹

16xy ⫺ 8x

12xy

25xy ⫺ 8x ⫹ 12y

12xy

LCD ⫽ 14x213y2 ⫽ 12xy

b.

2x

x2 ⫺ 1

⫹ 3x ⫹ 1

2x2 ⫺ x ⫺ 1

⫽

⫽

⫽

2x

3x ⫹ 1
1x ⫹ 121x ⫺ 12 ⫹
2x12x ⫹ 12 ⫹ 13x ⫹ 121x ⫹ 12

12x ⫹ 121x ⫺ 12

4x2 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 3x2 ⫹ 3x ⫹ x ⫹ 1

1x ⫹ 121x ⫺ 1212x ⫹ 12
1x ⫹ 121x ⫺ 1212x ⫹ 12
7x2 ⫹ 6x ⫹ 1

LCD ⫽ 12x ⫹ 12

⭈ 1x ⫹ 121x ⫺ 12

 #  

x
x

⫽

1x ⫹ 121x ⫺ 1212x ⫹ 12
 #  
⫺ 1
x
x ⫹ h

x ⫹ h
x ⫹ h

LCD ⫽ x1x ⫹ h2

x1x ⫹ h2

c.

1

x ⫹ h

⫺ 1
x

⫽ 1

x ⫹ h
x

⫽

⫽

⫽

x ⫺ x ⫺ h

x1x ⫹ h2 ⫺
x1x ⫹ h2
x1x ⫹ h2

h

⫺

Complex Fractions
A fractional expression that contains fractions in its numerator and/or denominator is
called a complex fraction. The techniques used to simplify rational expressions may
be used to simplify these fractions.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 4 Simplify: 

a.

1 ⫹ 1

x ⫹ 1

x ⫺ 4
x

b.

1
x
1
x2

⫹ 1
y
⫺ 1
y2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

24

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

Solution

a. We first express the numerator and denominator of the given expression as a 

single quotient. Thus,

1 ⫹ 1

x ⫹ 1

x ⫺ 4
x

1#  

⫽

x ⫹ 1
x ⫹ 1
x
x

x #  

⫹ 1

x ⫹ 1

⫺ 4
x

The LCD for the fraction in the numerator is 
x ⫹ 1, and the LCD for the fraction in the 
denominator is x.

⫽

⫽

x ⫹ 1 ⫹ 1

x ⫹ 1
x2 ⫺ 4

x

x ⫹ 2
x ⫹ 1
x2 ⫺ 4

x

We then multiply the numerator by the reciprocal of the denominator, obtaining

 #  

x ⫹ 2
x ⫹ 1

x

x2 ⫺ 4

⫽

⫽

x

1x ⫹ 121x ⫺ 22

 #  

x ⫹ 2
x ⫹ 1

x

1x ⫺ 221x ⫹ 22

Factor the denominator of the 
second fraction.

Cancel the common factors.

b. As before, we first write the numerator and denominator of the given expression as

a single quotient and then simplify the resulting fraction.

1
x
1
x2

⫹ 1
y
⫺ 1
y2

⫽

⫽

⫽

⫽

y ⫹ x

xy

y2 ⫺ x2

 #  
 #  

x2y2
y ⫹ x

xy

y ⫹ x

xy

xy

y ⫺ x

The LCD for the fractions in the numerator is 
xy, and the LCD for the fractions in the 
denominator is x2y2.

x2y2

y2 ⫺ x2

a
b

⫼

c
d

⫽

  #  

a
b

d
c

x2y2

1y ⫹ x21y ⫺ x2

Cancel common factors.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 5 Optics The equation

1
f

⫽ 1
p

⫹ 1
q

sometimes  called  a  lens-maker’s equation, gives  the  relationship  between  the
focal length f of a thin lens, the distance p of the object from the lens, and the dis-
tance q of its image from the lens.
a. Write the right-hand side of the equation as a single fraction.
b. Use the result of part (a) to find the focal length of the lens.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1.4 RATIONAL EXPRESSIONS

25

⫽

q ⫹ p

pq

⫽

p ⫹ q

pq

Solution
⫹ 1
q

1
p

a.

b. Using the result of part (a), we have
⫹ 1
q

⫽ 1
p

1
f

⫽

p ⫹ q

pq

from which we see that

f ⫽

pq

p ⫹ q

1.4 Self-Check Exercises

1. Simplify 

3a2b3

2ab2 ⫹ 4ab

 #  

b2 ⫹ 4b ⫹ 4

6a2b5

.

1.4 Concept Questions

1. a. What is a rational expression? Give an example.

b. Explain why a polynomial is a rational expression but

not vice versa.

1.4 Exercises

In Exercises 1–12, simplify the expression.

1.

3.

5.

7.

9.

28x2
7x3

4x ⫹ 12
5x ⫹ 15

6x2 ⫺ 3x

6x2

x2 ⫹ x ⫺ 2
x2 ⫹ 3x ⫹ 2

x2 ⫺ 9

2x2 ⫺ 5x ⫺ 3

11.

x3 ⫹ y3

x2 ⫺ xy ⫹ y2

2.

4.

6.

8.

10.

12.

3y4
18y2

12m ⫺ 6
18m ⫺ 9

8y2

4y3 ⫺ 4y2 ⫹ 8y

2y2 ⫺ y ⫺ 3
2y2 ⫹ y ⫺ 1

6y2 ⫹ 11y ⫹ 3

4y2 ⫺ 9

8r3 ⫺ s3

2r2 ⫹ rs ⫺ s2

2. Simplify 

⫺

x
y

y
x

x2 ⫹ 2xy ⫹ y2

x2 ⫺ y2

.

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 1.4 can be found on 
page 27.

2. a. If P, Q, R, and S are polynomials and Q ⬆ 0 and S ⬆ 0,
if Q ⬆ 0, R ⬆ 0, and 

A P
QB
? What is  ⫼

AR
SB

A P
QB

AR
SB

b. If P, Q, and R are polynomials with R ⬆ 0, what are 

what is 
S ⬆ 0?
AP
RB
AQ
RB

⫹

AQ
RB
and  ⫺ ?

AP
RB

In  Exercises  13–46,  perform  the  indicated  operations  and  sim-
plify.

14.

16.

18.

20.

25y4
12y

6x5
21x2

 #  

3y2
5y3
⫼ 4x
7x3
 #  

4y ⫹ 12
y ⫹ 2

3y ⫹ 6
2y ⫺ 1

3y ⫺ 6
4y ⫹ 6

⫼

6y ⫹ 24
8y ⫹ 12

13.

15.

17.

19.

21.

22.

6x3
32

3x3
8x2

 #  

8
3x2
⫼ 15x4
16x5
 #  

3x

x ⫹ 2y

5x ⫹ 10y

6

2m ⫹ 6

3

⫼ 3m ⫹ 9

6

6r2 ⫺ r ⫺ 2

2r ⫹ 4

6r ⫹ 12
4r ⫹ 2

 #  
 #  

x2 ⫺ x ⫺ 6
2x2 ⫹ 7x ⫹ 6

2x2 ⫺ x ⫺ 6
x2 ⫹ x ⫺ 6

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

26

23.

24.

25.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

34.

35.

36.

37.

39.

41.

43.

45.

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

k2 ⫺ 2k ⫺ 3
k2 ⫺ k ⫺ 6

⫼

k2 ⫺ 6k ⫹ 8
k2 ⫺ 2k ⫺ 8

47. AVERAGE COST The  cost  incurred  by  Herald  Records  in

pressing x DVDs is

⫼

6y2 ⫺ 13y ⫹ 6
9y2 ⫺ 12y ⫹ 4

2.2 ⫹ 2500
x

dollars per disc.
a. Write the cost per disc as a single fraction.
b. What  is  the  total  cost  incurred  by  Herald  Records  in

pressing x discs?

48. INVENTORY CONTROL The equation 

A ⫽

km
q

⫹ cm ⫹

hq
2

gives  the  annual  cost  of  ordering  and  storing  (as  yet
unsold)  merchandise.  Here,  q is  the  size  of  each  order, 
k is the cost of placing each order,  c is the unit cost of 
the product, m is the number of units of the product sold
per year, and h is the annual cost for storing each unit.
Write  the  right-hand  side  of  this  equation  as  a  single 
fraction.

49. AMORTIZATION FORMULA The periodic payment R on a loan
of P dollars to be amortized (paid off gradually by periodic
payments  of  principal  and  interest)  over  n periods  with
interest charged at the rate of i per period is found by solv-
ing the equation

P ⫽

R
i

⫺

R

i11 ⫹ i2 n

for R. Write the right-hand side of this equation as a single
fraction.

50. CYLINDER PRESSURE The pressure P, volume V, and temper-
ature  T of  a  gas  in  a  cylinder  are  related  by  the  van  der
Waals equation

P ⫽

kT

V ⫺ b

⫹

ab

21V ⫺ b2 ⫺

V 

a

V1V ⫺ b2

where a, b, and k are constants. Write the pressure P as a
single fraction.

51. AIR POLLUTION The  amount  of  nitrogen  dioxide,  a  brown
gas that impairs breathing, present in the atmosphere on a
certain May day in the city of Long Beach is approximated
by

A ⫽

136

1 ⫹ 0.251t ⫺ 4.52 2

⫹ 28    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 112

where A is measured in pollutant standard index (PSI) and
t is measured in hours, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 7 A.M.
Express A as a single fraction.
Source: Los Angeles Times.

6y2 ⫺ 5y ⫺ 6
6y2 ⫹ 13y ⫹ 6
⫹ 3

2

2x ⫹ 3

2x ⫺ 1

26.

2x ⫺ 1
x ⫹ 2

⫺

x ⫹ 3
x ⫺ 1

3

x2 ⫺ x ⫺ 6

⫹

2

x2 ⫹ x ⫺ 2

5

x2 ⫺ 6x ⫹ 9

4

x2 ⫺ 9

⫺

2m

2m2 ⫺ 2m ⫺ 1

⫹

3

2m2 ⫺ 3m ⫹ 3

t

t 2 ⫹ t ⫺ 2

⫺

2t ⫺ 1

2t 2 ⫹ 3t ⫺ 2

x

1 ⫺ x

⫹ 2x ⫹ 3
x2 ⫺ 1

2 ⫹ 1

a ⫹ 2

⫺ 2a
a ⫺ 2

33.

x ⫺

x2

x ⫹ 2

⫹ 2

x ⫺ 2

y

y2 ⫺ 1

⫹

y ⫺ 1
y ⫹ 1

⫺

2y

1 ⫺ y

x

x2 ⫹ 5x ⫹ 6

⫹ 2

x2 ⫺ 4

⫺

3

x2 ⫹ 3x ⫹ 2

2x ⫹ 1

2x2 ⫺ x ⫺ 1

⫺

x ⫹ 1

2x2 ⫹ 3x ⫹ 1

⫹

4

x2 ⫹ 2x ⫺ 3

⫹

y

by ⫺ bx

x

ax ⫺ ay
1 ⫹ 1
x
1 ⫺ 1
x
1
⫹ 1
x
y
1 ⫺ 1
xy

1
⫺ 1
x2
y2
x ⫹ y

1

21x ⫹ h2 ⫺ 1

2x

h

38.

40.

42.

44.

46.

⫹

ay ⫺ bx
by ⫺ ay

ax ⫹ by
ax ⫺ bx
2 ⫹ 2
x
x ⫺ 2
x

1 ⫹

1 ⫺

x
y
x2
y2
⫺ 1
y3
⫺ 1
y

1
x3
1
x

⫺ 1
x2

1

1x ⫹ h2 2

h

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1.4

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. Factoring the numerator and denominator of each expres-

2. Writing the numerator of the given expression as a single

1.5 INTEGRAL EXPONENTS

27

sion, we have

3a2b3

2ab2 ⫹ 4ab

 #  

b2 ⫹ 4b ⫹ 4

6a2b5

1b ⫹ 22 2
13a2b3212b22

Cancel common 
factors.

⫽ 3a2b3

2ab1b ⫹ 22  #  
b ⫹ 2
2ab12b22
b ⫹ 2
4ab3

⫽

⫽

quotient, we have

⫺

x
y

y
x

x2 ⫹ 2xy ⫹ y2

⫽

x2 ⫺ y2

xy

1x ⫹ y21x ⫺ y2
1x ⫹ y21x ⫹ y2
1x ⫹ y21x ⫺ y2
1x ⫹ y21x ⫺ y2
1x ⫺ y2 2

xy

xy

⫽

⫽

⫽

x2 ⫺ y2

xy

x2 ⫹ 2xy ⫹ y2

x2 ⫺ y2

The LCD for the frac-
tions in the numerator 
is xy.

 #  1x ⫹ y21x ⫺ y2
1x ⫹ y21x ⫹ y2

Factor.

a
b

⫼

c
d

⫽

  #  

a
b

d
c

Cancel common 
factors.

1.5

Integral Exponents

Exponents
We begin by recalling the definition of the exponential expression an, where a is a real
number and n is a positive integer.

Exponential Expressions
If a is any real number and n is a natural number, then the expression an (read
“a to the power n”) is defined as the number

an ⫽ a ⭈ a ⭈ a ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ a
(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:5)

n factors

Recall that the number a is the base and the superscript n is the exponent, or
power, to which the base is raised.

EXAMPLE 1 Write each of the following numbers without using exponents.

a. 25

b.

3b 3
a 2

Solution
a. 25 ⫽ 2 ⭈ 2 ⭈ 2 ⭈ 2 ⭈ 2 ⫽ 32

3b 3
b. a 2

⫽ a 2

3b a 2

3b a 2

3b ⫽ 8

27

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

28

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

Next,  we  extend  our  definition  of  an to  include  n ⫽ 0;  that  is,  we  define  the
expression a0. Observe that if a is any real number and m and n are positive integers,
then we have the rule

aman ⫽ a ⭈ a ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ a a ⭈ a ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ a ⫽ a ⭈ a ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ a ⫽ am⫹n

(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:5) (cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:5)

12

2

(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:5)

(m ⫹ n) factors

1

m factors

n factors

Now, if we require that this rule hold for the zero exponent as well, then we must have,
upon setting m ⫽ 0,

a0an ⫽ a0⫹n ⫽ an

or

a0an ⫽ an

Therefore,  if  a ⫽ 0,  we  can  divide  both  sides  of  this  last  equation  by  an to  obtain 
a0 ⫽ 1. This motivates the following definition.

Zero Exponent
For any nonzero real number a,

The expression 00 is not defined.

a0 ⫽ 1

EXAMPLE 2

a. 20 ⫽ 1

b. ⫺2 0 ⫽ 1

1

2

c. ␲ 0 ⫽ 1

1

2

d.

3b 0
a 1

⫽ 1

Next, we extend our definition to include expressions of the form an, where the

exponent is a negative integer. Once again, we use the rule

aman ⫽ am⫹n

where n is a positive integer. Now, if we require that this rule hold for negative inte-
gral exponents as well, upon setting m ⫽ ⫺n, we have

a⫺nan ⫽ a⫺n⫹n ⫽ a0 ⫽ 1

ora ⫺nan ⫽ 1

Therefore,  if  a ⫽ 0,  we  can  divide  both  sides  of  this  last  equation  by  an to  obtain 
a⫺n ⫽ 1>an. This motivates the following definition.

Exponential Expressions with Negative Exponents
If a is any nonzero real number and n is a positive integer, then

a⫺n ⫽ 1
an

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 3 Write each of the following numbers without using exponents.

a. 4⫺2

b. 3⫺1

c. ⫺2⫺3

d.

3b ⫺1
a 2

e.

2b ⫺3
a 3

Solution

a.

d.

4⫺2 ⫽ 1
⫽ 1
42
16
3b ⫺1
⫽ 1
a 2
A2
3B1

b.

3⫺1 ⫽ 1
31

⫽ 1
3

c.

⫽ 1

2
3

⫽ 3
2

e. a 3

2b ⫺3

⫽ 1
A3
2B3

⫽ ⫺1
8

⫺2⫺3 ⫽ ⫺ 1
23
⫽ 8
27

⫽ 23
33

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Note In Example 3d and 3e, the intermediate steps may be omitted by observing that

1.5 INTEGRAL EXPONENTS

29

since

bb ⫺n
a a

ab n
⫽ a b

For example, 

3b ⫺1
a 2

2b 1
⫽ a 3

bb ⫺n
a a

⫽ 1
bb n
a a

⫽ 1
an
bn

⫽ 1 #  

bn
an

ab n
⫽ a b

Five basic properties of exponents are given in Table 10.

TABLE 10
Properties of Exponents
Property

1. am ⭈ an ⫽ am⫹n

3. am n ⫽ amn
4. ab n ⫽ an ⭈ bn

am
an

⫽ am⫺n
2
1
1
2
bb n
a a

⫽

an
bn

2.

5.

1

b ⫽ 0

2

Illustration

x2 ⭈ x3 ⫽ x2⫹3 ⫽ x5
x7
⫽ x7⫺4 ⫽ x3
x 4
2
1
x4 3 ⫽ x 4⭈3 ⫽ x12
1
2
2x 4 ⫽ 24 ⭈ x4 ⫽ 16x4
2b 3
a x

x3
8

x3
23

⫽

⫽

It can be shown that these laws are valid for any real numbers a and b and any

integers m and n.

Simplifying Exponential Expressions
The next two examples illustrate the use of the laws of exponents.

EXAMPLE 4 Simplify the expression and write your answer using positive expo-
nents only.

a. 2x 3 3x 5

1

12

2

b.

2x 5
3x 4

2
c. x⫺2 ⫺3

1

2
d. 2u⫺1√ 3 3

1

e.

m5n3 b ⫺1
a 2m3n4

2
 x 5⫺4 ⫽ 2
3

12
⫽ 2
3
2

1
2x 5
3x 4
1
1
m5n3 b ⫺1
a 2m3n4

2

e.

Solution
a. 2x 3 3x 5 ⫽ 6x 3⫹5 ⫽ 6x 8

 x

b.
c. x⫺2 ⫺3 ⫽ x1 ⫺221 ⫺32 ⫽ x 6
d. 2u⫺1√ 3 3 ⫽ 23u1 ⫺121 32√ 31 3) ⫽ 8u⫺3√ 9 ⫽

1
2
⫽ 2m3⫺5n4⫺3 ⫺1
2
1
⫽ 2m⫺2n ⫺1
⫽ 1
2m⫺2n

m2
2n

⫽

8√ 9
u3

Property 1

Property 2

Property 3

Property 4

Property 2

Property 1

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

30

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 5 Simplify the expression and write your answer using positive expo-
nents only.

2
a. 22 3 ⫺ 32 2

1

2

1

2
b. x⫺1 ⫹ y⫺1 ⫺1

1

c.

2⫺4 #  12⫺12 2
120 ⫹ 12 ⫺1

Solution
a. 22 3 ⫺ 32 2 ⫽ 26 ⫺ 34 ⫽ 64 ⫺ 81 ⫽ ⫺17

b. x⫺1 ⫹ y⫺1 ⫺1 ⫽

2
1
2
1
1
2
2⫺4 #  12⫺12 2
120 ⫹ 12 ⫺1

c.

x

⫽ a y ⫹ x

yb ⫺1
xy b ⫺1
a 1
⫹ 1
⫽ 2⫺4 #  2⫺2
⫽ 2⫺4⫺2⫹1 ⫽ 2⫺5 ⫽ 1
122 ⫺1
25

⫽

xy

y ⫹ x
⫽ 1
32

1.5 Self-Check Exercises

1. Simplify the expression and write your answer using posi-

2. Simplify the expression and write your answer using posi-

tive exponents only.

tive exponents only.

a. 3a4 4a3

1

12

2

b. a u⫺3

u⫺5b ⫺2

2
a. x 2y 3 3 x 5y ⫺2

1

2

1

b.

a a2b⫺1c3
a3b⫺2 b 2

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 1.5 can be found on 
page 31.

1.5 Concept Questions

1. Explain the meaning of the expression an. What restrictions,
if any, are placed on a and n? What is a0 if a is a nonzero real
number? What is a⫺n if n is a positive integer and a ⬆ 0?

2. Write  all  the  properties  of  exponents,  and  illustrate  with 

examples.

1.5 Exercises

In Exercises 1–20, rewrite the number without using exponents.

2
1. ⫺2 3

1

3. 7⫺2

5.

⫺a⫺1

4b ⫺2

7. 2⫺2 ⫹ 3⫺1

9. 0.03 2

11. 19960

1

1

2

2

2.

4.

3b 4
a⫺2
4b ⫺2
a 3

6. ⫺42

3b 2
a⫺2

8. ⫺3⫺2 ⫺
2
10. ⫺0.3 ⫺2

2
12. 18 ⫹ 25 0

1
1
1

2

13. ab2 0, where a, b ⫽ 0

14. 3x 2y 3 0, where x, y ⫽ 0

23 #  25
24 #  29
2⫺3 #  2⫺4
2⫺5 #  2⫺2
a 34 #  3⫺3

3⫺2

15.

17.

19.

b ⫺1

6 #  104
3 #  102
4 #  2⫺3
2 #  4⫺2
a 5⫺2 #  5⫺2

5⫺5

16.

18.

20.

b ⫺2

In Exercises 21–54, simplify the expression and write your answer
using positive exponents only.

21. 2x 3

2

a 1

8

 x 2b

1
3x 3
2x 4
1

23.

2
25. a⫺2 3

2

1
12
22. ⫺2x 2 3x⫺4
13x 2214x 32

24.

2x 4
26. ⫺a2 ⫺32

1

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2

33.

31. ⫺x 2y 3

29. 4x 2y⫺3 2x⫺3y 2

2
35. 3x⫺2 3 2x 2 5

2
1
27. 2x⫺2y 2 3
1
12
a 2y 2
1
2
x 4 b
a 2u2√ 3
3u√ b ⫺1
2
1
1
30 #  4x⫺2
16 #  1x 22 3
22u⫺21√⫺12 3
321u⫺3√2 2
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
43. a2b⫺3 2 a⫺2b2 ⫺3
c a a⫺2b⫺2
3a⫺1b2b 2d ⫺1

37.

45.

39.

2

2
41. ⫺2x ⫺2 3y ⫺3 4z ⫺2

2

4√ 3

2

32.

30.

1
2
28. 3u⫺1√⫺2 ⫺3
a 1
1
 u⫺2√ 3b
 x 2yb ⫺2
a⫺1
2b2b ⫺3
a a⫺2
2
1

34.

2

2
36. 2⫺1r 3 ⫺2 3s⫺1 2

1
5x 213x⫺22
14x⫺121x 32 ⫺2
13a⫺1b22 ⫺2
12a2b⫺12 ⫺3
1
1
1
1
1
2
c a x 2y⫺3z⫺4
x⫺2y⫺1z 2b ⫺2d 3

2

38.

40.

46.

2
42. 3x⫺1 2 4y⫺1 3 2z ⫺2
2
44. 5u2√⫺3 ⫺1 ⭈ 3 2u2√ 2 ⫺2

2

1.5 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. a. 3a4 4a3 ⫽ 3 ⭈ a4 ⭈ 4 ⭈ a3 ⫽ 12a4⫹3 ⫽ 12a7

u1⫺321⫺22
u1⫺521⫺22 ⫽

u6
u10

⫽ u6⫺10 ⫽ u⫺4 ⫽ 1
u4

2. a. x 2y 3 3 x 5y ⫺2 ⫽ x 2⭈3y 3⭈3x5(⫺2)y⫺2 ⫽ x 6y 9x⫺10y⫺2

b.

2

12
1
a u⫺3
u⫺5b ⫺2
1
1

2

⫽

2

⫽ x 6⫺10y 9⫺2 ⫽ x⫺4y 7

⫽

y7
x4

1.6 SOLVING EQUATIONS

31

22x⫺2y0

32x 3y⫺2b ⫺2d ⫺2

2

47.

49.

51.

53.

22u3√⫺3b ⫺2a 32√ 5
a 32u⫺2√ 2
42u b 2

x⫺1 ⫺ 1
x⫺1 ⫹ 1
u⫺1 ⫺ √⫺1

√ ⫺ u
a a⫺1 ⫺ b⫺1
a⫺1 ⫹ b⫺1b ⫺1

48.

50.

52.

54.

c a⫺
x⫺1 ⫺ y⫺1
x⫺1 ⫹ y⫺1
1u√2 ⫺1
u⫺1 ⫹ √⫺1
13

42
a⫺1 ⫹ b⫺1 a⫺1 ⫺ b⫺1 ⫺2

12

In Exercises 55–57, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
55. If a and b are real numbers and m and n are natural num-

bers, then ambn ⫽ ab mn.

1

2

numbers, then

1

2

56. If a and b are real numbers  b ⫽ 0 and m and n are natural

a m
bn

⫽ a a

bb m⫺n

57. If a and b are real numbers and n is a natural number, then 

1

2

a ⫹ b n ⫽ an ⫹ bn.

b.

a a2b⫺1c3
a3b⫺2 b 2

⫽

a2#2b1⫺12122c3#2
a3#2b1⫺22122 ⫽

a4b⫺2c6
a6b⫺4
⫽ a4⫺6b⫺2⫹4c6 ⫽ a⫺2b2c6

⫽

b2c6
a2

1.6

Solving Equations

Equations
An equation is a statement that two mathematical expressions are equal.

EXAMPLE 1 The following are examples of equations.
a. 2x ⫹ 3 ⫽ 7
b. 3 2x ⫹ 3 ⫽ 4 x ⫺ 1 ⫹ 4

2

1
2z ⫺ 1 ⫽ 2

1

2

c.

y

y ⫺ 2

⫽

3y ⫹ 1
3y ⫺ 4

d.

In Example 1, the letters x, y, and z are called variables. A variable is a letter that
stands for a number belonging to a set of (real) numbers.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

32

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

A solution of an equation involving one variable is a number that renders the
equation a true statement when the number is substituted for the variable. For exam-
ple, replacing the variable x in the equation 2x ⫹ 3 ⫽ 7 by the number 2 gives

2
1
2 2 ⫹ 3 ⫽ 7
4 ⫹ 3 ⫽ 7

which is true. This shows that the number 2 is a solution of 2x ⫹ 3 ⫽ 7. The set of all
solutions of an equation is called the solution set. To solve an equation is synonymous
with finding its solution set.

The standard procedure for solving an equation is to transform the given equation,
using  an  appropriate  operation,  into  an  equivalent equation—that  is,  one  having
exactly the same solution(s) as the original equation. The transformations are repeated
if necessary until the solution(s) are easily read off. The following properties of real
numbers can be used to produce equivalent equations.

Equality Properties of Real Numbers
Let a, b, and c be real numbers.
1. If a ⫽ b, then a ⫹ c ⫽ b ⫹ c and a ⫺ c ⫽ b ⫺ c.

2. If a ⫽ b and c ⫽ 0, then ca ⫽ cb and 

a
c

⫽

b
c

.

Addition and subtraction
properties

Multiplication and division
properties

Thus, adding or subtracting the same number to both sides of an equation leads to an
equivalent  equation.  Also,  multiplying  or  dividing  both  sides  of  an  equation  by  a
nonzero number leads to an equivalent equation. Let’s apply the procedure to the solu-
tion of some linear equations.

Linear Equations
A  linear  equation in  the  variable  x is  an  equation  that  can  be  written  in  the  form 
ax ⫹ b ⫽ 0, where a and b are constants with a ⫽ 0. A linear equation in x is also
called a first-degree equation in x or an equation of degree 1 in x.

EXAMPLE 2 Solve the linear equation 8x ⫺ 3 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 9.

Solution We use the equality properties of real numbers to obtain the following
equivalent equations, in which the aim is to isolate x.

8x ⫺ 3 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 9

8x ⫺ 3 ⫺ 2x ⫽ 2x ⫹ 9 ⫺ 2x

Subtract 2x from both sides.

6x ⫺ 3 ⫽ 9

6x ⫺ 3 ⫹ 3 ⫽ 9 ⫹ 3

Add 3 to both sides.

11

6

6x ⫽ 12
2
6x ⫽ 12
6
x ⫽ 2

11

2

Multiply both sides by 

1
6

.

and so the required solution is 2.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1.6 SOLVING EQUATIONS

33

EXAMPLE 3 Solve the linear equation 3p ⫹ 2 p ⫺ 1 ⫽ ⫺2p ⫺ 4.

1

2

Solution

1

2

3p ⫹ 2 p ⫺ 1 ⫽ ⫺2p ⫺ 4
3p ⫹ 2p ⫺ 2 ⫽ ⫺2p ⫺ 4
5p ⫺ 2 ⫽ ⫺2p ⫺ 4

Use the distributive property.

Simplify.

5p ⫺ 2 ⫹ 2p ⫽ ⫺2p ⫺ 4 ⫹ 2p

Add 2p to both sides.

7p ⫺ 2 ⫽ ⫺4

7p ⫺ 2 ⫹ 2 ⫽ ⫺4 ⫹ 2

Add 2 to both sides.

7p ⫽ ⫺2
2
7p ⫽ ⫺2

11

7

11

7

2

Multiply both sides by 

1
7

.

p ⫽ ⫺

2
7

EXAMPLE 4 Solve the linear equation 

2k ⫹ 1

3

⫺

k ⫺ 1

4

⫽ 1
.

Solution First multiply both sides of the given equation by 12, the LCD. Thus,

⫺

12a 2k ⫹ 1

3
2k ⫹ 1

12 #  

3

k ⫺ 1

b
4
k ⫺ 1

4

⫺ 12 #  
2
1

2

1
4 2k ⫹ 1 ⫺ 3 k ⫺ 1 ⫽ 12
8k ⫹ 4 ⫺ 3k ⫹ 3 ⫽ 12
5k ⫹ 7 ⫽ 12
5k ⫽ 5
k ⫽ 1

1
⫽ 12 1

2

⫽ 12

Use the distributive property.

Simplify.

Use the distributive property.

Simplify.

Subtract 7 from both sides.

Multiply both sides by 

1
5

.

Some Special Nonlinear Equations
The  solution(s)  of  some  nonlinear  equations  are  found  by  solving  a  related  linear
equation as the following examples show.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 5 Solve 

2

31x ⫹ 12 ⫺

x

21x ⫹ 12 ⫽ 1

3

.

Solution We multiply both sides of the given equation by 6(x ⫹ 1), the LCD.
Thus,

61x ⫹ 12 #  

2

31x ⫹ 12 ⫺ 61x ⫹ 12 #  

x

21x ⫹ 12 ⫽ 61x ⫹ 12 #  

1
3

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

34

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

which, upon simplification, yields

4 ⫺ 3x ⫽ 2 x ⫹ 1
4 ⫺ 3x ⫽ 2x ⫹ 2

1

2

4 ⫺ 3x ⫺ 2x ⫽ 2x ⫹ 2 ⫺ 2x

Subtract 2x from both sides.

4 ⫺ 5x ⫽ 2

4 ⫺ 5x ⫺ 4 ⫽ 2 ⫺ 4

⫺5x ⫽ ⫺2

x ⫽

2
5

Subtract 4 from both sides.

1
Multiply both sides by ⫺ .
5

We can verify that x ⫽ is a solution of the original equation by substituting 
the left-hand side of the equation. Thus,

2
5

2
5

into

2

⫹ 12 ⫺

3A2

5

2A2

5

2
5

⫹ 1B ⫽ 2
5B ⫺
3A7
⫺ 1
⫽ 10
7
21

2
5

2A7
5B
⫽ 7
21

⫽ 1
3

which is equal to the right-hand side.

When we solve an equation in x, we sometimes multiply both sides of the equation
by  an  expression  in  x. The  resulting  equation  may  contain  solution(s)  that  are 
not solution(s) of the original equation. Such a solution is called an extraneous 
solution. For example, the solution of the equation 3x ⫽ 0 is of course 0. But mul-
tiplying both sides of this equation by the expression (x ⫺ 2) leads to the equation
3x(x ⫺ 2) ⫽ 0 whose solutions are 0 and 2. The solution 2 is not a solution of the
original equation. Thus, whenever you need to multiply both sides of an equation
by an expression that involves a variable, it is a good idea to check whether each
solution of the modified equation is indeed a solution of the given equation. 

EXAMPLE 6 Solve 

x ⫹ 1

x

⫺

x ⫺ 1
x ⫹ 1

⫽ 1

x 2 ⫹ x

.

Solution Multiplying both sides of the equation by the LCD, x(x ⫹ 1), we obtain

1

2

1

Note: x2 ⫹ x ⫽ x1x ⫹ 12

2

x ⫹ 1 2 ⫺ x x ⫺ 1 ⫽ 1
x 2 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 1 ⫺ x 2 ⫹ x ⫽ 1
3x ⫹ 1 ⫽ 1
3x ⫽ 0
x ⫽ 0

Since the original equation is not defined for x ⫽ 0 (division by 0 is not permitted),
we see that 0 is an extraneous solution of the given equation and conclude, accord-
ingly, that the given equation has no solution.

Solving for a Specified Variable
Equations involving more than one variable occur frequently in practical applications.
In these situations, we may be interested in solving for one of the variables in terms
of the others. To obtain such a solution, we think of all the variables other than the one
we are solving for as constants. This technique is illustrated in the next example.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXAMPLE 7 The equation A ⫽ P ⫹ Prt gives the relationship between the value A
of an investment of P dollars after t years when the investment earns simple interest
at the rate of r percent per year. Solve the equation for (a) P, (b) t, and (c) r.

1.6 SOLVING EQUATIONS

35

Solution

a.

b.

c.

A ⫽ P ⫹ Prt
A ⫽ P 1 ⫹ rt

1

A

1 ⫹ rt

⫽ P

A ⫽ P ⫹ Prt

A ⫺ P ⫽ Prt
A ⫺ P

⫽ t

Pr

A ⫽ P ⫹ Prt

A ⫺ P ⫽ Prt
A ⫺ P

⫽ r

Pt

1.6 Self-Check Exercises

1. Solve 

2a x ⫺ 1

4

b ⫺ 2x

3

⫽ 4 ⫺ 3x

12

.

1.6 Concept Questions

2

Factor.

Multiply both sides by 

1

1 ⫹ rt

.

Subtract P from both sides.

Multiply both sides by 

1
Pr

.

2. Solve 

k

2k ⫹ 1

⫽ 3
8

.

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 1.6 can be found on 
page 37.

1. What  is  an  equation?  What  is  a  solution  of  an  equation?

3. What is a linear equation in x? Give an example of one and

What is the solution set of an equation? Give examples.

solve it.

2. Write  the  equality  properties  of  real  numbers.  Illustrate

with examples.

1.6 Exercises

In Exercises 1–32, solve the given equation.
1. 3x ⫽ 12
2. 2x ⫽ 0
4. 2x ⫹ 5 ⫽ 11
3. 0.3y ⫽ 2
6. 2 ⫺ 3y ⫽ 8
5. 3x ⫹ 4 ⫽ 2
 k ⫹ 1 ⫽ 1
4

7. ⫺2y ⫹ 3 ⫽ ⫺7

1
3

8.

 k ⫺ 2

9.

1
5

 p ⫺ 3 ⫽ ⫺1
3

 p ⫹ 5

10. 3.1m ⫹ 2 ⫽ 3 ⫺ 0.2m

11. 0.4 ⫺ 0.3p ⫽ 0.1 p ⫹ 4

12.

1
3

 k ⫹ 4 ⫽ ⫺2a k ⫹ 1
3b

2
1
 12k ⫹ 42

13.

3
5

 1k ⫹ 12 ⫽ 1

4

3a 3m

4

2x ⫺ 1

3

m
5

⫺ 1b ⫹
⫹ 3x ⫹ 4

4

4

⫽ 42 ⫺ m
71x ⫹ 32

⫽

10

w ⫺ 1

3

⫹

w ⫹ 1

4

⫽ ⫺

w ⫹ 1

6

14.

15.

16.

17.

2

2

1

2x ⫺ 3 x ⫺ 4 ⫽ x ⫺ 5
2 ⫺ 3 x ⫹ 2 ⫽ 冤 ⫺3x ⫹ 1 ⫹ x冥

2
19. 2x ⫹ 1 2 ⫺ 3x ⫺ 2 2 ⫽ 5x 2 ⫺ x2

18.

12
11
2

42
42

31
31
1

3

1
2

1

1

2

1

3

4

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

36

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

20. x 2x ⫺ 3 2 ⫹ 5x 2 ⫽ 3x 2 3x ⫺ 4 ⫹ 18

4

1

2

13

2

21. ⫽ 24

8
x

22. ⫹ ⫽ 6

1
x

2
x

23.

25.

27.

29.

31.

2

y ⫺ 1

⫽ 4

⫽ 2
5
⫽ 3

2x ⫺ 3
x ⫹ 1

2

q ⫺ 1

3k ⫺ 2

4

q ⫺ 2
⫺ 3k
4

⫽

k ⫹ 3

k

m ⫺ 2

m

⫹ 2
m

⫽

m ⫹ 3
m ⫺ 3

24.

26.

28.

30.

32.

1

x ⫹ 3

⫽ 0

r

⫽ 4

3r ⫺ 1
⫺ 2

y
3

y ⫹ 1

⫽ 1
3

 1y ⫺ 32

2x ⫺ 1
3x ⫹ 2

⫽ 2x ⫹ 1
3x ⫹ 1

4

x1x ⫺ 22 ⫽ 2

x ⫺ 2

In Exercises 33–46, solve the equation for the indicated variable.
33. I ⫽ Prt; r

34. ax ⫹ by ⫹ c ⫽ 0; y

35. p ⫽ ⫺3q ⫹ 1; q

36. w ⫽

ku√
s 2

; u

S ⫽ Rc 11 ⫹ i2 n ⫺ 1
d ; R
S ⫽ R11 ⫹ i2 c 11 ⫹ i2 n ⫺ 1

i

i

37.

38.

d ; R

39. V ⫽

ax

x ⫹ b

; x

41. r ⫽

43. r ⫽

45.

1
f

; m

; n

2mI

2mI

B1n ⫹ 12
B1n ⫹ 12
⫽ 1
⫹ 1
q  ; p
p

40. V ⫽

42.

p ⫽

; n

n

Nb

Ca 1 ⫺
x ⫹ 10
x ⫹ 4  ; x

44.

46.

y ⫽ 10a 1 ⫺ 1
1 ⫹ 2xb ; x
⫹ 1
⫽ 1
R1
R3

⫹ 1
R2

; R3

1
R

47. SIMPLE INTEREST The  simple  interest  I (in  dollars)  earned
when P dollars is invested for a term of t years is given by
I ⫽ Prt, where r is the (simple) interest rate/year. Solve for
t in terms of I, P, and r. If Susan invests $1000 in a bank
paying interest at the rate of 6%/year, how long must she
leave it in the bank before it earns an interest of $90?

48. TEMPERATURE CONVERSION The  relationship  between  the
temperature in degrees Fahrenheit (°F) and the temperature
in  degrees  Celsius  (°C)  is  F ⫽ C ⫹ 32.  Solve  for  C in
terms of F. Then use the result to find the temperature in
degrees Celsius corresponding to a temperature of 70°F.

9
5

49. WEISS’S LAW According to Weiss’s law of excitation of tis-
sue,  the  strength  S of  an  electric  current  is  related  to  the
time t the current takes to excite tissue by the formula

S ⫽

a
t

⫹ b    1t ⬎ 02

where a and b are positive constants. Solve this equation
for t.

50. SPEED OF A CHEMICAL REACTION Certain proteins, known as
enzymes, serve as catalysts for chemical reactions in living
things. In 1913, Leonor Michaelis and L. M. Menten dis-
covered the following formula:

V ⫽

ax

x ⫹ b

where  a and  b are  positive  constants,  giving  the  initial
speed V, in miles per liter per second, at which a reaction
begins in terms of the amount of substrate x (the substance
being acted upon), measured in moles per liters. Solve this
equation for x.

51. LINEAR DEPRECIATION Suppose  an  asset  has  an  original
value of $C and is depreciated linearly over N years with a
scrap value of $S. Then the book value V (in dollars) of the
asset at the end of t years is given by

V ⫽ C ⫺ a C ⫺ S
N b t

a. Solve for C in terms of V, S, N, and t.
b. A speed boat is being depreciated linearly over 5 years.
If the scrap value of the boat is $40,000 and the book
value of the boat at the end of 3 years is $70,000, what
was its original value?

52. MOTION OF A CAR The distance s (in feet) covered by a car
traveling along a straight road is related to its initial speed
u (in ft/sec), its final speed √ (in ft/sec), and its (constant)
acceleration a (in ft/sec2) by the equation √ 2 ⫽ u2 ⫹ 2as.
a. Solve the equation for a in terms of the other variables.
b. A car starting from rest and accelerating at a constant
rate reaches a speed of 88 ft/sec after traveling  mile
(1320 ft). What is its acceleration?

1
4

53. COWLING’S RULE Cowling’s Rule is a method for calculat-
ing pediatric drug dosages. If a denotes the adult dosage (in
milligrams) and if t is the child’s age (in years), then the
child’s dosage (in milligrams) is given by

c ⫽ a t ⫹ 1

24 b a

a. Solve the equation for t in terms of a and c.
b. If  the  adult  dose  of  a  drug  is  500  mg  and  a  child

received a dose of 125 mg, how old was the child?

54. AMOUNT OF RAINFALL The total amount of rain (in inches)

after t hr during a rainfall is given by

T ⫽ 0.8t
t ⫹ 4.1

a. Solve for t in terms of T.
b. How  long  does  it  take  for  the  total  amount  of  rain  to

reach 0.4 in.?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1.

4

12

b ⫺ 2x

3

1.6 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises
⫽ 4 ⫺ 3x
2a x ⫺ 1
61x ⫺ 12 ⫺ 8x ⫽ 4 ⫺ 3x
6x ⫺ 6 ⫺ 8x ⫽ 4 ⫺ 3x
⫺6 ⫺ 2x ⫽ 4 ⫺ 3x
⫺6 ⫹ x ⫽ 4
x ⫽ 10

Multiply both sides by 12, 
the LCD.

Add 3x to both sides.

1.7 RATIONAL EXPONENTS AND RADICALS

37

If we substitute this value of k into the original equation, we
find

3
2

213
22 ⫹ 1

⫽

3
2

3 ⫹ 1

⫽ 3
8

which is equal to the right-hand side. So k ⫽ is the solution
of the given equation.

3
2

2.

k

2k ⫹ 1

⫽ 3
8

8k ⫽ 312k ⫹ 12
8k ⫽ 6k ⫹ 3
2k ⫽ 3
k ⫽ 3
2

Multiply both sides by 812k ⫹ 12, the LCD.

1.7

Rational Exponents and Radicals

nth Roots of Real Numbers
Thus far, we have described the expression an, where a is a real number and n is an
integer. We now direct our attention to a closely related topic: roots of real numbers.
As we will soon see, expressions of the form an for fractional (rational) powers of n
may be defined in terms of the roots of a.

nth Root of a Real Number
If n is a natural number and a and b are real numbers such that

then we say that a is the nth root of b.

an ⫽ b

For n ⫽ 2 and n ⫽ 3, the roots are commonly referred to as the square roots and cube
roots, respectively. Some examples of roots follow:
■ ⫺2 and 2 are square roots of 4 because 1⫺222 ⫽ 4 and 22 ⫽ 4.
■ ⫺3 and 3 are fourth roots of 81 because 1⫺324 ⫽ 81 and 34 ⫽ 81.
■ ⫺4 is a cube root of ⫺64 because 1⫺423 ⫽ ⫺64.

■

1
2

is a fifth root of  because 

1
32

1
⫽ .
32

11
22 5

How many real roots does a real number b have?

1. When n is even, the real nth roots of a positive real number b must come in pairs—
one positive and the other negative. For example, the real fourth roots of 81 include
⫺3 and 3.

2. When n is even and b is a negative real number, there are no real nth roots of b.
For example, if b ⫽ ⫺9 and the real number a is a square root of b, then by defi-
nition, a2 ⫽ ⫺9. But this is a contradiction, since the square of a real number can-
not be negative, and we conclude that b has no real roots in this case.

3. When n is odd, then there is only one real nth root of b. For example, the cube root

of ⫺64 is ⫺4.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

38

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

As you can see from the first statement, given a number b, there might be more
than one real root. So to avoid ambiguity, we define the principal nth root of a positive
real number, when n is even, to be the positive root. Thus, the principal square root of
a real number, when n is even, is the positive root. For example, the principal square
root of 4 is 2, and the principal fourth root of 81 is 3. Of course, the principal nth root
of any real number b, when n is odd, is given by the (unique) nth root of b. For exam-
ple, the principal cube root of ⫺64 is ⫺4, and the principal fifth root of 

1
32

is  .1
2

A summary of the number of roots of a real number b is given in Table 11.

TABLE 11
Number of Roots of a Real Number b
Index

b

n even

n odd

b ⬎ 0
b ⬍ 0
b ⫽ 0
b ⬎ 0
b ⬍ 0
b ⫽ 0

Number of Roots

Two real roots (one principal root)
No real roots
One real root
One real root
One real root
One real root

We use the notation 

, called a radical, to denote the principal nth root of b.
is called a radical sign, and the number b within the radical sign is
The symbol 
called  the  radicand. The  positive  integer  n is  called  the  index of  the  radical.  For
square roots  n ⫽ 2 , we write 

2b

.

2  
1

2

A common mistake is to write 
denotes
the principal fourth root of 16, which is the positive root 2. Of course, the nega-
tive of the fourth root of 16 is ⫺

. This is wrong because 

⫽ ⫺ 2 ⫽ ⫺2.

24 16

EXAMPLE 1 Determine the number of roots of each real number.
a.

23 ⫺27

225

25 0

b.

d.

c.

2n b

instead of 

22 b
24 16 ⫽ ⫾2
24 16

2
1
2⫺27

Solution
a. Here, b ⬎ 0, n is even, and there is one principal root. Thus, 
b. Here, b ⫽ 0, n is odd, and there is one root. Thus, 
⫽ 0.
c. Here, b ⬍ 0, n is odd, and there is one root. Thus, 
d. Here, b ⬍ 0, n is even, and no real root exists. Thus, 

25 0
23 ⫺27
2⫺27

225

⫽ 5.

⫽ ⫺3.

is not defined.

Note  that 1⫺8121/4 does  not  exist  because  n is  even  and  b ⬍ 0,  but  ⫺811/4 ⫽
⫺18121/4 ⫽ ⫺3. The first expression is “the fourth root of ⫺81,” whereas the sec-

ond expression is “the negative of the fourth root of 81.”

EXAMPLE 2 Evaluate the following radicals.

26 64

25 ⫺32

b.

c.

B3 8

27

d.

⫺B 4

25

a.

a.
b.

c.

d.

Solution

26 64
25 ⫺32
B3 8
⫽ 2
3
⫺B 4
⫽ ⫺2
5

25

27

⫽ 2 because 26 ⫽ 64.

⫽ ⫺2 because (⫺2)5 ⫽ ⫺32.

because 

.

3b 3
a 2
⫽ 8
27
B 4
⫽ 2
5

25

because 

, so 

⫺B 4

25

⫽ ⫺2
5

.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1.7 RATIONAL EXPONENTS AND RADICALS

39

Rational Exponents and Radicals
In Section 1.5, we defined expressions such as 2⫺3, 
exponents. But how do we evaluate expressions such as 81/3, where the exponent is a
rational number? From the definition of the nth root of a real number, we know that
⫽ 2. Using rational exponents, we write this same result in the form 81/3 ⫽ 2.

, and 1>␲ 3 involving integral

23 8

A1
2B2

More generally, we have the following definitions.

Rational Exponents
1. If n is a natural number and b is

a real number, then

2n b

b1/n ⫽

(If b ⬍ 0 and n is even, b1/n is 
not defined.)
2. If m>n is a rational number 

reduced to lowest terms  
(m, n natural numbers), then

or, equivalently,

bm/n ⫽ 1b1/n2m
2n bm

bm/n ⫽

29
Illustration
91/2 ⫽
1⫺821/3 ⫽

⫽ 3

23 ⫺8

⫽ ⫺2

12722/3 ⫽ 1271/322 ⫽ 32 ⫽ 9
12722/3 ⫽ 3127224 1/3 ⫽ 172921/3 ⫽ 9
1⫺2722/3 ⫽ 1⫺271/322
⫽ 1⫺322 ⫽ 9

whenever it exists.

23 64

EXAMPLE 3
a.
b.
c.

⫽ 4

16421/3 ⫽
18123/4 ⫽ 1811/423 ⫽ 33 ⫽ 27
1⫺825/3 ⫽ 1⫺81/325 ⫽ 1⫺225 ⫽ ⫺32
27b 2/3
3b 2
⫽ a 1
a 1

27b 1/3d 2

⫽ c a 1

d.

⫽ 1
9

Expressions involving negative rational exponents are taken care of by the fol-

lowing definition.

Negative Exponents

a⫺m/n ⫽

1
a m/n

1a ⫽ 02

EXAMPLE 4
4⫺5/2 ⫽ 1
45/2

a.

⫽ 1
141/22 5

⫽ 1
25

⫽ 1
32

b.

1⫺82 ⫺1/3 ⫽ 1

1⫺82 1/3

⫽ 1
⫺2

⫽ ⫺1
2

All the properties of integral exponents listed in Table 10 (on page 29) hold for

rational exponents. Examples 5 and 6 illustrate the use of these properties.

EXAMPLE 5

⫽ 165/4⫺1/2 ⫽ 165/4⫺2/4 ⫽ 163/4 ⫽ 1161/423 ⫽ 23 ⫽ 8

a.

b.

165/4
161/2
162/323 ⫽ 61 2/32 3 ⫽ 66/3 ⫽ 62 ⫽ 36
⫽ a 161/4
81b 3/4
811/4b 3

81b 1/4d 3

⫽ c a 16

#

c. a 16

3b 3
⫽ a 2

⫽ 8
27

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

40

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 6 Evaluate:

a. 2x 1/21x 2/3 ⫺ x 1/42

b.

1x 1/3 ⫺ y 2/322

Solution

a. 2x 1/21x 2/3 ⫺ x 1/42 ⫽ 2x 1/21x 2/32 ⫺ 2x 1/21x 1/42
1x 1/3 ⫺ y 2/322 ⫽ 1x 1/322 ⫺ 2x 1/3y 2/3 ⫹ 1y 2/322

⫽ x 2/3 ⫺ 2x 1/3y 2/3 ⫹ y 4/3

b.

⫽ 2x 1/2⫹2/3 ⫺ 2x 1/2⫹1/4 ⫽ 2x 3/6⫹4/6 ⫺ 2x 2/4⫹1/4
⫽ 2x7/6 ⫺ 2x 3/4

Simplifying Radicals
The  properties  of  radicals  given  in  Table  12  follow  directly  from  the  properties  of
exponents discussed earlier (Table 10, page 29).

TABLE 12
Properties of Radicals
Property

Illustration

If m and n are natural numbers and a and b are real numbers for which the indicated roots exist,
then

⫽

⫽ 21 ⫽ 2

123 22 3 ⫽ 121/32 3
23 216 ⫽ 23 27 #  8 ⫽ 23 27 #  23 8 ⫽ 3 #  2 ⫽ 6
23 823 64
B3 8
33 264 ⫽ 2⭈2 3
21⫺32 2
23 ⫺8

⫽ 2
4
64 ⫽ 26 64 ⫽ 2

⫽ 兩 ⫺3 兩 ⫽ 3

⫽ 1
2

⫽ ⫺2

64

1.

2.

3.

4.

⫽

⫽ a

12n a2 n
2n ab ⫽ 2n a #  2n b
2n a2n b
Bn a
3m 2n a ⫽ 2mn
2n an
2n an

If n is odd: 

a

b

5. If n is even: 

(b ⫽ 0)

⫽ 兩 a 兩.
⫽ a.

2n an

⫽ a. This is not true if a is negative (see Illus-
A common error is to write 
tration 5 in Table 12). Thus, unless the variable a is known to be nonnegative, the
correct answer is given by Property 5.

When we work with algebraic expressions involving radicals, we usually express

the radical in simplified form.

Simplifying Radicals
An  expression  involving  radicals  is  simplified  if  the  following  conditions  are
satisfied:
1. The powers of all factors under the radical sign are less than the index of the

radical.

2. The index of the radical has been reduced as far as possible.
3. No radical appears in a denominator.
4. No fraction appears within a radical.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1.7 RATIONAL EXPONENTS AND RADICALS

41

EXAMPLE 7 Determine whether each radical is in simplified form. If not, state
which condition is violated.

a.

124 x5

b.

26 y2

c.

B 5

4

Solution None of the three radicals are in simplified form. The radical in 
part (a) violates conditions 1 and 3; that is, the power of x is 5, which is greater
than 4, the index of the radical, and a radical appears in the denominator. The
radical in part (b) violates condition 2, since the index of the radical can be
reduced; that is,

The radical in part (c) violates condition 4, since there is a fraction within the radical.
Rewriting the radical, we see that

26 y2 ⫽ 23⭈2
2524

⫽

2

25

y2 ⫽ 23 y

 25

⫽ 1
2

B 5

4

⫽

EXAMPLE 8 Simplify:
a.

23 375

23 8x 3y 6z 9

b.

26 81x4y2

c.

Solution

23 375 ⫽ 23 3 #  125 ⫽ 23 3 #  23 53 ⫽ 523 3
 23 8x 3y 6z 9 ⫽ 23 23 #  1xy 2z 32 3
 ⫽ 223 #  23 1xy 2z 32 3

23 53 ⫽ 5

 ⫽ 2xy 2z 3

 26 81x4y2 ⫽ 26 921x2y2 2
 ⫽ 23⭈2
92 # 23⭈2 1x2y2 2
 ⫽ 23 9 #  23 x 2y
 ⫽ 23 9x 2y

23 23 ⫽ 2,  23 1xy2z32 3 ⫽ xy2z3

 23⭈2

92 ⫽ 23 9,  23⭈2 1x2y2 2 ⫽ 23 x2y

a.

b.

c.

15

As was mentioned earlier, a simplified rational expression should not have radi-

is, since the denominator of the latter is free of radicals. How do we get rid of the rad-
ical 
does  the  job,  since
⫽ 5! But we cannot multiply the denominator of a fraction by any
number other than 1 without changing the fraction. So the solution is to multiply both

in  the  fraction  3>

?  Obviously,  multiplying  by 

125

⫽

15

is not in simplified form, whereas 3

15

cals in its denominator. For example, 3>
15
1152115 2
the numerator and the denominator of 3>
15
15
>
1515

(which is equal to 1). Thus,

⫽ 315

315

  #  

by 

by 

15
15
. Equivalently, we multiply 3>
⫽ 315
⫽ 315125

5

15

15
>5

This process of eliminating a radical from the denominator of an algebraic expres-
sion is referred to as rationalizing the denominator and is illustrated in Examples
9 and 10.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

42

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

EXAMPLE 9 Rationalize the denominator.

⫽

c.

3x

x23 y

22x
12
 12
⫽ 1
⫽ 3x1x
2
 1x
⫽ 3
2
x23 y 223 y 3
x23 y 2

2x

⫽

⫽

2

y

a.

122

b.

Solution

a.

b.

c.

3x

1212
 #  
112
1x1x
 #  
21x
23 y 223 y 2
 #  
x23 y
23 y 3

23 y 2

Note that in Example 9c, we multiplied the denominator by 

so that we would
, which is equal to y. In general, to rationalize a denominator involving an
obtain 
nth root, we multiply the numerator and the denominator by a factor that will yield a
product in the denominator involving an nth power. For example,

125 x 3

⫽ 125 x 3

  #  

25 x 225 x 2

25 x 225 x 5

⫽

⫽

25 x 2

x

25 x3 #  25 x2 ⫽ x 3/5  #  x 2/5 ⫽ x5/5 ⫽ x

Since 

EXAMPLE 10 Rationalize the denominator.

a.

B3 8

3

b.

B3 x

y 2

Solution

a.

b.

3

B3 8
B3 x

y 2

⫽

⫽

23 823 3
23 3223 32
⫽ 223 32
  #  
⫽ 223 3
23 y23 y
23 xy23 y 3
23 x23 y 2
23 x23 y 2
 #  

⫽

⫽

3

⫽ 2
3

⫽

 23 9
23 xy

y

How do we rationalize the denominator of a fraction like 

1

1 ⫺ 23

? Rather than 

multiplying  by 

(which  does  not  eliminate  the  radical  in  the  denominator),  we 

multiply by 

, obtaining

2323
1 ⫹ 23
1 ⫹ 23
  #  
1 ⫺ 23

1

1 ⫹ 23
1 ⫹ 23

⫽ 1 ⫹ 23
1 ⫺ 1232 2
⫽ 1 ⫹ 23
⫽ ⫺1 ⫹ 23

1 ⫺ 3

2

⫽ 1 ⫹ 23

⫺2

1a ⫺ b21a ⫹ b2 ⫽ a2 ⫺ b 2

1b
1b

a ⫺ 2b
a ⫺ 2b
a ⫹ 2b
a ⫹ 2b

. 

.

In general, to rationalize a denominator of the form a ⫹

, we multiply by 

Similarly, to rationalize a denominator of the form a ⫺

, we multiply by 

We refer to the quantities a ⫹

and a ⫺

as conjugates of each other.

1b

1b

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

fraction by 

2 ⫹ 25
2 ⫹ 25
2 ⫺ 15

3

 

, obtaining

 #  

2 ⫹ 15
2 ⫹ 15

3

2 ⫺ 25

.

312 ⫹ 152
22 ⫺ 1152 2

312 ⫹ 152

⫽

12 ⫺ 15212 ⫹ 152 ⫽
312 ⫹ 152
 ⫽ ⫺312 ⫹ 152

⫺1

 ⫽

1.7 RATIONAL EXPONENTS AND RADICALS

43

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 11 Rationalize the denominator in the expression 

Solution The conjugate of 2 ⫺

is 2 ⫹

. Therefore, we multiply the given 

15

15

Sometimes you may find it easier to convert an expression containing a radical to

one involving rational exponents before evaluating the expression.

EXAMPLE 12 Evaluate:
a.

24 93

23 32

b.

⭈

23 x 2y

2xy

⭈

Solution
23 32
⭈
23 x 2y

a.
b.

24 93
2xy

⭈

⫽ 32/3 ⭈ 93/4 ⫽ 32/3 ⭈ 36/4 ⫽ 32/3⫹3/2 ⫽ 34/6⫹9/6 ⫽ 313/6

⫽ x 2/3y 1/3 ⭈ x 1/2y 1/2 ⫽ x 2/3⫹1/2y 1/3⫹1/2 ⫽ x4/6⫹3/6y 2/6⫹3/6 ⫽ x7/6y5/6

Note how much easier it is to work with rational exponents in this case.

Solving Equations Involving Radicals
The following examples show how to solve equations involving radicals.

EXAMPLE 13 Solve 

22x ⫹ 5

⫽ 3.

Solution This equation is not a linear equation. To solve it, we square both sides
of the equation, obtaining

122x ⫹ 52 2

⫽ 32
2x ⫹ 5 ⫽ 9
2x ⫽ 4
x ⫽ 2

Substituting x ⫽ 2 into the left-hand side of the original equation yields

22122 ⫹ 5

29

⫽

⫽ 3

which is the same as the number on the right-hand side of the equation. Therefore,
the required solution is 3.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 14 Solve 

2k2 ⫺ 4 ⫽ k ⫺ 4

.

Solution Squaring both sides of the equation leads to

k 2 ⫺ 4 ⫽ 1k ⫺ 422
k 2 ⫺ 4 ⫽ k 2 ⫺ 8k ⫹ 16
⫺4 ⫽ ⫺8k ⫹ 16
⫺20 ⫽ ⫺8k

5
2

⫽ k

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

44

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

Substituting this value of k into the left-hand side of the original equation gives

Ba 5
2b 2

⫺ 4 ⫽ B 25

4

⫺ 4 ⫽ B 9

4

⫽ 3
2

But this is not equal to  ⫺ 4 ⫽ ⫺ , which is the result obtained if the value of k is
substituted into the right-hand side of the original equation. We conclude that the
given equation has no solution.

5
2

3
2

1.7 Self-Check Exercises

1. Simplify:

82/3 #  84/3

a.

83/2

b.

a 3y⫺4y 4
z⫺2 b 3

c. 15 #  145

2. Rationalize the denominator:

a.

123 xy

b.

4

3 ⫹ 28

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 1.7 can be found on 
page 45.

1.7 Concept Questions

1. What is the nth root of a real number? Give an example.

2. What is the principal nth root of a positive real number?

Give an example.

1.7 Exercises

3. What is meant by the statement “rationalize the denomina-
tor of an algebraic expression”? Illustrate the process with
an example.

In Exercises 1–20, rewrite the number without radicals or expo-
nents.

281
24 256

1.

3.

23 ⫺27
25 ⫺32

2.

4.

5. 161/2

7. 82/3

6. 6251/4

8. 322/5

13.

9. ⫺251/2
1
2
11. ⫺8 2/3
9b 1/2
a 4
8 b 2/3
a 27
17. 8⫺2/3
⫺a 27

15.

19.

8 b ⫺1/3

14.

10. ⫺163/2
1
2
12. ⫺32 3/5
25b 3/2
a 9
125b 1/3
a⫺ 8
18. 81⫺1/4
⫺a⫺ 8

16.

20.

27b ⫺2/3

In Exercises 21–40, carry out the indicated operation and write
your answer using positive exponents only.
21. 31/3 ⭈ 35/3

22. 26/5 ⭈ 2⫺1/5

23.

31/2
35/2

24.

3⫺5/4
3⫺1/4

44.

47.

49.

51.

25.

2⫺1/2 #  32/3
23/2 #  3⫺1/3
1

2

27. 23/2 4
29. x2/5 ⭈ x⫺1/5

x3

31.

33.

x 3/4
x⫺1/4
⫺27x⫺6b ⫺2/3
a
a x⫺3
xb 3/2
y⫺2b 1/2a y
2
1
37. x 2/5 x 2 ⫺ 2x 3

35.

2
39. 2p3/2 2p1/2 ⫺ p⫺1/2

1

41/3 #  4⫺2/5

26.

42/3
2

13

4
28. ⫺3 1/3 2
30. y⫺3/8 ⭈ y1/4

x 7/3
x⫺2

32.

34.

36.

a 27x⫺3y 2
8x⫺2y⫺5b 1/3
r 5⫺2nb 4
a r n
1

38. s1/3 2s ⫺ s1/4

2
2
40. 3y1/3 y2/3 ⫺ 1 2

1

In Exercises 41–52, write the expression in simplest radical form.
(Assume that all variables are nonnegative.)
41.

43.

23 ⫺54
240a 3b4

46.

232
⫺24 48
23 m 6n 3p12
33 29
33 2x

42.

45.

245
216x 2y 3
23 ⫺27p2q3r 4
35 23 9
52. 33 ⫺24 x3

48.

50.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In  Exercises  53–68,  rationalize  the  denominator  of  the  expres-
sion.

55.

58.

3

22x
5x223x

53.

56.

59.

61.

63.

65.

67.

2

223
32xy
123 x
1 ⫹ 23
1 ⫹ 22
1 ⫺ 22
q2q ⫺ 1
y23 x 2z

54.

57.

60.

62.

64.

66.

68.

y

3

325
2y23y
B 2x
1 ⫺ 22
9 ⫹ 22
3 ⫺ 22
xy2x ⫹ 2y
2x23 xy 2

In Exercises 69–76, simplify the expression. (Assume that all vari-
ables are positive.)

69.

73.

3

B 16
B 3

2x2

70.

74.

3

⫺B 8
B x 3y 5

4

71.

75.

3

B3 2
B3 2y 2

3

In Exercises 77–84, simplify the expression.

72.

76.

4

B3 81
B3 3a3

b2

⫺ 2x ⫺ y

78.

x2x ⫺ y

2y2x ⫺ 2y
2a2 ⫺ b2

a

⫹

⫺

77.

79.

80.

⫹ 2a
12a
2x2x ⫹ 2y
a2a2 ⫺ b2
1
2
1

1
2

81. x ⫹ 1 1/2 ⫹ x x ⫹ 1 ⫺1/2

82.

x⫺1/2 x ⫹ y 1/3 ⫹ x1/2 x ⫹ y ⫺2/3

1
3

1

2

2

2

11
2

1.7 RATIONAL EXPONENTS AND RADICALS

45

1

211 ⫹ x1/32x⫺1/2 ⫺ 1
11 ⫹ x1/32 2
2 x⫺1/21x ⫹ y2 1/2 ⫺ 1

1

x ⫹ y

3 x1/2 #  x⫺2/3

2 x1/21x ⫹ y2 ⫺1/2

83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

In Exercises 85–90, solve the given equation.

23x ⫹ 1 ⫽ 2
22x ⫺ 3 ⫺ 3 ⫽ 0
2k 2 ⫺ 4 ⫽ 4 ⫺ k
24k 2 ⫺ 3 ⫽ 2k ⫹ 1
2k ⫹ 1 ⫹ 2k ⫽ 32k
2x ⫹ 1 ⫺ 2x ⫽ 24x ⫺ 3

91. DEMAND FOR TIRES The  management  of  Titan  Tire  Com-
pany has determined that x thousand Super Titan tires will
be sold each week if the price per tire is p dollars, where p
and x are related by the equation

x ⫽ 2144 ⫺ p    10 ⬍ p ⱕ 1442

Solve the equation for p in terms of x.

92. DEMAND FOR WATCHES The equation

x ⫽ 10B 50 ⫺ p

p

    10 ⬍ p ⱕ 502

gives the relationship between the number x, in thousands,
of the Sicard sports watch demanded per week and the unit
price p in dollars. Solve the equation for p in terms of x.

In  Exercises  93–96,  determine  whether  the  statement  is  true  or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, explain why or
give an example to show why it is false.
93. If a is a real number, then 

94. If a is a real number, then ⫺ a2 1/4 is not defined.

2a2
1

⫽ 兩 a 兩.
2

95. If  n is  a  natural  number  and  a is  a  positive  real  number,

then  a1/n n ⫽ a.

1

2
2a 2 ⫹ b 2

⫽ a ⫹ b.

96. If a and b are positive real numbers, then 

1.7 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises
222

⫽ 82/3⫹4/3⫺3/2 ⫽ 86/3⫺3/2 ⫽ 81/2 ⫽

82/3 #  84/3

28

⫽

1. a.

83/2

b.

a 3y⫺4y 4
z⫺2 b 3

⫽ a 3y⫺4⫹4
⫽ a 3y0
z⫺2b 3
z⫺2 b 3
#
⫽ 13z22 3 ⫽ 33z2 3 ⫽ 27z6
c. 25 #  245 ⫽ 25 #  45 ⫽ 2225 ⫽ 15

2. a.

b.

 #  

123 xy
3 ⫹ 28

4

⫽

23 x 2y 223 x 2y 2
3 ⫺ 28
 #  
3 ⫺ 28

⫽

xy

23 x 2y 2
23 x 2y 223 x 3y 3
413 ⫺ 282
32 ⫺ 1282 2
413 ⫺ 282

⫽

⫽

9 ⫺ 8

⫽ 413 ⫺ 282

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

46

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

1.8 Quadratic Equations

The equation

2x 2 ⫹ 3x ⫹ 1 ⫽ 0

is an example of a quadratic equation. In general, a quadratic equation in the vari-
able x is any equation that can be written in the form

ax 2 ⫹ bx ⫹ c ⫽ 0

where a, b, and c are constants and a ⫽ 0. We refer to this form as the standard form.
Equations such as

3x 2 ⫹ 4x ⫽ 1 and 2t 2 ⫽ t ⫹ 1

are quadratic equations in nonstandard form, but they can be easily transformed into stan-
dard  form.  For  example,  adding  ⫺1  to  both  sides  of  the  first  equation  leads  to 
3x 2 ⫹ 4x ⫺ 1 ⫽ 0, which is in standard form. Similarly, by subtracting (t ⫹ 1) from both
sides of the second equation, we obtain 2t 2 ⫺ t ⫺ 1 ⫽ 0, which is also in standard form.

Solving by Factoring
We solve a quadratic equation in x by finding its roots. The roots of a quadratic equa-
tion in x are precisely the values of x that satisfy the equation. The method of solving
quadratic equations by factoring relies on the following zero-product property of real
numbers, which we restate here.

Zero-Product Property of Real Numbers
If a and b are real numbers and ab ⫽ 0, then a ⫽ 0, or b ⫽ 0, or both a, b ⫽ 0.

Simply stated, this property says that the product of two real numbers is equal to zero
if and only if one (or both) of the factors is equal to zero.

EXAMPLE 1 Solve x 2 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 2 ⫽ 0 by factoring.

Solution Factoring the given equation, we find that

1

12

x 2 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 2 ⫽ x ⫺ 2 x ⫺ 1 ⫽ 0

2

By the zero-product property of real numbers, we have

from which we see that x ⫽ 2 or x ⫽ 1 are the roots of the equation.

x ⫺ 2 ⫽ 0

orx ⫺ 1 ⫽ 0

If a quadratic equation is not in standard form, we first rewrite it in standard form

and then factor the equation to find its roots.

EXAMPLE 2 Solve by factoring.
a. 2x 2 ⫺ 7x ⫽ ⫺6

b. 4x 2 ⫽ 3x

c. 2x 2 ⫽ 6x ⫺ 4

Solution

a. Rewriting the equation in standard form, we have
2x 2 ⫺ 7x ⫹ 6 ⫽ 0

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1.8 QUADRATIC EQUATIONS

47

Factoring this equation, we obtain

1

2x ⫺ 3 x ⫺ 2 ⫽ 0

12

2

Therefore,

2x ⫺ 3 ⫽ 0
3
2

x ⫽

orx ⫺ 2 ⫽ 0

x ⫽ 2

b. We first write the equation in standard form:

4x 2 ⫺ 3x ⫽ 0

Factoring this equation, we have

1
x 4x ⫺ 3 ⫽ 0

2

Therefore,

x ⫽ 0

or

x ⫽ 0

4x ⫺ 3 ⫽ 0
3
4

x ⫽

(Observe that if we had divided 4x 2 ⫺ 3x ⫽ 0 by x before factoring the original
equation, we would have lost the solution x ⫽ 0.)
c. Rewriting the equation in standard form, we have
2x 2 ⫺ 6x ⫹ 4 ⫽ 0

Factoring, we have

and

1
2 x 2 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 2 ⫽ 0
1
2 x ⫺ 2 x ⫺ 1 ⫽ 0

12

2
2
x ⫽ 2

orx ⫽ 1

2 is a common factor.

Solving by Completing the Square
The method of solution by factoring works well for equations that are easily factored.
But what about equations such as x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 2 ⫽ 0 that are not easily factored? Equa-
tions of this type may be solved by using the method of completing the square.

The Method of Completing the Square
1. Write the equation ax2 ⫹ bx ⫹ c ⫽ 0 in the 

Illustration
x2 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 2 ⫽ 0

form

x 2 ⫹ ᎏb
cᎏ
ᎏ x ⫽ ⫺ ᎏ
a
a
앖
앖
Coefficient of x —
— Constant term

where the coefficient of x 2 is 1 and the con-
stant term is on the right side of the equation.

2. Square half of the coefficient of x.

3. Add the number obtained in step 2 to
both sides of the equation, factor, and
solve for x.

x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫽ 2
앖
— Constant

앖
Coefficient —
of x

term

⫽ 1

2b 2
a⫺2
1x ⫺ 122 ⫽ 3
x ⫺ 1 ⫽ ⫾

x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫹ 1 ⫽ 2 ⫹ 1

13
x ⫽ 1 ⫾13

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

48

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

EXAMPLE 3 Solve by completing the square.
a. 4x 2 ⫺ 3x ⫺ 2 ⫽ 0

b. 6x 2 ⫺ 27 ⫽ 0

Solution

a. Step 1

First, write

x 2 ⫺ x ⫺ ⫽ 0

3
4

1
2

Divide the original equation 
by 4, the coefficient of x2.

x 2 ⫺ x ⫽

3
4

1
2

1
2

to both sides of the equation so that 

Add 
the constant term is on the right side.

Step 2

Square half of the coefficient of x, obtaining

4

a ⫺3
2 b 2

8b 2
⫽ a ⫺3

⫽ 9
64

Step 3 Add 

9
64

to both sides of the equation:

x 2 ⫺ x ⫹ ⫽ ⫹

3
4

9
64

1
2
41
64

⫽

9
64

Factoring the left side of the equation, we have

8b 2
a x ⫺ 3

⫽ 41
64

x ⫺ ⫽ ⫾

3
8

241
241

8

8

x ⫽ ⫾ 

3
8

⫽ 3 ⫾

11

8

2241

b. This equation is much easier to solve because the coefficient of x is 0. As before,

we write the equation in the form

6x 2 ⫽ 27 or

x 2 ⫽

9
2

Taking the square root of both sides of the equation, we have

x ⫽ ⫾

B 9

2

⫽ ⫾

322

⫽ ⫾

322

2

Using the Quadratic Formula
By using the method of completing the square to solve the general quadratic equation,

ax 2 ⫹ bx ⫹ c ⫽ 0

a ⫽ 0

1

2

we obtain the quadratic formula (but we will not derive the formula here). This for-
mula can be used to solve any quadratic equation.

The Quadratic Formula
The solutions of ax2 ⫹ bx ⫹ c ⫽ 0 (a ⫽ 0) are given by

⫺b ⫾ 2b2 ⫺ 4ac

x ⫽

2a

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1.8 QUADRATIC EQUATIONS

49

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 4 Use the quadratic formula to solve the following:
a. 2x 2 ⫹ 5x ⫺ 12 ⫽ 0

b. x 2 ⫹ 165x ⫹ 6624 ⫽ 0

c. x 2 ⫽ ⫺3x ⫹ 8

Solution
a. The equation is in standard form, with a ⫽ 2, b ⫽ 5, and c ⫽ ⫺12. Using the

quadratic formula, we find

⫺b ⫾ 2b2 ⫺ 4ac

 x ⫽

2a

⫺5 ⫾ 252 ⫺ 41221⫺122
2122
⫺5 ⫾ 2121

⫺5 ⫾ 11

⫽

4

4

⫽

 ⫽

 ⫽ ⫺4    or    

3
2

Observe that this equation can also be solved by factoring. Thus,

from which we see that the desired roots are x ⫽ or x ⫽ ⫺4, as obtained earlier.
b. The equation is in standard form, with a ⫽ 1, b ⫽ 165, and c ⫽ 6624. Using the

2x 2 ⫹ 5x ⫺ 12 ⫽ 2x ⫺ 3 x ⫹ 4 ⫽ 0

1

2

12

3
2

quadratic formula, we find

⫺b ⫾ 2b2 ⫺ 4ac

 x ⫽

2a

⫺165 ⫾ 21652 ⫺ 4112166242
2112
⫺165 ⫾ 2729

2

⫺165 ⫾ 27

2

⫽ ⫺96    or    ⫺69

⫽

 ⫽

 ⫽

In this case, using the quadratic formula is preferable to factoring the quadratic
equation.

c. We first rewrite the given equation in the standard form x 2 ⫹ 3x ⫺ 8 ⫽ 0, from
which we see that a ⫽ 1, b ⫽ 3, and c ⫽ ⫺8. Using the quadratic formula, we
find

⫺b ⫾ 2b2 ⫺ 4ac

⫺3 ⫾ 232 ⫺ 41121⫺82

⫽

⫽

⫺3 ⫾ 241

x ⫽

2a

That is, the solutions are

⫺3 ⫹ 241

2

⬇ 1.7    or    

2

2112
⫺3 ⫺ 241

2

⬇ ⫺4.7

In this case, the quadratic formula proves quite handy!

EXAMPLE 5 Use the quadratic formula to solve 9x 2 ⫺ 12x ⫹ 4 ⫽ 0.

Solution Using the quadratic formula with a ⫽ 9, b ⫽ ⫺12, and c ⫽ 4, we find
that

 x ⫽

⫺b ⫾ 2b2 ⫺ 4ac
 ⫽ 12 ⫾ 2144 ⫺ 144

2a

18

⫽ 12
18

⫽ 2
3

⫺1⫺122 ⫾ 21⫺122 2 ⫺ 4192142

⫽

2192

Here, the only solution is x ⫽ . We refer to  as a double root. (This equation could
also be solved by factoring. Try it!)

2
3

2
3

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

50

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

EXAMPLE 6 Solve the equation 

22x ⫺ 1

⫺

2x ⫹ 3

⫹ 1 ⫽ 0.

Solution We proceed as follows:

⫽

2x ⫹ 3
⫺ 1
2x ⫹ 3
⫺ 122
2x ⫹ 3
2x ⫹ 3
2x ⫹ 3
22

22x ⫺ 1
2x ⫺ 1 ⫽ 1
2x ⫺ 1 ⫽ x ⫹ 3 ⫺ 2
x ⫺ 5 ⫽ ⫺2
1x ⫺ 522 ⫽ 1⫺2
x 2 ⫺ 10x ⫹ 25 ⫽ 4x ⫹ 12
x 2 ⫺ 14x ⫹ 13 ⫽ 0
1x ⫺ 121x ⫺ 132 ⫽ 0
x ⫽ 1

13

or

2x ⫹ 3 ⫺ 1

Add 

Square both sides.

to both sides.

⫹ 1

Simplify.

Square both sides.

Next, we need to verify that these solutions of the quadratic equation are indeed the
solutions of the original equation. Recall that squaring an equation could introduce
extraneous solutions. Now, substituting x ⫽ 1 into the original equation gives

so x ⫽ 1 is a solution. On the other hand, if x ⫽ 13, we have

22 ⫺ 1
226 ⫺ 1

⫺

⫺

21 ⫹ 3
216

⫹ 1 ⫽ 1 ⫺ 2 ⫹ 1 ⫽ 0

⫹ 1 ⫽ 5 ⫺ 4 ⫹ 1 ⫽ 2 ⫽ 0

so x ⫽ 13 is an extraneous solution. Therefore, the required solution is x ⫽ 1.

The following example gives an application involving quadratic equations.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 7 Book Design A production editor at a textbook 
publishing house decided that the pages of a book should have 1-inch 
margins at the top and bottom and  -inch margins on the sides. She further 
stipulated that the length of a page should be 1 times its width and have a printed
area of exactly 51 square inches. Find the dimensions of a page of the book.

1
2

1
2

Solution Let x denote the width of a page of the book (Figure 3). Then the
length of the page is  x. The dimensions of the printed area of the page are

A3
2 x ⫺ 2B

inches by 1x ⫺ 12 inches, so its area is 

A3
2 x ⫺ 2B1x ⫺ 12

Since the printed area is to be exactly 51 square inches, we must have

3
2

square inches.

a 3

2

 x ⫺ 2b1x ⫺ 12 ⫽ 51

VIDEO

1
 in.
2

1 in.

Expanding the left-hand side of the equation gives

x – 2

3
2 

3
x
2 

3
2

x 2 ⫺ x ⫺ 2x ⫹ 2 ⫽ 51

3
2

3
2

x 2 ⫺ x ⫺ 49 ⫽ 0

7
2

3x 2 ⫺ 7x ⫺ 98 ⫽ 0

Multiply both sides by 2.

x – 1

x

FIGURE 3

Factoring, we have

13x ⫹ 1421x ⫺ 72 ⫽ 0

14
3

so x ⫽ ⫺ or x ⫽ 7. Since x must be positive, we reject the negative root and 
conclude that the required solution is x ⫽ 7. Therefore, the dimensions of the
page are 7 inches by  (7), or 

, inches.

10 

3
2

1
2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

1.8 QUADRATIC EQUATIONS

51

TABLE 13
Solutions of a Quadratic Equation
Discriminant
b2 ⴚ 4ac

Number of 
Solutions

Positive

Equal to 0
Negative

Two real and 
distinct solutions
One real solution
No real solution

The quantity b2 ⫺ 4ac, which appears under the radical sign in the quadratic for-
mula, is called the discriminant. We use the discriminant to determine the number of
solutions of a quadratic equation. If the discriminant is positive, the equation has two
real and distinct roots (Example 4a–c). If the discriminant is equal to 0, the equation
has one double root (Example 5). Finally, if the discriminant is negative, the equation
has no real roots. These results are summarized in Table 13.

EXAMPLE 8 Use the discriminant to determine the number of real solutions of each
equation.
a. x 2 ⫺ 7x ⫹ 4 ⫽ 0

b. 2x 2 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 4 ⫽ 0

Solution
a. Here, a ⫽ 1, b ⫽ ⫺7, and c ⫽ 4. Therefore,
1
12

2

b2 ⫺ 4ac ⫽ ⫺7 2 ⫺ 4 1 4 ⫽ 49 ⫺ 16

1
⫽ 33

2

2

and we conclude that the equation has two real and distinct solutions.

b. Here, a ⫽ 2, b ⫽ ⫺3, and c ⫽ 4. Therefore,
1

12

b2 ⫺ 4ac ⫽ ⫺3 2 ⫺ 4 2 4 ⫽ 9 ⫺ 32

2
1
⫽ ⫺23

Since the discriminant is negative, we conclude that the equation has no real 
solution.

1.8 Self-Check Exercises

1. Solve by factoring: 
a. x 2 ⫺ 5x ⫹ 6 ⫽ 0
b. 4t 2 ⫺ 4t ⫽ 3

1.8 Concept Questions

2. Solve the equation 2x 2 ⫺ 4x ⫺ 8 ⫽ 0:

a. By completing the square
b. By using the quadratic formula

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 1.8 can be found on 
page 54.

1. What is a quadratic equation in x? Give an example.

3. State the quadratic formula. Illustrate its use with an example.

2. Explain  the  method  of  completing  the  square.  Illustrate

with an example.

1.8 Exercises

In Exercises 1–16, solve the equation by factoring, if required.
1. x ⫹ 2 x ⫺ 3 ⫽ 0

2. y ⫺ 3 y ⫺ 4 ⫽ 0

1

12

2

1

12

2

3. x 2 ⫺ 4 ⫽ 0

4. 2m2 ⫺ 32 ⫽ 0

7. 4t 2 ⫹ 2t ⫺ 2 ⫽ 0

8. ⫺6x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 12 ⫽ 0

9.

1
4

x 2 ⫺ x ⫹ 1 ⫽ 0

10.

1
2

a2 ⫹ a ⫺ 12 ⫽ 0

5. x 2 ⫹ x ⫺ 12 ⫽ 0

6. 3x 2 ⫺ x ⫺ 4 ⫽ 0

11. 2m2 ⫺ 7m ⫽ ⫺6

12. 6x 2 ⫽ ⫺5x ⫹ 6

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

52

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

13. 4x 2 ⫺ 9 ⫽ 0

14. 8m2 ⫹ 64m ⫽ 0

15. z 2z ⫹ 1 ⫽ 6

16. 13m ⫽ ⫺5 ⫺ 6m2

1

2

In Exercises 17–26, solve the equation by completing the square.
17. x 2 ⫹ 2x ⫺ 8 ⫽ 0

18. x 2 ⫺ x ⫺ 6 ⫽ 0

19. 6x 2 ⫺ 12x ⫽ 3

21. m2 ⫺ 3 ⫽ ⫺m

23. 3x ⫺ 4 ⫽ ⫺2x 2

25. 4x 2 ⫺ 13 ⫽ 0

20. 2x 2 ⫺ 6x ⫽ 20

22. p2 ⫺ 4 ⫽ ⫺2p

24. 10x ⫺ 5 ⫽ 4x 2

26. 7p2 ⫺ 20 ⫽ 0

In Exercises 27–36, solve the equation by using the quadratic for-
mula.
27. 2x 2 ⫺ x ⫺ 6 ⫽ 0

28. 6x 2 ⫺ 7x ⫺ 3 ⫽ 0

29. m2 ⫽ 4m ⫺ 1

31. 8x ⫹ 3 ⫽ 8x 2

30. 2x 2 ⫽ 8x ⫺ 3

32. 6p ⫺ 6 ⫽ p2

33. 4x ⫽ ⫺2x 2 ⫹ 3

34. 15 ⫺ 2y 2 ⫽ 7y

35. 2.1x 2 ⫺ 4.7x ⫺ 6.2 ⫽ 0

36. 0.2m2 ⫹ 1.6m ⫹ 1.2 ⫽ 0

In Exercises 37–44, solve the equation.
37. x 4 ⫺ 5x 2 ⫹ 6 ⫽ 0

Hint: Let m ⫽ x 2. Then solve the quadratic equation in m.

38. m4 ⫺ 13m2 ⫹ 36 ⫽ 0

Hint: Let x ⫽ m2. Then solve the quadratic equation in x.

39. y 4 ⫺ 7y 2 ⫹ 10 ⫽ 0

Hint: Let x ⫽ y 2.

40. 4x 4 ⫺ 21x 2 ⫹ 5 ⫽ 0

Hint: Let y ⫽ x 2.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

59.

61.

62.

63.

64.

3

x 2 ⫺ 1

⫹ 2x
x ⫹ 1

⫽ 7
3

m

m ⫺ 2

⫺ 27
7

⫽

3x

x ⫺ 2

⫹ 4

x ⫹ 2

2

m 2 ⫺ m ⫺ 2
⫽ 24

x 2 ⫺ 4

3x

x ⫹ 1

⫹ 2
x

⫹ 5 ⫽ 3

x 2 ⫹ x

2t ⫹ 1
t ⫺ 2

⫺

t

t ⫹ 1

⫽ ⫺1

x

⫺ 3

⫹

2

x ⫹ 1

x ⫺ 2

x 2 ⫺ x ⫺ 2

58.

2u 2 ⫹ u ⫺ 5 ⫽ 1
22r ⫹ 3 ⫽ r
2s ⫺ 2 ⫺ 2s ⫹ 3 ⫹ 1 ⫽ 0
2x ⫹ 1 ⫺ 22x ⫺ 5 ⫹ 1 ⫽ 0

60.

⫽ 0

26x 2 ⫺ 5x ⫺ 2 ⫽ 0
23 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 2x ⫽ 0

1

1x ⫺ 32 2
12x ⫺ 12 2

2

⫺ 10
x ⫺ 3

⫹ 21 ⫽ 0

⫺ 5

2x ⫺ 1

⫹ 3 ⫽ 0

In Exercises 65–72, use the discriminant to determine the num-
ber of real solutions of the equation.
65. x 2 ⫺ 6x ⫹ 5 ⫽ 0

66. 2m2 ⫹ 5m ⫹ 3 ⫽ 0

67. 3y 2 ⫺ 4y ⫹ 5 ⫽ 0

68. 2p2 ⫹ 5p ⫹ 6 ⫽ 0

69. 4x 2 ⫹ 12x ⫹ 9 ⫽ 0

70. 25x 2 ⫺ 80x ⫹ 64 ⫽ 0

Hint: Let y ⫽ x ⫹ 2.

41. 61x ⫹ 222 ⫹ 71x ⫹ 22 ⫺ 3 ⫽ 0
42. 812m ⫹ 322 ⫹ 1412m ⫹ 32 ⫺ 15 ⫽ 0

Hint: Let x ⫽ 2m ⫹ 3.

43. 6w ⫺ 13 

Hint: Let x ⫽

44.

a

t

t ⫺ 1b 2

Hint: Let x ⫽

1w
1w
⫹ 6 ⫽ 0
.
⫺ 2t
t ⫺ 1
t

.

t ⫺ 1

⫺ 3 ⫽ 0

In Exercises 45–64, solve the equation.

Hint: Be sure to check for extraneous solutions.

45.

47.

49.

2

⫺ 4
x

⫽ 4

x ⫹ 3
x ⫹ 2 ⫺ 3

2x ⫺ 1

⫽ 0

2 ⫺ 7
2y

⫺ 15
y 2

⫽ 0

3y ⫺ 1

46.

4

x2

48.

x ⫺ 1
50. 6 ⫹ 1
k

⫹ 4

y ⫹ 1
⫽ 3 ⫺ 2x
x ⫺ 1

⫺ 2
k 2

⫽ 0

71.

6
k 2

⫹ 1
k

1

⫺ 2 ⫽ 0
2
1

2

72. 2p ⫹ 1 2 ⫺ 3 2p ⫹ 1 ⫹ 4 ⫽ 0

73. MOTION OF A BALL A person standing on the balcony of a
building throws a ball directly upward. The height of the
ball  (in  feet)  as  measured  from  the  ground  after  t sec  is
given by h ⫽ ⫺16t 2 ⫹ 64t ⫹ 768. When does the ball reach
the ground?

74. MOTION OF A MODEL ROCKET A  model  rocket  is  launched
vertically upward so that its height (measured in feet) t sec
after launch is given by

21
h t ⫽ ⫺16t 2 ⫹ 384t ⫹ 4

a. Find the time(s) when the rocket is at a height of 1284 ft.
b. How long is the rocket in flight?

75. MOTION OF A CYCLIST A cyclist riding along a straight path
has a speed of u ft/sec as she passes a tree. Accelerating at
a ft/sec2, she reaches a speed of √ ft/sec t sec later, where 
√ ⫽ ut ⫹ at 2. If the cyclist was traveling at 10 ft/sec and she
began  accelerating  at  a  rate  of  4  ft/sec2 as  she  passed  the
tree, how long did it take her to reach a speed of 22 ft/sec?

⫽ 5
2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

76. PROFIT OF A VINEYARD Phillip, the proprietor of a vineyard,
estimates  that  the  profit  (in  dollars)  from  producing  and
selling (x ⫹ 10,000) bottles of wine is P ⫽ ⫺0.0002x 2 ⫹
3x ⫹ 50,000. Find the level(s) of production that will yield
a profit of $60,800.

77. DEMAND FOR SMOKE ALARMS The  quantity  demanded  x
(measured  in  units  of  a  thousand)  of  the  Sentinel  smoke
alarm/week is related to its unit price p (in dollars) by the
equation

p ⫽

30

0.02x 2 ⫹ 1

1

0 ⱕ x ⱕ 10

2

If  the  unit  price  is  set  at  $10,  what  is  the  quantity
demanded?

78. DEMAND FOR COMMODITIES The quantity demanded x (mea-
sured in units of a thousand) of a certain commodity when
the unit price is set at $p is given by the equation

p ⫽ 2⫺x 2 ⫹ 100

If the unit price is set at $6, what is the quantity demanded?

79. SUPPLY OF SATELLITE RADIOS The  quantity  x of  satellite
radios that a manufacturer will make available in the mar-
ketplace  is  related  to  the  unit  price  p (in  dollars)  by  the
equation

2x ⫹ 10

p ⫽ 1
10

How  many  satellite  radios  will  the  manufacturer  make
available in the marketplace if the unit price is $30?

80. SUPPLY OF DESK LAMPS The  supplier  of  the  Luminar  desk
lamp will make x thousand units of the lamp available in
the marketplace if its unit price is p dollars, where p and x
are related by the equation

p ⫽ 0.1x 2 ⫹ 0.5x ⫹ 15

If the unit price of the lamp is set at $20, how many units
will the supplier make available in the marketplace?

81. OXYGEN CONTENT OF A POND When  organic  waste  is
dumped into a pond, the oxidation process that takes place
reduces the pond’s oxygen content. However, given time,
nature will restore the oxygen content to its natural level.
Suppose the oxygen content t days after organic waste has
been dumped into the pond is given by

P ⫽ 100a t2 ⫹ 10t ⫹ 100
t2 ⫹ 20t ⫹ 100b

percent of its normal level. Find t corresponding to an oxy-
gen content of 80%, and interpret your results.

82. THE GOLDEN RATIO Consider  a  rectangle  of  width  x and
height y (see the accompanying figure). The ratio r ⫽ sat-
isfying the equation

x
y

⫽

x
y

x ⫹ y

x

1.8 QUADRATIC EQUATIONS

53

is called the golden ratio. Show that

r ⫽ a 1

2b11 ⫹ 252 ⬇ 1.6

y

x

Note: A  structure  or  a  picture  with  a  ratio  of  width  to
height equal to the golden ratio is especially pleasing to the
eye.  In  fact,  this  golden  ratio  was  used  by  the  ancient
Greeks  in  designing  their  beautiful  temples  and  public
buildings such as the Parthenon (see photo below).

s
i
b
r
o
C
/
e
n
e
c
s
o
c
E
/
y
e
k
n
W
m

i

l

 

i
J
 
©

83. CONSTRUCTING A BOX By  cutting  away  identical  squares
from each corner of a rectangular piece of cardboard and
folding up the resulting flaps, an open box may be made
(see  the  accompanying  figure).  If  the  cardboard  is  16  in.
long and 10 in. wide, find the dimensions of the resulting
box if it is to have a total surface area of 144 in.2.

x

10 10 – 2x

x

x

x

1

0 – 2

x

x

x

x

x

x

16 – 2x

16

1 6 – 2 x

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

54

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

84. ENCLOSING AN AREA Carmen  wishes  to  put  up  a  fence
around a proposed rectangular garden in her backyard. The
length of the garden is to be twice its width, and the area of
the garden is to be 200 ft2. How many feet of fencing does
she need?

85. ENCLOSING AN AREA George  has  120  ft  of  fencing.  He
wishes to cut it into two pieces, with the purpose of enclos-
ing two square regions. If the sum of the areas of the regions
enclosed is 562.5 ft2, how long should each piece of fenc-
ing be?

86. WIDTH OF A SIDEWALK A rectangular garden of length 40 ft
and width 20 ft is surrounded by a path of uniform width.
If the area of the walkway is 325 ft2, what is its width?

87. ENCLOSING AN AREA The owner of the Rancho los Feliz has
3000 yd of fencing to enclose a rectangular piece of graz-
ing land along the straight portion of a river. If an area of
1,125,000 yd2 is to be enclosed, what will be the dimen-
sions of the fenced area?

x

y

89. DESIGNING A METAL CONTAINER A  metal  container  consists
of  a  right  circular  cylinder  with  hemispherical  ends.  The
surface area of the container is S ⫽ 2␲rl ⫹ 4␲r2, where 
l is the length of the cylinder and r is the radius of the hemi-
sphere. If the length of the cylinder is 4 ft and the surface
area of the container is 28␲ ft2, what is the radius of each
hemisphere?

r

l

90. OIL SPILLS In calm waters, the oil spilling from the ruptured
hull of a grounded oil tanker spreads in all directions. The
area polluted at a certain instant of time was circular with
a radius of 100 ft. A little later, the area, still circular, had
increased by 4400␲ ft2. By how much had the radius in-
creased?

In Exercises 91–94, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, explain why or
give an example to show why it is false.
91. If  a and  b are  real  numbers  and  ab ⫽ 0,  then  a ⫽ 0  or 

x

b ⫽ 0.

92. If a, b, and c are real numbers and abc ⫽ 0, then
might not be a real number.

real number but 

a

b ⫹ c

a ⫹ b

c

is a

88. RADIUS OF A CYLINDRICAL CAN The surface area of a right cir-
cular cylinder is given by S ⫽ 2␲r 2 ⫹ 2␲rh, where r is the
radius of the cylinder and h is its height. What is the radius
of a cylinder of surface area 100 in.2 and height 3 in.?

93. If b2 ⫺ 4ac ⬎ 0 and a ⫽ 0, then the roots of ax 2 ⫺ bx ⫹
c ⫽ 0 are the negatives of the roots of ax 2 ⫹ bx ⫹ c ⫽ 0.

94. If b2 ⫺ 4ac ⫽ 0 and a ⫽ 0, then ax 2 ⫹ bx ⫹ c ⫽ 0 has two

distinct real roots, or it has no real roots at all.

r

h

1.8 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. a. Factoring the given equation, we have

2. a. Step 1

First write

x 2 ⫺ 5x ⫹ 6 ⫽ x ⫺ 3 x ⫺ 2 ⫽ 0

and x ⫽ 3 or x ⫽ 2.

b. Rewriting the given equation, we have

4t 2 ⫺ 4t ⫺ 3 ⫽ 0

Add ⫺3 to both sides 
of the equation.

Factoring this equation gives

12
and t ⫽ or t ⫽ ⫺ .1
2

1

3
2

2t ⫺ 3 2t ⫹ 1 ⫽ 0

1

2

12

2

x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 4 ⫽ 0

x2 ⫺ 2x ⫽ 4

Divide the original equation by 2,
the coefficient of x 2.
Add 4 to both sides so that the constant
term is on the right side.

Step 2

Square half of the coefficient of x, obtaining

a ⫺2
2 b 2

⫽ 1

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Step 3 Add 1 to both sides of the equation:

b. Using the quadratic formula, with a ⫽ 2, b ⫽ ⫺4, and 

1.9 INEQUALITIES AND ABSOLUTE VALUE

55

x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫹ 1 ⫽ 5

Factoring, we have

1

2

x ⫺ 1 2 ⫽ 5
x ⫺ 1 ⫽ ⫾

15
x ⫽ 1 ⫾ 15

1.9

Inequalities and Absolute Value

⫺1⫺42 ⫾ 21⫺42 2 ⫺ 41221⫺82

⫽

2122

 x ⫽

c ⫽ ⫺8, we obtain

⫺b ⫾ 2b2 ⫺ 4ac
 ⫽ 4 ⫾ 280
 ⫽ 1 ⫾ 25

2a

4

⫽ 4 ⫾ 425

4

Intervals
We described the system of real numbers and its properties in Section 1.1. Often, we
will restrict our attention to certain subsets of the set of real numbers. For example, if
x denotes the number of cars rolling off an assembly line each day in an automobile
assembly plant, then x must be nonnegative; that is, x ⱖ 0. Taking this example one
step further, suppose management decides that the daily production must not exceed
200 cars. Then x must satisfy the inequality 0 ⱕ x ⱕ 200.

More generally, we will be interested in certain subsets of real numbers called
finite intervals and infinite intervals. Finite intervals are open, closed, or half-open.
The set of all real numbers that lie strictly between two fixed numbers a and b is called
an open interval (a, b). It consists of all real numbers x that satisfy the inequalities 
a ⬍ x ⬍ b; it is called “open” because neither of its endpoints is included in the inter-
val. A closed interval contains both of its endpoints. Thus, the set of all real numbers
x that satisfy the inequalities a ⱕ x ⱕ b is the closed interval [a, b]. Notice that brack-
ets  are  used  to  indicate  that  the  endpoints  are  included  in  this  interval.  Half-open
intervals (also called half-closed intervals) contain only one of their endpoints. The
interval [a, b) is the set of all real numbers x that satisfy a ⱕ x ⬍ b, whereas the inter-
val (a, b] is described by the inequalities a ⬍ x ⱕ b. Examples of these finite intervals
are illustrated in Table 14.

Graph

Example

a 

a 

a 

a 

b 

b 

b 

b 

x 

x 

x 

x 

4
2

2
4

⫺1, 2

⫺2, 1

1
3
2, 34
A1
3 ⫺1
2, 3B

–3 

–2 

–1 

0 

1 

2 

3 

–1 

0 

1 

2 

0 

1 

1 
2 

2 

3 

0 

– 
1 
2 

1 

2 

3 

x 

x 

x 

x 

TABLE 14
Finite Intervals
Interval

Open:  a, b

1

2

Closed:  a, b

3

4

Half-open:  a, b

Half-open:  a, b

1
3

Infinite  intervals include  the  half-lines  (a, ⬁),  [a, ⬁),  (⫺⬁,  a),  and  (⫺⬁,  a],
defined by the set of all real numbers that satisfy x ⬎ a, x ⱖ a, x ⬍ a, and x ⱕ a,
respectively. The symbol ⬁, called infinity, is not a real number. It is used here only
for  notational  purposes  in  conjunction  with  the  definition  of  infinite  intervals.  The

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

56

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

notation (⫺⬁, ⬁) is used for the set of real numbers x, since, by definition, the inequal-
ities ⫺⬁ ⬍ x ⬍ ⬁hold for any real number x. These infinite intervals are illustrated
in Table 15.

TABLE 15
Infinite Intervals
Interval

1
3
1
1

a, ⬁

a, ⬁

2
2

⫺⬁, a

⫺⬁, a

2
4

Graph

a 

a 

a 

a 

x 

x 

x 

x 

2, ⬁

2

⫺1, ⬁

1
3
2
1
2
⫺⬁, 1
1⫺⬁, ⫺1
24

Example

0 

1 

2 

–1 

0 

0 

1 

– 1 
2 

0 

1 

2 

x 

x 

x 

x 

Inequalities
In practical applications, intervals are often found by solving one or more inequal-
ities involving a variable. To solve these inequalities, we use the properties listed
in Table 16.

TABLE 16
Properties of Inequalities
Property

Let a, b, and c be any real numbers.
1. If a ⬍ b and b ⬍ c, then a ⬍ c.
2. If a ⬍ b, then a ⫹ c ⬍ b ⫹ c.

3. If a ⬍ b and c ⬎ 0, then ac ⬍ bc.

4. If a ⬍ b and c ⬍ 0, then ac ⬎ bc.

Illustration

2 ⬍ 3 and 3 ⬍ 8, so 2 ⬍ 8.
⫺5 ⬍ ⫺3, so ⫺5 ⫹ 2 ⬍ ⫺3 ⫹ 2;

that is, ⫺3 ⬍ ⫺1.

⫺5 ⬍ ⫺3 and 2 ⬎ 0, so

(⫺5)(2) ⬍ (⫺3)(2); that is,
⫺10 ⬍ ⫺6.

⫺2 ⬍ 4 and ⫺3 ⬍ 0, so

(⫺2)(⫺3) ⬎ (4)(⫺3); that is,
6 ⬎ ⫺12.

Similar properties hold if each inequality sign, ⬍, between a and b is replaced by

ⱖ, ⬎, or ⱕ.

A real number is a solution of an inequality involving a variable if a true state-
ment is obtained when the variable is replaced by that number. The set of all real num-
bers satisfying the inequality is called the solution set.

EXAMPLE 1 Solve 3x ⫺ 2 ⬍ 7.

Solution Add 2 to each side of the inequality, obtaining

3x ⫺ 2 ⫹ 2 ⬍ 7 ⫹ 2

3x ⬍ 9

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

2

6

0
FIGURE 4
The graph of the solution set for 
⫺1 ⱕ 2x ⫺ 5 ⬍ 7

1.9 INEQUALITIES AND ABSOLUTE VALUE

57

Next, multiply each side of the inequality by  , obtaining

1
3

1
3

 13x2 ⬍ 1

3
x ⬍ 3

 192

The solution is the set of all values of x in the interval (⫺⬁, 3).

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 2 Solve ⫺1 ⱕ 2x ⫺ 5 ⬍ 7 and graph the solution set.

Solution Add 5 to each member of the double inequality, obtaining

4 ⱕ 2x ⬍ 12

Next multiply each member of the resulting double inequality by  , yielding

1
2

2 ⱕ x ⬍ 6

x

Thus, the solution is the set of all values of x lying in the interval [2, 6). The graph of
the solution set is shown in Figure 4.

Solving Inequalities by Factoring
The method of factoring can be used to solve inequalities that involve polynomials of
degree 2 or higher. This method relies on the principle that a polynomial changes sign
only at a point where its value is 0. To find the values of x where the polynomial is
equal to 0, we set the polynomial equal to 0 and then solve for x. The values obtained
can then be used to help us solve the given inequality. In Examples 3 and 4, detailed
steps are provided for this technique.

EXAMPLE 3 Solve x 2 ⫺ 5x ⫹ 6 ⬎ 0.

Solution
Step 1

Set the polynomial in the inequality equal to 0:

x2 ⫺ 5x ⫹ 6 ⫽ 0

Step 2 Factor the polynomial:

1x ⫺ 321x ⫺ 22 ⫽ 0

Step 3 Construct a sign diagram for the factors of the polynomial. We use a ⫹ to 
indicate that a factor is positive for a given value of x, a ⫺ to indicate that 
it is negative, and a 0 to indicate that it is equal to 0. Now, x ⫺ 3 ⬍ 0 
if x ⬍ 3, x ⫺ 3 ⬎ 0 if x ⬎ 3, and x ⫺ 3 ⫽ 0 if x ⫽ 3. Similarly, x ⫺ 2 ⬍ 0 if 
x ⬍ 2, x ⫺ 2 ⬎ 0 if x ⬎ 2, and x ⫺ 2 ⫽ 0 if x ⫽ 2. Using this information, we
construct the sign diagram shown in Figure 5.

Sign of
(x ⫺ 3)
(x ⫺ 2)

___________
_________

0 + + + +
+ +

+ +

0

+ +

FIGURE 5

0

2

3

x

Step 4 Determine the intervals that satisfy the given inequality. Since x 2 ⫺ 5x ⫹ 6 ⬎ 0,

we require that the product of the two factors be positive—that is, that both 
factors have the same sign. From the sign diagram, we see that the two 
factors have the same sign when x ⬍ 2 or x ⬎ 3. Thus, the solution set is 
(⫺⬁, 2) 傼 (3, ⬁).

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

58

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

EXAMPLE 4 Solve x 2 ⫹ 2x ⫺ 8 ⬍ 0.

Solution
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3

x 2 ⫹ 2x ⫺ 8 ⫽ 0
1x ⫹ 421x ⫺ 22 ⫽ 0, so x ⫽ ⫺4 or x ⫽ 2.
x ⫹ 4 ⬎ 0 when x ⬎ ⫺4, x ⫹ 4 ⬍ 0 when x ⬍ ⫺4, and x ⫹ 4 ⫽ 0 when 
x ⫽ ⫺4. Similarly, x ⫺ 2 ⬎ 0 when x ⬎ 2, x ⫺ 2 ⬍ 0 when x ⬍ 2, and 
x ⫺ 2 ⫽ 0 when x ⫽ 2. Using these results, we construct the sign diagram
for the factors of x 2 ⫹ 2x ⫺ 8 (Figure 6).

Sign of
(x ⫹ 4)
(x ⫺ 2)

++++++++0__
____

___

__

++++
0

_____

++++
++++

++
++

FIGURE 6

⫺5

⫺4

⫺3

⫺2

⫺1

0

1

2

3

4

5

x

Step 4

Since x 2 ⫹ 2x ⫺ 8 ⬍ 0, the product of the two factors must be negative; that
is, the signs of the two factors must differ. From the sign diagram, we see that
the two factors x ⫹ 4 and x ⫺ 2 have opposite signs when x lies strictly
between ⫺4 and 2. Therefore, the required solution is the interval (⫺4, 2).

Solving Inequalities Involving a Quotient
The next two examples show how an inequality involving the quotient of two alge-
braic expressions is solved.

EXAMPLE 5 Solve 

x ⫹ 1
x ⫺ 1

ⱖ 0.

Solution The quotient 1x ⫹ 12>1x ⫺ 12 is positive (greater than 0) when the numer-
ator and denominator have the same sign. The signs of x ⫹ 1 and x ⫺ 1 are shown
in Figure 7.

Sign of
(x ⫹ 1)
(x ⫺ 1)

__
__

____
_____

++++0
0

_ _

_

++++
++++

++
++

FIGURE 7

⫺4

⫺3

⫺2

⫺1

0

1

2

3

4

x

From the sign diagram, we see that x ⫹ 1 and x ⫺ 1 have the same sign when 
x ⬍ ⫺1 or x ⬎ 1. The quotient 1x ⫹ 12>1x ⫺ 12 is equal to 0 when x ⫽ ⫺1. It is
undefined at x ⫽ 1, since the denominator is 0 at that point. Therefore, the required
solution is the set of all x in the intervals (⫺⬁, ⫺1] and (1, ⬁).

EXAMPLE 6 Solve 

2x ⫺ 1
x ⫺ 2

ⱖ 1.

Solution We rewrite the given inequality so that the right side is equal to 0:

2x ⫺ 1
x ⫺ 2

⫺ 1 ⱖ 0

2x ⫺ 1 ⫺ 1x ⫺ 22
2x ⫺ 1 ⫺ x ⫹ 2

x ⫺ 2

ⱖ 0

ⱖ 0

ⱖ 0

x ⫺ 2

x ⫹ 1
x ⫺ 2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

1.9 INEQUALITIES AND ABSOLUTE VALUE

59

Next we construct the sign diagram for the factors in the numerator and the denomi-
nator (Figure 8).

FIGURE 8

⫺1

0

2

Sign of
(x ⫹ 1)
(x ⫺ 2)

__
__

__
_____

++++++0
0

_ _

_

+++
+++

+
+

x

Since the quotient of these two factors must be positive or equal to 0, we require

that the sign of each factor be the same or that the quotient of the two factors be
equal to 0. From the sign diagram, we see that the solution set is given by (⫺⬁, ⫺1]
and (2, ⬁). Note that x ⫽ 2 is not included in the second interval, since division by 0
is not allowed.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 7 Gross Domestic Product The gross domestic product
(GDP) of a certain country is projected to be t 2 ⫹ 2t ⫹ 50 billion dollars 
t years from now. Find the time t when the GDP of the country will first equal or
exceed $58 billion.

Solution The GDP of the country will equal or exceed $58 billion when

To solve this inequality for t, we first write it in the form

t 2 ⫹ 2t ⫹ 50 ⱖ 58

The sign diagram for the factors of t 2 ⫹ 2t ⫺ 8 is shown in Figure 9.

t 2 ⫹ 2t ⫺ 8 ⱖ 0
t ⫹ 4 t ⫺ 2 ⱖ 0

12

2

1

FIGURE 9

⫺4

0

2

Sign of
(t ⫹ 4)
(t ⫺ 2)

__
__

_
_____

+++++++0
0

_ _

_

+++
+++

+
+

t

From the sign diagram, we see that the solution set is (⫺⬁, ⫺4] 傼 [2, ⬁). 

Since t must be nonnegative for the problem to be meaningful, we see that the GDP
of the country is greater than or equal to $58 billion when t ⱖ 2; that is, the GDP
will first equal or exceed $58 billion when t ⫽ 2, or 2 years from now.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 8 Stock Purchase The management of Corbyco, a giant
conglomerate, has estimated that x thousand dollars is needed to purchase

100,000 ⫺1 ⫹

1

21 ⫹ 0.001x

2

shares of common stock of the Starr Communications Company. Determine how
much money Corbyco needs in order to purchase at least 100,000 shares of
Starr’s stock.

Solution The amount of cash Corbyco needs to purchase at least 100,000 shares
is found by solving the inequality
100,000 ⫺1 ⫹

21 ⫹ 0.001x

ⱖ 100,000

2

1

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

60

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

冷5冷

冷5冷

5

a

冷a冷

0

0

–5

(a)

冷a冷

–a

(b)
FIGURE 10

x

x

Proceeding, we find

⫺1 ⫹

21 ⫹ 0.001x
21 ⫹ 0.001x

ⱖ 1
ⱖ 2
1 ⫹ 0.001x ⱖ 4
0.001x ⱖ 3

x ⱖ 3000

Square both sides.

so Corbyco needs at least $3,000,000. (Remember, x is measured in thousands of
dollars.)

Absolute Value

Absolute Value
The absolute value of a number a is denoted by 兩 a 兩 and is defined by

兩 a 兩 ⫽ 冦⫺a

a

if a ⱖ 0
if a ⬍ 0

Since ⫺a is a positive number when a is negative, it follows that the absolute value
of a number is always nonnegative. For example, 兩 5 兩 ⫽ 5 and 兩 ⫺5 兩 ⫽ ⫺(⫺5) ⫽ 5.
Geometrically, 兩 a 兩 is the distance between the origin and the point on the number line
that represents the number a (Figure 10a and b).

The  absolute  value  properties  are  given  in  Table  17.  Property  4  is  called  the 

triangle inequality.

TABLE 17
Absolute Value Properties
Property

If a and b are any real numbers, then
1.

兩 ⫺a 兩 ⫽ 兩 a 兩
兩 ab 兩 ⫽ 兩 a 兩兩 b 兩

2.

3. 冨

冨 ⫽

a
b

兩 a 兩
兩 b 兩

4.

兩 a ⫹ b 兩 ⱕ 兩 a 兩 ⫹ 兩 b 兩

冨

EXAMPLE 9 Evaluate:
a.
b.

兩 ␲ ⫺ 5 兩 ⫹ 3

13 ⫺ 2

兩

兩 ⫹ 兩 2 ⫺

13

兩

Illustration

兩 ⫺3 兩 ⫽ ⫺1⫺32 ⫽ 3 ⫽ 兩 3 兩
兩1221⫺32兩 ⫽ 兩 ⫺6 兩 ⫽ 6

⫽ 兩 2 兩兩 ⫺3 兩

冨 ⫽冨

冨 ⫽ ⫽
⫺3
⫺4
兩 8 ⫹ 1⫺52兩 ⫽ 兩 3 兩 ⫽ 3

3
4

3
4

兩 ⫺3 兩
兩 ⫺4 兩

ⱕ 兩 8 兩 ⫹ 兩 ⫺5 兩 ⫽ 13

Solution

a. Since ␲ ⫺ 5 ⬍ 0, we see that 兩 ␲ ⫺ 5 兩 ⫽ ⫺1␲ ⫺ 52. Therefore,

兩 ␲ ⫺ 5 兩 ⫹ 3 ⫽ ⫺1␲ ⫺ 52 ⫹ 3 ⫽ ⫺␲ ⫹ 5 ⫹ 3 ⫽ 8 ⫺ ␲

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

1.9 INEQUALITIES AND ABSOLUTE VALUE

61

b. Since 

13

2 ⫺
兩

13 ⫺ 2
13 ⫺ 2
13
兩 ⫽ ⫺1
⫺ 2 ⬍ 0, we see that 兩
13
13
⬎ 0, so 兩 2 ⫺
兩 ⫽ 2 ⫺
13
13
13
⫺ 22 ⫹ 12 ⫺
2 ⫽ ⫺
⫺ 2 兩 ⫹ 兩 2 ⫺
13
13
2
⫽ 212 ⫺
EXAMPLE 10 Solve the inequalities 兩 x 兩 ⱕ 5 and 兩 x 兩 ⱖ 5.

13
兩 ⫽ ⫺1
⫽ 4 ⫺ 2

. Therefore,

2. Next observe that
13
13
⫹2  ⫹ 2 ⫺

Solution We first consider the inequality 兩 x 兩 ⱕ 5. If x ⬎ 0, then 兩 x 兩 ⫽ x, so 
兩 x 兩 ⱕ 5 implies x ⱕ 5 in this case. However, if x ⬍ 0, then 兩 x 兩 ⫽ ⫺x, so 兩 x 兩 ⱕ 5
implies that ⫺x ⱕ 5, or x ⱖ ⫺5. Thus, 兩 x 兩 ⱕ 5 means ⫺5 ⱕ x ⱕ 5 (Figure 11a).
Alternatively, observe that 兩 x 兩 is the distance from the point x to 0, so the inequality 
兩 x 兩 ⱕ 5 implies immediately that ⫺5 ⱕ x ⱕ 5.

Next, the inequality 兩 x 兩 ⱖ 5 states that the distance from x to 0 is greater than or

equal to 5. This observation yields the result x ⱖ 5 or x ⱕ ⫺5 (Figure 11b).

FIGURE 11

–5

0

5

(a) 兩 x 兩 ⱕ 5

x

x

–5

0

5

(b) 兩 x 兩 ⱖ 5

The results of Example 10 may be generalized. Thus, if k ⬎ 0, then 兩 x 兩 ⱕ k is

equivalent to ⫺k ⱕ x ⱕ k, and 兩 x 兩 ⱖ k is equivalent to x ⱖ k or x ⱕ ⫺k.

EXAMPLE 11 Solve the inequality 兩 2x ⫺ 3 兩 ⱕ 1.

Solution The inequality 兩 2x ⫺ 3 兩 ⱕ 1 is equivalent to the inequalities 
⫺1 ⱕ 2x ⫺ 3 ⱕ 1 (see Example 10). Then

2 ⱕ 2x ⱕ 4

Add 3 to each member of the inequality.

and

1 ⱕ x ⱕ 2

Multiply each member of the inequality by 

1
2

.

Therefore, the solution is given by the set of all x in the interval [1, 2] (Figure 12).

EXAMPLE 12 Solve the inequality 兩 5x ⫹ 7 兩 ⱖ 18.

Solution Referring to Example 10 once again, we see that 兩 5x ⫹ 7 兩 ⱖ 18 is equiv-
alent to

5x ⫹ 7 ⱕ ⫺18 or 5x ⫹ 7 ⱖ 18

That is,

5x ⱕ ⫺25 or 5x ⱖ 11
11
5

x ⱕ ⫺5

x ⱖ

Therefore, the solution is given by the set of all x in the interval (⫺⬁, ⫺5] or the
interval 

(Figure 13).

3 11
5 , ⬁2

x

x

0

1

2

FIGURE 12
兩 2x ⫺ 3 兩 ⱕ 1

⫺5

0

11
5

FIGURE 13
兩 5x ⫹ 7 兩 ⱖ 18

1.9 Self-Check Exercises

1. Solve ⫺1 ⬍ 2x ⫺ 1 ⱕ 5, and graph the solution set.

2. Solve 6x 2 ⫺ 5x ⫺ 4 ⱕ 0.

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 1.9 can be found on 
page 64.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

62

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

1.9 Concept Questions

1. State the properties of inequalities. Illustrate with examples.
2. What is the absolute value of a number a? Can 兩 a 兩 be neg-

ative? Explain.

1.9 Exercises

3. State the absolute value properties. Illustrate with examples. 

In  Exercises  1–4,  determine  whether  the  statement  is  true  or
false.
1. ⫺3 ⬍ ⫺20

2. ⫺5 ⱕ ⫺5

35.

37.

兩 ␲ ⫺ 1 兩 ⫹ 2
22
兩

⫺ 1 兩 ⫹ 兩 3 ⫺

22

兩

36.

38.

兩 ␲ ⫺ 6 兩 ⫺ 3
23
兩 2

⫺ 3 兩 ⫺ 兩

23

⫺ 4 兩

3. ⬎

2
3

5
6

4. ⫺ ⬍ ⫺

5
6

11
12

In Exercises 39–44, suppose a and b are real numbers other than
0 and a ⬎ b. State whether the inequality is true or false.

In Exercises 5–10, show the interval on a number line.
5. 3, 6

6. ⫺2, 5

2
7. ⫺1, 4
2

9. 0, ⬁

1
3
1

2

8.

1
c ⫺6
1

5

4
, ⫺1
2d
4

10. ⫺⬁, 5

In Exercises 11–28, find the values of x that satisfy the inequali-
ties.
11. 2x ⫹ 2 ⬍ 8

12. ⫺6 ⬎ 4 ⫹ 5x

13. ⫺4x ⱖ 20

14. ⫺12 ⱕ ⫺3x

15. ⫺6 ⬍ x ⫺ 2 ⬍ 4

16. 0 ⱕ x ⫹ 1 ⱕ 4

17. x ⫹ 1 ⬎ 4 or x ⫹ 2 ⬍ ⫺1

18. x ⫹ 1 ⬎ 2 or x ⫺ 1 ⬍ ⫺2

19. x ⫹ 3 ⬎ 1 and x ⫺ 2 ⬍ 1

20. x ⫺ 4 ⱕ 1 and x ⫹ 3 ⬎ 2

21. x ⫹ 3 x ⫺ 5 ⱕ 0

22. 2x ⫺ 4 x ⫹ 2 ⱖ 0

23. 2x ⫺ 3 x ⫺ 1 ⱕ 0

24. 3x ⫺ 4 2x ⫹ 2 ⱕ 0

2

2

1
1
x ⫹ 3
x ⫺ 2

12
12
ⱖ 0

x ⫺ 2
x ⫺ 1

ⱕ 2

25.

27.

2

2

1
1
2x ⫺ 3
x ⫹ 1

12
12
ⱖ 4

2x ⫺ 1
x ⫹ 2

ⱕ 4

26.

28.

39. b ⫺ a ⬎ 0

41. a2 ⬎ b2

40. ⬎ 1

a
b

42. ⬎

1
a

1
b

43. a3 ⬎ b3
45. Write the inequality 兩 x ⫺ a 兩 ⬍ b without using absolute

44. ⫺a ⬍ ⫺b

values.

46. Write the inequality 兩 x ⫺ a 兩 ⱖ b without using absolute

values.

In Exercises 47–52, determine whether the statement is true for
all real numbers a and b.
47.

48.

兩 ⫺a 兩 ⫽ a
兩 a ⫺ 4 兩 ⫽ 兩 4 ⫺ a 兩
兩 a ⫹ b 兩 ⫽ 兩 a 兩 ⫹ 兩 b 兩

49.

51.

兩 b2 兩 ⫽ b2
兩 a ⫹ 1 兩 ⫽ 兩 a 兩 ⫹ 1
兩 a ⫺ b 兩 ⫽ 兩 a 兩 ⫺ 兩 b 兩

50.

52.

53. Find the minimum cost C (in dollars) given that

1
5 C ⫺ 25 ⱖ 1.75 ⫹ 2.5C

2

54. Find the maximum profit P (in dollars) given that

1
6 P ⫺ 2500 ⱕ 4 P ⫹ 2400

1

2

2

In Exercises 29–38, evaluate the expression.
29.

兩 ⫺6 ⫹ 2 兩
兩 ⫺12 ⫹ 4 兩
兩 16 ⫺ 12 兩
23

31.

33.

兩 ⫺2 兩 ⫹ 3 兩 ⫺

23

兩

30. 4 ⫹ 兩 ⫺4 兩
32. 冨

0.2 ⫺ 1.4
1.6 ⫺ 2.4
兩 ⫺1 兩 ⫹

冨
22

34.

55. DRIVING RANGE OF A CAR An advertisement for a certain car
states  that  the  EPA  fuel  economy  is  20  mpg  city  and 
27  mpg  highway  and  that  the  car’s  fuel-tank  capacity  is 
18.1 gal. Assuming ideal driving conditions, determine the
driving range for the car from the foregoing data.

56. CELSIUS AND FAHRENHEIT TEMPERATURES The  relationship
between Celsius (°C) and Fahrenheit (°F) temperatures is
given by the formula

兩 ⫺2 兩

C ⫽ F ⫺ 322

15

9

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

a. If the temperature range for Montreal during the month
of  January  is  ⫺15° ⬍ C° ⬍ ⫺5°,  find  the  range  in
degrees Fahrenheit in Montreal for the same period.

b. If the temperature range for New York City during the
month  of  June  is  63° ⬍ F° ⬍ 80°,  find  the  range  in
degrees Celsius in New York City for the same period.

57. MEETING SALES TARGETS A salesman’s monthly commission
is 15% on all sales over $12,000. If his goal is to make a
commission  of  at  least  $6000/month,  what  minimum
monthly sales figures must he attain?

58. MARKUP ON A CAR The markup on a used car was at least
30% of its current wholesale price. If the car was sold for
$11,200, what was the maximum wholesale price?

59. MEETING PROFIT GOALS A  manufacturer  of  a  certain  com-
modity has estimated that her profit (in thousands of dol-
lars) is given by the expression

⫺6x 2 ⫹ 30x ⫺ 10

where  x (in  thousands)  is  the  number  of  units  produced.
What  production  range  will  enable  the  manufacturer  to
realize a profit of at least $14,000 on the commodity?

60. CONCENTRATION OF A DRUG IN THE BLOODSTREAM The concen-
tration (in milligrams/cubic centimeter) of a certain drug in
a patient’s bloodstream t hr after injection is given by

0.2t
t 2 ⫹ 1

Find  the  interval  of  time  when  the  concentration  of  the
drug is greater than or equal to 0.08 mg/cc.

61. COST OF REMOVING TOXIC POLLUTANTS A city’s main well was
recently found to be contaminated with trichloroethylene (a
cancer-causing chemical) as a result of an abandoned chem-
ical dump that leached chemicals into the water. A proposal
submitted to the city council indicated that the cost, in mil-
lions of dollars, of removing x% of the toxic pollutants is

0.5x

100 ⫺ x

If the city could raise between $25 and $30 million inclu-
sive for the purpose of removing the toxic pollutants, what
is  the  range  of  pollutants  that  could  be  expected  to  be
removed?

62. AVERAGE SPEED OF A VEHICLE The average speed of a vehi-
cle  in  miles  per  hour  on  a  stretch  of  route  134  between 
6 A.M. and 10 A.M. on a typical weekday is approximated
by the expression

20t ⫺ 402t ⫹ 50        10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

where t is measured in hours, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
6 A.M. Over what interval of time is the average speed of a
vehicle less than or equal to 35 mph?

1.9 INEQUALITIES AND ABSOLUTE VALUE

63

63. EFFECT OF BACTERICIDE The number of bacteria in a certain
culture  t min  after  an  experimental  bactericide  is  intro-
duced is given by

10,000
t 2 ⫹ 1

⫹ 2000

Find  the  time  when  the  number  of  bacteria  will  have
dropped below 4000.

64. AIR POLLUTION Nitrogen  dioxide  is  a  brown  gas  that
impairs breathing. The amount of nitrogen dioxide  present
in the atmosphere on a certain May day in the city of Long
Beach measured in PSI (pollutant standard index) at time t,
where  t is  measured  in  hours,  and  t ⫽ 0  corresponds  to 
7 A.M., is approximated by 

136

1 ⫹ 0.251t ⫺ 4.52 2

⫹ 28    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 112

Find the time of the day when the amount of nitrogen diox-
ide is greater than or equal to 128 PSI.
Source: Los Angeles Times.

65. A ball is thrown straight up so that its height after t sec is

128t ⫺ 16t 2 ⫹ 4

ft. Determine the length of time the ball stays at or above a
height of 196 ft.

66. DISTRIBUTION OF INCOME The  distribution  of  income  in  a
certain  city  can  be  described  by  the  mathematical  model 

y ⫽ 15.6 ⭈ 101121x2⫺1.5, where y is the number of families

with an income of x or more dollars.
a. How  many  families  in  this  city  have  an  income  of

$30,000 or more?

b. How  many  families  have  an  income  of  $60,000  or

more?

c. How  many  families  have  an  income  of  $150,000  or

more?

67. QUALITY CONTROL PAR Manufacturing Company manufac-
tures  steel  rods.  Suppose  the  rods  ordered  by  a  customer
are  manufactured  to  a  specification  of  0.5  in.  and  are
acceptable  only  if  they  are  within  the  tolerance  limits of
0.49 in. and 0.51 in. Letting x denote the diameter of a rod,
write an inequality using absolute value to express a crite-
rion involving x that must be satisfied in order for a rod to
be acceptable.

68. QUALITY CONTROL The diameter x (in inches) of a batch of
ball bearings manufactured by PAR Manufacturing satis-
fies the inequality

兩 x ⫺ 0.1兩 ⱕ 0.01

What  is  the  smallest  diameter  a  ball  bearing  in  the  batch
can have? The largest diameter?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

64

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

1.9 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1.

⫺1 ⬍ 2x ⫺ 1 ⱕ 5

⫺1 ⫹ 1 ⬍ 2x ⫺ 1 ⫹ 1 ⱕ 5 ⫹ 1

0 ⬍ 2x ⱕ 6
0 ⬍ x ⱕ 3

Add 1 to each member of
the inequality.
Combine like terms.
Multiply each member of
the inequality by ᎏ1
ᎏ.
2

We conclude that the solution set is (0, 3]. The graph of the
solution set is shown in the following figure:

0

3

x

2. Step 1
Step 2
Step 3

6x 2 ⫺ 5x ⫺ 4 ⱕ 0
13x ⫺ 4212x ⫹ 12 ⱕ 0
3x ⫺ 4 ⬎ 0 when x ⬎ , 3x ⫺ 4 ⫽ 0 when x ⫽ , 4
3
and 3x ⫺ 4 ⬍ 0 when x ⬍ . Similarly, 2x ⫹ 1 ⬎ 0 
when  x ⬎ ⫺ ,  2x ⫹ 1  ⫽ 0  when  x ⫽ ⫺ ,  and 

4
3

4
3

1
2

1
2

2x ⫹ 1 ⬍ 0 when x ⬍ ⫺ . Using these results, we 
construct the following sign diagram for the factors
of 6x 2 ⫺ 5x ⫺ 4:

1
2

Sign of
(3x ⫺ 4)
(2x ⫹ 1)

_____
____

0

_____

+++++

++

0
+ +

+ +
+

+ +

⫺

1
2

0

4
3

x

Step 4

Since  6x 2 ⫺ 5x ⫺ 4  ⱕ 0,  the  signs  of  the  two 
factors  must  differ  or  be  equal  to  0.  From  the 
sign  diagram,  we  see  that  x must  lie  between  ⫺1
2
4
and  , inclusive. Therefore, the required solution is 
3
3 ⫺1
34
2, 4

.

CHAPTER 1

Summary of Principal Formulas and Terms

FORMULAS

1. Product formula

2. Quadratic formula

3. Difference of two squares
4. Perfect square trinomial

5. Sum of two cubes
6. Difference of two cubes

TERMS

natural number (2)
whole number (2)
integer (2)
rational number (2)
irrational number (2)
real number (2)
exponent (7)
base (7)
polynomial (9)
rational expression (20)
complex fraction (23)
zero exponent (28)

x ⫽

1a ⫹ b22 ⫽ a2 ⫹ 2ab ⫹ b2
1a ⫺ b22 ⫽ a2 ⫺ 2ab ⫹ b2
1a ⫹ b21a ⫺ b2 ⫽ a2 ⫺ b2
⫺b ⫾ 2b2 ⫺ 4ac
a2 ⫺ b2 ⫽ 1a ⫹ b21a ⫺ b2
a2 ⫹ 2ab ⫹ b2 ⫽ 1a ⫹ b22
a2 ⫺ 2ab ⫹ b2 ⫽ 1a ⫺ b22
a3 ⫹ b3 ⫽ 1a ⫹ b21a2 ⫺ ab ⫹ b22
a3 ⫺ b3 ⫽ 1a ⫺ b21a2 ⫹ ab ⫹ b22

2a

equation (31)
variable (31)
solution of an equation (32)
solution set (32)
linear equation (32)
extraneous solution (34)
nth root (37)
square root (37)
cube root (37)
radical (38)
radical sign (38)
radicand (38)

index (38)
conjugate (42)
quadratic equation (46)
discriminant (51)
finite interval (55)
open interval (55)
closed interval (55)
half-open interval (55)
infinite interval (55)
absolute value (60)
triangle inequality (60)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

11
a2

CHAPTER 1

Concept Review Questions

Fill in the blanks.
1. a. A number of the form  , where a and b are integers, with 
b ⬆ 0 is called a/an _____ number. A rational number
can be represented by either a/an _____ or _____ deci-
mal.

a
b

b. A real number that is not rational is called _____. When
such  a  number  is  represented  by  a  decimal,  it  neither
_____ nor _____.

2. a. Under addition, we have a ⫹ b ⫽ _____, a ⫹ (b ⫹ c) ⫽

_____, a ⫹ 0 ⫽ _____, and a ⫹ (⫺a) ⫽ _____.

b. Under  multiplication,  we  have  ab ⫽ _____,  a(bc)  ⫽

_____, a ⭈ 1 ⫽ _____, and a ⫽ _____ (a ⬆ 0).

c. Under addition and multiplication, we have a(b ⫹ c) ⫽

_____.

3. a. If a and b are numbers, then  ⫺(⫺a)  ⫽ _____, (⫺a)b ⫽
_____, (⫺a)(⫺b) ⫽ _____, (⫺1)a ⫽ ⫺a, and a ⭈ 0 ⫽ 0.

b. If ab ⫽ 0, then a ⫽ _____, or b ⫽ _____, or both.

4. a. An expression of the form an xn ⫹ an⫺1xn⫺1 ⫹ . . . ⫹ a0
is called a/an _____ in _____; the nonnegative integer n
is  called  its  _____;  the  expression  akxk is  called  the
_____ of the _____; and ak is called the _____ of xk.

b. To add or subtract two polynomials, we add or subtract

_____ terms.

5. To factor a polynomial, we express it as a/an _____ of two
or more _____ polynomials. For example, x3 ⫹ x2 ⫺ 2x ⫽
_____.

6. a. A rational expression is a quotient of _____.

b. A  rational  expression  is  simplified  or  reduced  to  lowest
terms if the _____ and the _____ have no common _____
other than _____ and _____.

c. To add or subtract rational expressions, first find the least
common  _____ of  the  expressions,  if  necessary.  Then
follow  the  procedure  for  adding  and  subtracting  _____
with common denominators.

CHAPTER 1

Review Exercises

In Exercises 1–6, classify the number as to type.

1.

7
8

4. 0

2.

213
5. 2.7苶1苶

3. ⫺2␲

6. 3.14159. . .

In Exercises 7–14, evaluate the expression.

7.

4b 3/2
a 9
1
2
9. 3 ⴢ 4 ⫺2

8.

56
54
1

10. ⫺8 5/32

REVIEW EXERCISES

65

7. A rational expression that contains fractions in its numera-
tor or denominator is called a/an _____ fraction. An exam-
ple of a compound fraction is _____.

8. a. If a is any real number and n is a natural number, then 
an ⫽ _____. The number a is the _____, and the super-
script n is called the _____, or _____.

b. For  any  nonzero  real  number  a,  a0 ⫽ _____.  The

expression 00 is _____ _____.

c. If a is any nonzero number and n is a positive integer,

then a⫺n ⫽ _____.

9. a. A statement that two mathematical statements are equal

is called a/an _____.

b. A variable is a letter that stands for a/an _____ belong-

ing to a set of real numbers.

c. A linear equation in the variable  x is an equation that
can be written in the form _____; a linear equation in x
has degree _____ in x.

10. a. If n is a natural number and a and b are real numbers,

we say that a is the nth root of b if _____.

b. If n is even, the real nth roots of a positive number b

must come in _____.

c. If n is even and b is negative, then there are _____ real

roots.

d. If n is odd, then there is only one _____ _____ of b.

11. a. If n is a natural number and b is a real number, then 

is called a/an _____; also, 

⫽ _____.

2n b

b. To rationalize a denominator of an algebraic expression

means to eliminate a/an _____ from the denominator.

12. a. A  quadratic  equation  is  an  equation  in  x that  can  be

written in the form _____.

b. A quadratic equation can be solved by _____, by _____
_____ _____,  or  by  using  the  quadratic  formula.  The
quadratic formula is _____.

11.

13.

9 b 3/2
a 16
B3 27

125

13 #  2⫺3214 #  352
2 #  93
323 5423 18

12.

14.

2n b

In  Exercises  15–22,  simplify  the  expression.  (Assume  that  all 
variables are positive.)

41x 2 ⫹ y2 3

x 2 ⫹ y

15.

16.

a6b⫺5
1a3b⫺22 ⫺3

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ALGEBRA

66

17.

19.

21.

24 16x5yz
24 81xyz5
a 3xy 2
 a 3xy 3
4x 3yb ⫺2
2x 2 b 3
23 81x 5y10 23 9xy 2

18. 2x 3 ⫺3x⫺2

1

12

2

a 1

6

 x⫺1/2b

2
20. ⫺3a2b3 2 2a⫺1b⫺2 ⫺1

1
1
2
a ⫺x 1/2y 2/3
x 1/3y 3/4 b 6

22.

In Exercises 47–54, solve the equation.
47. 8x 2 ⫹ 2x ⫺ 3 ⫽ 0

48. ⫺6x 2 ⫺ 10x ⫹ 4 ⫽ 0

49. 2x 2 ⫺ 3x ⫺ 4 ⫽ 0

50. x 2 ⫹ 5x ⫹ 3 ⫽ 0

51. 2y 2 ⫺ 3y ⫹ 1 ⫽ 0

52. 0.3m2 ⫺ 2.1m ⫺ 3.2 ⫽ 0

53. ⫺x 3 ⫺ 2x 2 ⫹ 3x ⫽ 0

54. 2x 4 ⫹ x 2 ⫽ 1

In Exercises 55–62, solve the equation.

56.

3p ⫹ 1

2

⫺

2p ⫺ 1

3

⫽

5p
12

In  Exercises  23–30,  perform  the  indicated  operations  and  sim-
plify the expression.
23. 3x 4 ⫹ 10x 3 ⫹ 6x 2 ⫹ 10x ⫹ 3 ⫹ 2x 4 ⫹ 10x 3 ⫹ 6x 2 ⫹ 4x

2

1

2

1
1
1

1

2

24. 3x ⫺ 4 3x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫹ 3
2

25. 2x ⫹ 3y 2 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 1 (2x ⫺ 3
1

1
2
1t ⫹ 621602 ⫺ 160t ⫹ 1802

12
2
2
13
1t ⫹ 62 2

2

26. 2 3a ⫹ b ⫺ 3 2a ⫹ 3b ⫺ a ⫹ 2b

42

58.

59.

60.

55.

1
4

 x ⫹ 2 ⫽ 3
4

 x ⫺ 5
2
1
3q ⫹ 1
2q ⫹ 1

1

2
57. x ⫹ 2 2 ⫺ 3x 1 ⫺ x ⫽ x ⫺ 2 2

2
1
312q ⫹ 12
4q ⫺ 3
2k ⫺ 1 ⫽ 22k ⫺ 3
2x ⫺ 2x ⫺ 1 ⫽ 24x ⫺ 3

⫽

61. Solve C ⫽

62. Solve r ⫽

20x

100 ⫺ x

for x.

2mI

B1n ⫹ 12

for I.

In Exercises 63–66, find the values of x that satisfy the inequal-
ities.
63. ⫺x ⫹ 3 ⱕ 2x ⫹ 9

64. ⫺2 ⱕ 3x ⫹ 1 ⱕ 7

65. x ⫺ 3 ⬎ 2 or x ⫹ 3 ⬍ ⫺1

66. 2x 2 ⬎ 50

In Exercises 67–70, evaluate the expression.
5 ⫺ 12
⫺4 ⫺ 3

兩 ⫺5 ⫹ 7 兩 ⫹ 兩 ⫺2 兩

68. 冨

67.

冨

69.

兩 2␲ ⫺ 6 兩 ⫺ ␲

70.

兩

⫺ 4 兩 ⫹ 兩 4 ⫺ 2

13

13

兩

In Exercises 71–76, find the value(s) of x that satisfy the expres-
sion.

71. 2x 2 ⫹ 3x ⫺ 2 ⱕ 0

72. x 2 ⫹ x ⫺ 12 ⱕ 0

73.

1

x ⫹ 2

⬎ 2

75.

兩 3x ⫺ 4 兩 ⱕ 2

74.

76. 冨

兩 2x ⫺ 3 兩 ⬍ 5
冨 ⫽ 5

x ⫹ 1
x ⫺ 1

77. Rationalize the numerator:

2x ⫺ 1

x ⫺ 1

78. Rationalize the numerator:

B3 x 2

yz 3

27.

28.

29.

30.

42.

43.

44.

46.

6x

1

41x ⫹ 22

4x

2
3

213x 2 ⫹ 22 ⫹
 a
⫺2x2x ⫹ 1

2x 2 ⫺ 1b ⫹ 3a
⫹ 42x ⫹ 1

3

3x ⫺ 1b

In Exercises 31–40, factor the expression.
31. ⫺2␲ 2r 3 ⫹ 100␲r 2

33. 16 ⫺ x 2

32. 2√ 3w ⫹ 2√w 3 ⫹ 2u2√w
34. 12t 3 ⫺ 6t 2 ⫺ 18t

35. ⫺2x 2 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 6

36. 12x 2 ⫺ 92x ⫹ 120
38. 8u6√3 ⫹ 27u3
39. 6a4b4c ⫺ 3a3b2c ⫺ 9a2b2 40. 6x 2 ⫺ xy ⫺ y2

37. 9a2 ⫺ 25b2

41.

In  Exercises  41–46,  perform  the  indicated  operations  and  sim-
plify the expression.
2x 2 ⫹ 3x ⫺ 2
2x 2 ⫹ 5x ⫺ 3
31t 2 ⫹ 4212t ⫺ 424 ⫺ 1t 2 ⫺ 4t ⫹ 4212t2

1t 2 ⫹ 42 2
x 2 ⫹ 6x ⫹ 9

x 2 ⫺ 9

  #  

2x ⫺ 6
x ⫹ 3

45.

1 ⫹ 1

x ⫹ 2

x ⫺ 9
x

3x

⫹ 3x 2
x 3 ⫹ 1

x 2 ⫹ 2
x13x 2 ⫹ 12
x ⫺ 1

  #  

3x 3 ⫺ 5x 2 ⫹ x

x1x ⫺ 1213x 2 ⫹ 12 1/2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

79. Rationalize the denominator:

2x ⫺ 1
22x

80. Rationalize the denominator:

3

1 ⫹ 22x

BEFORE MOVING ON . . .

67

In  Exercises  81  and  82,  use  the  quadratic  formula  to  solve  the
quadratic equation.
81. x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 5 ⫽ 0

82. 2x 2 ⫹ 8x ⫹ 7 ⫽ 0

83. Find the minimum cost C (in dollars) given that

1
2 1.5C ⫹ 80 ⱕ 2 2.5C ⫺ 20

1

2

2

84. Find the maximum revenue R (in dollars) given that

12 2R ⫺ 320 ⱕ 4 3R ⫹ 2402
1

1

2

The problem-solving skills that you learn in each chapter are building blocks for the rest of the course. Therefore, it is a good 
idea to make sure that you have mastered these skills before moving on to the next chapter. The Before Moving On exercises that
follow are designed for that purpose. After taking this test, you can see where your weaknesses, if any, are. Then you can log in 
at www.cengagebrain.com where you will find a link to CourseMate. Here, you can access additional Concept Quiz and Concept
Review modules.

If you feel that you need additional help with these exercises, at this Website you can also use Tutorial Example Videos.

CHAPTER 1

Before Moving On . . .

1. Perform the indicated operations and simplify: 

1
2 3x ⫺ 2 2 ⫺ 3x x ⫹ 1 ⫹ 4

2

1

2

2. Factor: 

a. x 4 ⫺ x3 ⫺ 6x 2
1
b. a ⫺ b 2 ⫺ a 2 ⫹ b 2

1

2

2

3. Perform the indicated operation and simplify: 

2x

3x 2 ⫺ 5x ⫺ 2

⫹

x ⫺ 1

x 2 ⫺ x ⫺ 2

4. Simplify 

a 8x 2y⫺3
9x⫺3y 2b ⫺1a 2x 2
3y 3b 2

.

5. Solve 2s ⫽

r

s ⫹ r

for r.

6. Rationalize the denominator in the expression

2 ⫺ 23
2 ⫹ 23

7. a. Solve 2x 2 ⫹ 5x ⫺ 12 ⫽ 0 by factoring.

b. Solve m2 ⫺ 3m ⫺ 2 ⫽ 0.

2x ⫹ 4

⫺

8. Solve 

2x ⫺ 5

⫺ 1 ⫽ 0.

9. Find the values of x that satisfy  3x ⫹ 2 2x ⫺ 3 ⱕ 0.
10. Find the values of x that satisfy 兩 2x ⫹ 3 兩 ⱕ 1.

12

2

1

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2

FUNCTIONS AND
THEIR GRAPHS

© istockphoto.com/kali9

THIS CHAPTER INTRODUCES the Cartesian coordinate system,

a system that allows us to represent points in the plane in

terms of ordered pairs of real numbers. This in turn enables us to

study geometry, using algebraic methods. Specifically, we will see

how straight lines in the plane can be represented by algebraic

equations. Next, we study functions, which are special

relationships between two quantities. These relationships, or

mathematical models, can be found in fields of study as diverse as

business, economics, the social sciences, physics, and medicine.

We study in detail two special classes of functions: linear functions

and quadratic functions. More general functions require the use of

the tools of calculus and will be studied in later chapters. Finally,

we look at the process of solving real-world problems using

mathematics, a process called mathematical modeling.

Unless changes are made, when is the

current Social Security system expected

to go broke? In Example 2, page 139, we

use a mathematical model constructed

from data from the Social Security

Administration to predict the year in

which the assets of the current system

will be depleted.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

69

70

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

2.1

The Cartesian Coordinate System and Straight Lines

y

y-axis

Origin 

O

x-axis

x

FIGURE 1
The Cartesian coordinate system

y

y

O

P(x, y)

x

x

FIGURE 2
An ordered pair in the coordinate plane

In Section 1.1, we saw how a one-to-one correspondence between the set of real num-
bers and the points on a straight line leads to a coordinate system on a line (a one-
dimensional space). 

A similar representation for points in a plane (a two-dimensional space) is real-
ized  through  the  Cartesian  coordinate  system, which  we  construct  as  follows:
Take two perpendicular lines, one of which is normally chosen to be horizontal. These
lines intersect at a point O, called the origin (Figure 1). The horizontal line is called
the x-axis, and the vertical line is called the y-axis. A number scale is set up along the 
x-axis, with the positive numbers lying to the right of the origin and the negative num-
bers lying to the left of it. Similarly, a number scale is set up along the y-axis, with the
positive numbers lying above the origin and the negative numbers lying below it.

Note The  number  scales  on  the  two  axes  need  not  be  the  same.  Indeed,  in  many
applications, different quantities are represented by x and y. For example, x may rep-
resent the number of smartphones sold, and y may represent the total revenue result-
ing from the sales. In such cases, it is often desirable to choose different number scales
to  represent  the  different  quantities.  Note,  however,  that  the  zeros  of  both  number
scales coincide at the origin of the two-dimensional coordinate system.

We can represent a point in the plane that is uniquely in this coordinate system by
an ordered pair of numbers—that is, a pair (x, y) in which x is the first number and
y is the second. To see this, let P be any point in the plane (Figure 2). Draw perpen-
dicular lines from P to the x-axis and y-axis, respectively. Then the number x is pre-
cisely the number that corresponds to the point on the x-axis at which the perpendic-
ular line through P hits the x-axis. Similarly, y is the number that corresponds to the
point on the y-axis at which the perpendicular line through P crosses the y-axis.

Conversely, given an ordered pair (x, y) with x as the first number and y as the
second, a point P in the plane is uniquely determined as follows: Locate the point on
the x-axis represented by the number x, and draw a line through that point perpendic-
ular to the x-axis. Next, locate the point on the y-axis represented by the number y, and
draw a line through that point perpendicular to the y-axis. The point of intersection of
these two lines is the point P (Figure 2).

In the ordered pair (x, y), x is called the abscissa, or x-coordinate; y is called the
ordinate, or y-coordinate; and x and y together are referred to as the coordinates of
the point P. The point P with x-coordinate equal to a and y-coordinate equal to b is
often written P(a, b).

The  points  A(2,  3),  B(⫺2,  3),  C(⫺2,  ⫺3),  D(2,  ⫺3),  E(3,  2),  F(4,  0),  and 

G(0, ⫺5) are plotted in Figure 3.

Note

In general, (x, y) ⫽ (y, x). This is illustrated by the points A and E in Figure 3.

y

4

2

B(–2, 3)

A(2, 3)

E(3, 2)

F(4, 0)

–3 

–1

1

3

5

C(–2, –3)

– 2

– 4

– 6

D(2, – 3)

G(0, – 5)

x

FIGURE 3
Several points in the coordinate plane

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

2.1 THE CARTESIAN COORDINATE SYSTEM AND STRAIGHT LINES

71

The axes divide the plane into four quadrants. Quadrant I consists of the points P with
coordinates x and y, denoted by P(x, y), satisfying x ⬎ 0 and y ⬎ 0; Quadrant II con-
sists of the points P(x, y) where x ⬍ 0 and y ⬎ 0; Quadrant III consists of the points
P(x, y) where x ⬍ 0 and y ⬍ 0; and Quadrant IV consists of the points P(x, y) where
x ⬎ 0 and y ⬍ 0 (Figure 4).

y

Quadrant  II 

(–, +) 

Quadrant  I 

(+, +) 

O

x

Quadrant  III 

Quadrant  IV 

(–, –) 

(+, –) 

Straight Lines
In  computing  income  tax,  business  firms  are  allowed  by  law  to  depreciate  certain
assets such as buildings, machines, furniture, and automobiles over a period of time.
Linear depreciation, or the straight-line method, is often used for this purpose. The
graph of the straight line shown in Figure 5 describes the book value V of a network
server that has an initial value of $10,000 and that is being depreciated linearly over
5 years with a scrap value of $3000. Note that only the solid portion of the straight line
is of interest here.

V ($)

10,000

3000

(5, 3000)

1

2

3

4

5

Years

t

FIGURE 4
The four quadrants in the coordinate
plane

FIGURE 5
Linear depreciation of an asset

The book value of the server at the end of year t, where t lies between 0 and 5,
can be read directly from the graph. But there is one shortcoming in this approach: The
result depends on how accurately you draw and read the graph. A better and more
accurate method is based on finding an algebraic representation of the depreciation
line. (We continue our discussion of the linear depreciation problem in Section 2.5.)
To see how a straight line in the xy-plane may be described algebraically, we need

first to recall certain properties of straight lines.

Slope of a Line
Let  L denote  the  unique  straight  line  that  passes  through  the  two  distinct  points 
1x1, y12 and 1x2, y22. If x1 ⫽ x2, then we define the slope of L as follows. 

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

72

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

Slope of a Nonvertical Line

If 1x1, y12 and 1x2, y22 are any two distinct points on a nonvertical line L, then the

slope m of L is given by

(1)

m ⫽

¢y
¢x

⫽

y2 ⫺ y1
x2 ⫺ x1

y

L

(x2, y2)

y2 – y1 = Δy

(x1, y1)

x2 – x1 = Δ x

x

(Figure 6).

FIGURE 6

y

L

(x1, y1)

(x2, y 2)

x

FIGURE 7
The slope is undefined if x1 ⫽ x2.

If x1 ⫽ x2, then L is a vertical line (Figure 7). Its slope is undefined since the denom-
inator in Equation (1) will be zero and division by zero is proscribed.

Observe that the slope of a straight line is a constant whenever it is defined. The
number ⌬y ⫽ y2 ⫺ y1 (⌬y is read “delta y”) is a measure of the vertical change in y,
and ⌬x ⫽ x2 ⫺ x1 is a measure of the horizontal change in x as shown in Figure 6.
From this figure we can see that the slope m of a straight line L is a measure of the
rate of change of y with respect to x. Furthermore, the slope of a nonvertical straight
line is constant, and this tells us that this rate of change is constant.

Figure  8a  shows  a  straight  line  L1 with  slope  2.  Observe  that  L1 has  the
property that a 1-unit increase in x results in a 2-unit increase in y. To see this, let
⌬ x ⫽ 1 in Equation (1) so that m ⫽ ⌬y. Since m ⫽ 2, we conclude that ⌬y ⫽ 2. Sim-
ilarly, Figure 8b shows a line L2 with slope ⫺1. Observe that a straight line with pos-
itive slope slants upward from left to right (y increases as x increases), whereas a line
with negative slope slants downward from left to right (y decreases as x increases).
Finally, Figure 9 shows a family of straight lines passing through the origin with indi-
cated slopes.

y

L1

y

L2

m = 2

2

1

1

m = –1

–1

m = –2

m = –1

y

m = 2

m = 1

m = – 1
2

m = 1
2
x

x

x

(a) The line rises (m ⬎ 0).
FIGURE 8

(b) The line falls (m ⬍ 0).

FIGURE 9
A family of straight lines

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

2.1 THE CARTESIAN COORDINATE SYSTEM AND STRAIGHT LINES

73

Explore & Discuss
Show that the slope of a nonvertical line is independent of the two distinct points used to
compute it.

Hint: Suppose we pick two other distinct points, P31x3, y32 and P41x4, y42 lying on L. Draw a pic-
ture, and use similar triangles to demonstrate that using  P3 and  P4 gives the same value as that
obtained by using P1 and P2.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 1 Sketch the straight line that passes through the point (⫺2, 5) and has
slope 

.

⫺4
3

⫺4
Solution First, plot the point (⫺2, 5) (Figure 10). Next, recall that a slope of 
3
indicates that an increase of 1 unit in the x-direction produces a decrease of  units
in the y-direction, or equivalently, a 3-unit increase in the x-direction produces a

4
3

, or 4-unit, decrease in the y-direction. Using this information, we plot the point

314
32

(1, 1) and draw the line through the two points.

FIGURE 10
L has slope 
(⫺2, 5).

⫺4
3

and passes through 

L

(–2, 5)

Δx = 3

y

5

Δy = – 4

(1, 1)

–5

x

5

y

5

3

(–1, 1)

–3 

–1

1

3

5

FIGURE 11
L passes through (5, 3) and (⫺1, 1).

x

EXAMPLE 2 Find the slope m of the line that passes through the points (⫺1, 1) and
(5, 3).

(5, 3)

L

Solution Choose 1x1, y12 to be the point (⫺1, 1) and 1x2, y22 to be the point (5, 3).
Then, with x1 ⫽ ⫺1, y1 ⫽ 1, x2 ⫽ 5, and y2 ⫽ 3, we find, using Equation (1),

m ⫽

y2 ⫺ y1
x2 ⫺ x1

⫽ 3 ⫺ 1
5 ⫺ 1⫺12 ⫽ 2

6

⫽ 1
3

(Figure 11). You may verify that the result obtained would be the same had we cho-

sen the point (⫺1, 1) to be 1x2, y22 and the point (5, 3) to be 1x1, y12.
EXAMPLE 3 Find the slope of the line that passes through the points (⫺2, 5) and 
(3, 5).

Solution The slope of the required line is given by

(Figure 12).

FIGURE 12
The slope of the horizontal line L is zero.

m ⫽ 5 ⫺ 5

3 ⫺ 1⫺22 ⫽ 0

5

⫽ 0

(3, 5)

(– 2, 5)

y

6

4

2

– 2

2

4

L

x

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Note The slope of a horizontal line is zero.

74

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

We can use the slope of a straight line to determine whether a line is parallel to

another line.

Parallel Lines
Two distinct lines are parallel if and only if their slopes are equal or their slopes
are undefined.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 4 Let L1 be a line that passes through the points (⫺2, 9) and (1, 3), and
let L2 be the line that passes through the points (⫺4, 10) and (3, ⫺4). Determine
whether L1 and L2 are parallel.

(1, 3)

Solution The slope m1 of L1 is given by

m1 ⫽ 3 ⫺ 9

1 ⫺ 1⫺22 ⫽ ⫺2

The slope m2 of L2 is given by

m2 ⫽

Since m1 ⫽ m2, the lines L1 and L2 are parallel (Figure 13).

⫺4 ⫺ 10

3 ⫺ 1⫺42 ⫽ ⫺2

L2
(– 4, 10)

(– 2, 9)

y

L1

12

8

2

– 6

– 2

– 2

x

4

– 6

(3, – 4)

FIGURE 13
L1 and L2 have the same slope and hence
are parallel.

2.1 Self-Check Exercise

Determine the number a such that the line passing through the
points (a, 2) and (3, 6) is parallel to a line with slope 4.

The solution to Self-Check Exercise 2.1 can be found on 
page 76.

2.1 Concept Questions

1. What can you say about the signs of a and b if the point
P(a, b) lies in (a) the second quadrant? (b) The third quad-
rant? (c) The fourth quadrant?

2. What is the slope of a nonvertical line? What can you say

about the slope of a vertical line?

2.1 Exercises

In Exercises 1–6, refer to the accompanying figure and determine
the coordinates of the point and the quadrant in which it is located.

1. A

4. D

2. B

5. E

3. C

6. F

D

B

y

3

1

A

– 5  

– 3

–1

1

3

5

7

9

x

C

F

– 3

– 5

– 7

E

In Exercises 7–12, refer to the accompanying figure.

y

4

2

B

C

D

–6  –4  –2

E

– 2

F

– 4

A

x

2

4

6

G

7. Which point has coordinates (4, 2)?

8. What are the coordinates of point B?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

2.1 THE CARTESIAN COORDINATE SYSTEM AND STRAIGHT LINES

75

9. Which points have negative y-coordinates?

24.

10. Which point has a negative x-coordinate and a negative 

y-coordinate?

11. Which point has an x-coordinate that is equal to zero?

12. Which point has a y-coordinate that is equal to zero?

y

5

3

1

In Exercises 13–20, sketch a set of coordinate axes and then plot
the point.
13. (⫺2, 5)

14. (1, 3)

15. (3, ⫺1)

17. 18, ⫺ 2

7
2

19. (4.5, ⫺4.5)

18. 1⫺ ,  2

5
2

3
2

16. (3, ⫺4)

20. (1.2, ⫺3.4)

– 3  

– 1

1

3

x

In Exercises 25–30, find the slope of the line that passes through
the given pair of points.
25. (4, 3) and (5, 8)

26. (4, 5) and (3, 8)

27. (⫺2, 3) and (4, 8)

28. (⫺2, ⫺2) and (4, ⫺4)

In  Exercises  21– 24,  find  the  slope  of  the  line  shown  in  each 
figure.
21.

y

29. (a, b) and (c, d)

30. (⫺a ⫹ 1, b ⫺ 1) and (a ⫹ 1, ⫺b)

4

– 2

x

2

– 4  

– 2

y

4

2

– 2

2

4

– 2

y

2

– 2

2

– 4  

– 2

x

x

22.

23.

31. Given the equation y ⫽ 4x ⫺ 3, answer the following ques-

tions.
a. If x increases by 1 unit, what is the corresponding

change in y?

b. If x decreases by 2 units, what is the corresponding

change in y?

32. Given  the  equation  2x ⫹ 3y ⫽ 4,  answer  the  following

questions.
a. Is the slope of the line described by this equation posi-

tive or negative?

b. As x increases in value, does y increase or decrease?
c. If x decreases by 2 units, what is the corresponding

change in y?

In Exercises 33 and 34, determine whether the lines through the
pairs of points are parallel.
33. A(1, ⫺2), B(⫺3, ⫺10) and C(1, 5), D(⫺1, 1)

34. A(2, 3), B(2, ⫺2) and C(⫺2, 4), D(⫺2, 5)

35. If the line passing through the points (1, a) and (4, ⫺2) is
parallel  to  the  line  passing  through  the  points  (2,  8)  and 
(⫺7, a ⫹ 4), what is the value of a?

36. If  the  line  passing  through  the  points  (a,  1)  and  (5,  8)  is
parallel  to  the  line  passing  through  the  points  (4,  9)  and 
(a ⫹ 2, 1), what is the value of a?

37. Is there a difference between the statements “The slope of
a straight line is zero” and “The slope of a straight line does
not exist (is not defined)”? Explain your answer.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

76

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

2.1 Solution to Self-Check Exercise

The slope of the line that passes through the points (a, 2) and
(3, 6) is

m ⫽ 6 ⫺ 2
3 ⫺ a

⫽ 4

3 ⫺ a

Since this line is parallel to a line with slope 4, m must be equal
to 4; that is,

4

3 ⫺ a

⫽ 4

2.2

Equations of Lines

or, upon multiplying both sides of the equation by 3 ⫺ a,

 4 ⫽ 413 ⫺ a2
4 ⫽ 12 ⫺ 4a
 4a ⫽ 8
 a ⫽ 2

Point-Slope Form
We now show that every straight line lying in the xy-plane may be represented by an
equation involving the variables x and y. One immediate benefit of this is that prob-
lems involving straight lines may be solved algebraically.

Let L be a straight line parallel to the y-axis (perpendicular to the x-axis) (Fig-
ure 14). Then L crosses the x-axis at some point (a, 0) with the x-coordinate given by
x ⫽ a, where a is some real number. Any other point on L has the form (a, y), where
yy is  an  appropriate  number.  Therefore,  the  vertical  line  L is  described  by  the  sole 
condition

x ⫽ a

and this is accordingly an equation of L. For example, the equation x ⫽ ⫺2 represents
a vertical line 2 units to the left of the y-axis, and the equation x ⫽ 3 represents a ver-
tical line 3 units to the right of the y-axis (Figure 15).

y

L

(a, y)

y

5

3

1

x = – 2

x = 3

(a, 0)

x

–3 

–1

1

x

5

FIGURE 14
The vertical line x ⫽ a

FIGURE 15
The vertical lines x ⫽ ⫺2 and x ⫽ 3

y

L

(x, y)

(x1 y1, 
)

x

FIGURE 16
L passes through (x1, y1) and has 
slope m.

Next, suppose L is a nonvertical line, so it has a well-defined slope m. Suppose
(x1,  y1)  is  a  fixed  point  lying  on  L and  (x,  y)  is  a  variable  point  on  L distinct 
from (x1, y1) (Figure 16). Using Equation (1) with the point (x2, y2) ⫽ (x, y), we find
that the slope of L is given by

Upon multiplying both sides of the equation by x ⫺ x1, we obtain Equation (2).

m ⫽

y ⫺ y1
x ⫺ x1

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

2.2 EQUATIONS OF LINES

77

Point-Slope Form of an Equation of a Line
An equation of the line that has slope m and passes through the point (x1, y1) is
given by

y ⫺ y1 ⫽ m1x ⫺ x12

(2)

Equation (2) is called the point-slope form of an equation of a line because it uses a

given point 1x1, y12 on a line and the slope m of the line.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 1 Find an equation of the line that passes through the point (1, 3) and
has slope 2.

Solution Using the point-slope form of the equation of a line with the point (1, 3)
and m ⫽ 2, we obtain

y ⫺ 3 ⫽ 21x ⫺ 12

y ⫺ y1 ⫽ m1x ⫺ x12

which, when simplified, becomes

(Figure 17).

2x ⫺ y ⫹ 1 ⫽ 0

y

L

(1, 3)

4

2

FIGURE 17
L passes through (1, 3) and has slope 2.

– 2

2

x

EXAMPLE 2 Find an equation of the line that passes through the points (⫺3, 2) and
(4, ⫺1).

Solution The slope of the line is given by

m ⫽

⫺1 ⫺ 2

4 ⫺ 1⫺32 ⫽ ⫺3

7

Using the point-slope form of the equation of a line with the point (4, ⫺1) and the
slope 

, we have

m ⫽ ⫺3
7

y ⫹ 1 ⫽ ⫺3
7

 1x ⫺ 42
 7y ⫹ 7 ⫽ ⫺3x ⫹ 12

 3x ⫹ 7y ⫺ 5 ⫽ 0

y ⫺ y1 ⫽ m1x ⫺ x12

(Figure 18).

y

4

2

L

(–3, 2) 

– 4  

– 2

– 2

x

2
4
(4, –1)

 

FIGURE 18
L passes through (⫺3, 2) and (4, ⫺1).

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

78

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

We can use the slope of a straight line to determine whether a line is perpendicular to
another line.

Perpendicular Lines
If L1 and L2 are two distinct nonvertical lines that have slopes m1 and m2, respec-
tively, then L1 is perpendicular to L2 (written L1 ⊥ L2) if and only if

m1 ⫽ ⫺ 1
m2

If the line L1 is vertical (so that its slope is undefined), then L1 is perpendicular to
another line, L2, if and only if L2 is horizontal (so that its slope is zero). For a proof of
these results, see Exercise 74, page 85.

EXAMPLE 3 Find an equation of the line that passes through the point (3, 1) and is
perpendicular to the line of Example 1.

Solution Since the slope of the line in Example 1 is 2, it follows that the slope of
the required line is given by 
, the negative reciprocal of 2. Using the point-
slope form of the equation of a line, we obtain

m ⫽ ⫺1
2

y ⫺ 1 ⫽ ⫺1
2

 1x ⫺ 32

 2y ⫺ 2 ⫽ ⫺x ⫹ 3

 x ⫹ 2y ⫺ 5 ⫽ 0

y ⫺ y1 ⫽ m1x ⫺ x12

L2

5

1

y

L1

(1, 3)

(3, 1)

1

3

5

x

FIGURE 19
L2 is perpendicular to L1 and passes
through (3, 1).

(Figure 19).

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
1. Use a graphing utility to plot the straight lines L1 and L2 with equations 
2x ⫹ y ⫺ 5 ⫽ 0 and 41x ⫹ 20y ⫺ 11 ⫽ 0 on the same set of axes, using
the standard viewing window.
a. Can you tell whether the lines L1 and L2 are parallel to each other?
b. Verify your observations by computing the slopes of L1 and L2 algebraically.

2. Use a graphing utility to plot the straight lines L1 and L2 with equations 
x ⫹ 2y ⫺ 5 ⫽ 0 and 5x ⫺ y ⫹ 5 ⫽ 0 on the same set of axes, using the
standard viewing window.
a. Can you tell whether the lines L1 and L2 are perpendicular to each other?
b. Verify your observation by computing the slopes of L1 and L2 algebraically.

Slope-Intercept Form
A straight line L that is neither horizontal nor vertical cuts the x-axis and the y-axis at,
say, points (a, 0) and (0, b), respectively (Figure 20). The numbers a and b are called
the x-intercept and y-intercept, respectively, of L.

Now, let L be a line with slope m and y-intercept b. Using Equation (2), the point-
slope form of the equation of a line, with the point given by (0, b) and slope m, we have

y ⫺ b ⫽ m1x ⫺ 02
 y ⫽ mx ⫹ b

L

y

(0, b)

(a, 0) 

x

FIGURE 20
The line L has x-intercept a and 
y-intercept b.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

2.2 EQUATIONS OF LINES

79

Slope-Intercept Form of an Equation of a Line
An equation of the line that has slope m and intersects the y-axis at the point 
(0, b) is given by

y ⫽ mx ⫹ b

(3)

EXAMPLE 4 Find an equation of the line that has slope 3 and y-intercept ⫺4.

Solution Using Equation (3) with m ⫽ 3 and b ⫽ ⫺4, we obtain the required
equation:

y ⫽ 3x ⫺ 4

EXAMPLE 5 Determine the slope and y-intercept of the line whose equation is 
3x ⫺ 4y ⫽ 8.

Solution Rewrite the given equation in the slope-intercept form. Thus,

 3x ⫺ 4y ⫽ 8

 ⫺4y ⫽ ⫺3x ⫹ 8

 y ⫽ 3
4

 x ⫺ 2

Comparing this result with Equation (3), we find 
clude that the slope and y-intercept of the given line are  and ⫺2, respectively.

and b ⫽ ⫺2, and we con-
3
4

m ⫽ 3
4

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
1. Use a graphing utility to plot the straight lines with equations y ⫽ ⫺2x ⫹ 3,

y ⫽ ⫺x ⫹ 3, y ⫽ x ⫹ 3, and y ⫽ 2.5x ⫹ 3 on the same set of axes, using
the standard viewing window. What effect does changing the coefficient m
of x in the equation y ⫽ mx ⫹ b have on its graph?

2. Use a graphing utility to plot the straight lines with equations y ⫽ 2x ⫺ 2, 
y ⫽ 2x ⫺ 1, y ⫽ 2x, y ⫽ 2x ⫹ 1, and y ⫽ 2x ⫹ 4 on the same set of axes,
using the standard viewing window. What effect does changing the constant
b in the equation y ⫽ mx ⫹ b have on its graph?

3. Describe in words the effect of changing both m and b in the equation 

y ⫽ mx ⫹ b.

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 6 Sales of a Sporting Goods Store The sales manager
of a local sporting goods store plotted sales versus time for the last 5 years 
and found the points to lie approximately along a straight line. (See Figure 21 on
the next page.) By using the points corresponding to the first and fifth years, find
an equation of the trend line. What sales figure can be predicted for the sixth year?

Solution Using Equation (1) with the points (1, 20) and (5, 60), we find that the
slope of the required line is given by

m ⫽ 60 ⫺ 20
5 ⫺ 1

⫽ 10

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

80

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

y

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

s
r
a
l
l
o
d

 

d
n
a
s
u
o
h
t
 

n
e
t
 

n
i
 
s
e
l
a
S

1

2

3
4
Years

5

6

x

FIGURE 21
Sales of a sporting goods store

VIDEO

Explore & Discuss
Refer to Example 7. Can the
equation predicting the value of
the art object be used to predict
long-term growth?

Next, using the point-slope form of the equation of a line with the point (1, 20)
and m ⫽ 10, we obtain

y ⫺ 20 ⫽ 101x ⫺ 12
 y ⫽ 10 x ⫹ 10

 y ⫺ y1 ⫽ m1  x ⫺ x12

as the required equation.

The sales figure for the sixth year is obtained by letting x ⫽ 6 in the last

equation, giving

or $700,000. (Note that the sales are measured in ten thousand dollars.)

y ⫽ 10162 ⫹ 10 ⫽ 70

APPLIED EXAMPLE 7 Appreciation in Value of an Art Object Suppose an 
art object purchased for $50,000 is expected to appreciate in value at a 

constant rate of $5000 per year for the next 5 years. Use Equation (3) to write an
equation predicting the value of the art object in the next several years. What will
be its value 3 years from the purchase date?

Solution Let x denote the time (in years) that has elapsed since the purchase
date and let y denote the object’s value (in dollars). Then, y ⫽ 50,000 when 
x ⫽ 0. Furthermore, the slope of the required equation is given by m ⫽ 5000,
since each unit increase in x (1 year) implies an increase of 5000 units (dollars) 
in y. Using Equation (3) with m ⫽ 5000 and b ⫽ 50,000, we obtain

 y ⫽ 5000x ⫹ 50,000

 y ⫽ mx ⫹ b

Three years from the purchase date, the value of the object will be given by

or $65,000.

y ⫽ 5000132 ⫹ 50,000

General Form of an Equation of a Line
We have considered several forms of the equation of a straight line in the plane. These
different forms of the equation are equivalent to each other. In fact, each is a special
case of the following equation.

General Form of a Linear Equation
The equation

Ax ⫹ By ⫹ C ⫽ 0

(4)

where A, B, and C are constants and A and B are not both zero, is called the gen-
eral form of a linear equation in the variables x and y.

We now state (without proof) an important result concerning the algebraic repre-

sentation of straight lines in the plane.

THEOREM 1
An equation of a straight line is a linear equation; conversely, every linear equa-
tion represents a straight line.

This result justifies the use of the adjective linear in describing Equation (4).

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

2.2 EQUATIONS OF LINES

81

EXAMPLE 8 Sketch the straight line represented by the equation

3x ⫺ 4y ⫺ 12 ⫽ 0

Solution Since every straight line is uniquely determined by two distinct points,
we need to find only two points through which the line passes in order to sketch it.
For convenience, let’s compute the points at which the line crosses the x- and y-
axes. Setting y ⫽ 0, we find x ⫽ 4, the x-intercept, so the line crosses the x-axis at
the point (4, 0). Setting x ⫽ 0 gives y ⫽ ⫺3, the y-intercept, so the line crosses the 
y-axis at the point (0, ⫺3). A sketch of the line appears in Figure 22.

y

2

– 2

2

– 2

(0, – 3)

(4, 0)

x

Here is a summary of the common forms of the equations of straight lines dis-

cussed in this section.

Equations of Straight Lines

FIGURE 22
To sketch 3x ⫺ 4y ⫺ 12 ⫽ 0, first find the
x-intercept, 4, and the y-intercept, ⫺3.

x ⫽ a
y ⫽ b

Vertical line:
Horizontal line:
Point-slope form:
Slope-intercept form:

y ⫺ y1 ⫽ m1x ⫺ x12
General form: Ax ⫹ By ⫹ C ⫽ 0

y ⫽ mx ⫹ b

2.2 Self-Check Exercises

1. Find an equation of the line that passes through the point 

a. Plot the number of satellite TV subscribers in the United

(3, ⫺1) and is perpendicular to a line with slope 

.

States (y) versus the year (t).

⫺1
2

2. Does  the  point  (3,  ⫺3)  lie  on  the  line  with  equation 

2x ⫺ 3y ⫺ 12 ⫽ 0? Sketch the graph of the line.

3. SATELLITE TV  SUBSCRIBERS The  following  table  gives  the
number of satellite TV subscribers in the United States (in
millions)  from  2004  through  2008  (t ⫽ 0  corresponds  to
the beginning of  2004):

Year, t
Number, y 22.5

0

1

2

3

4

24.8

27.1

29.1

30.7

2.2 Concept Questions

b. Draw the line L through the points (0, 22.5) and (4, 30.7).
c. Find an equation of the line L.
d. Assuming that this trend continued, estimate the number
of satellite TV subscribers in the United States in 2010.
Sources: National Cable & Telecommunications Association and the
Federal Communications Commission.

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 2.2 can be found on 
page 85.

1. Give (a) the point-slope form, (b) the slope-intercept form,

and (c) the general form of an equation of a line.

2. Let L1 have slope m1 and let L2 have slope m2. State the
conditions on m1 and m2 if (a) L1 is parallel to L2 and (b) L1
is perpendicular to L2.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

82

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

2.2 Exercises

In  Exercises  1–6,  match  the  statement  with  one  of  the  graphs
(a)– (f).
1. The slope of the line is zero.

(e)

2. The slope of the line is undefined.

3. The slope of the line is positive, and its y-intercept is pos-

itive.

y

4

4. The slope of the line is positive, and its y-intercept is neg-

⫺4

4

ative.

5. The slope of the line is negative, and its x-intercept is neg-

ative.

6. The slope of the line is negative, and its x-intercept is pos-

(f)

y

3

x

x

itive.
(a)

y

4

(b)

(c)

(d)

–4

y

4

–3

y

4

2

4

y

3

–3

– 2

2

4

– 2

x

2

x

x

x

–3

3

–2

In  Exercises  7  and  8,  determine  whether  the  lines  through  the
pairs of points are perpendicular.
7. A(⫺2, 5), B(4, 2) and C(⫺1, ⫺2), D(3, 6)

8. A(2, 0), B(1, ⫺2) and C(4, 2), D(⫺8, 4)

9. Find an equation of the horizontal line that passes through

(⫺4, ⫺5).

10. Find  an  equation  of  the  vertical  line  that  passes  through 

(0, 5).

In  Exercises  11–14,  find  an  equation  of  the  line  that  passes
through the point and has the indicated slope m.
11. (3, ⫺4); m ⫽ 2

13. (⫺3, 2); m ⫽ 0

12. (2, 4); m ⫽ ⫺1
11, 22; m ⫽ ⫺1

14.

2

In  Exercises  15–18,  find  an  equation  of  the  line  that  passes
through the given points.
15. (2, 4) and (3, 7)

16. (2, 1) and (2, 5)

17. (1, 2) and (⫺3, ⫺2)

18. (⫺1, ⫺2) and (3, ⫺4)

In Exercises 19–22, find an equation of the line that has slope m
and y-intercept b.
19. m ⫽ 3; b ⫽ 5

20. m ⫽ ⫺2; b ⫽ ⫺1
2  ; b ⫽ 3

22. m ⫽ ⫺1

4

21. m ⫽ 0; b ⫽ 5

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

In  Exercises  23–28,  write  the  equation  in  the  slope-intercept
form and then find the slope and y-intercept of the correspond-
ing line.
23. x ⫺ 2y ⫽ 0

24. y ⫺ 2 ⫽ 0

In Exercises 48–51, use the results of Exercise 47 to find an equa-
tion of a line with the x- and y-intercepts.
48. x-intercept 3; y-intercept 4
49. x-intercept ⫺2; y-intercept ⫺4

2.2 EQUATIONS OF LINES

83

25. 2x ⫺ 3y ⫺ 9 ⫽ 0

26. 3x ⫺ 4y ⫹ 8 ⫽ 0

27. 2x ⫹ 4y ⫽ 14

28. 5x ⫹ 8y ⫺ 24 ⫽ 0

29. Find an equation of the line that passes through the point

(⫺2, 2) and is parallel to the line 2x ⫺ 4y ⫺ 8 ⫽ 0.

30. Find an equation of the line that passes through the point
(⫺1, 3) and is parallel to the line passing through the points
(⫺2, ⫺3) and (2, 5).

31. Find an equation of the line that passes through the point 

(2, 4) and is perpendicular to the line 3x ⫹ 4y ⫺ 22 ⫽ 0.

32. Find an equation of the line that passes through the point
(1, ⫺2) and is perpendicular to the line passing through the
points (⫺2, ⫺1) and (4, 3).

In Exercises 33–38, find an equation of the line that satisfies the
given condition.
33. The line parallel to the x-axis and 6 units below it

34. The line passing through the origin and parallel to the line

passing through the points (2, 4) and (4, 7)

35. The line passing through the point (a, b) with slope equal

to zero

36. The line passing through (⫺3, 4) and parallel to the x-axis

37. The line passing through (⫺5, ⫺4) and parallel to the line

passing through (⫺3, 2) and (6, 8)

38. The line passing through (a, b) with undefined slope

39. Given that the point P(⫺3, 5) lies on the line kx ⫹ 3y ⫹

9 ⫽ 0, find k.

40. Given that the point P(2, ⫺3) lies on the line ⫺2x ⫹ ky ⫹

10 ⫽ 0, find k.

In Exercises 41–46, sketch the straight line defined by the linear
equation by finding the x- and y-intercepts.

Hint: See Example 8.

41. 3x ⫺ 2y ⫹ 6 ⫽ 0

42. 2x ⫺ 5y ⫹ 10 ⫽ 0

43. x ⫹ 2y ⫺ 4 ⫽ 0

44. 2x ⫹ 3y ⫺ 15 ⫽ 0

45. y ⫹ 5 ⫽ 0

46. ⫺2x ⫺ 8y ⫹ 24 ⫽ 0

47. Show that an equation of a line through the points (a, 0)
and (0, b) with  a ⫽ 0 and b ⫽ 0 can be written in the form

⫹

x
a

y
b

⫽ 1

(Recall that the numbers a and b are the x- and y-intercepts,
respectively, of the line. This form of an equation of a line
is called the intercept form.)

50.

51.

x-intercept ⫺1

3
2  ; y-intercept 
4
x-intercept 4; y-intercept ⫺1
2

In  Exercises  52  and  53,  determine  whether  the  points  lie  on  a
straight line.
52. A(⫺1, 7), B(2, ⫺2), and C(5, ⫺9)
53. A(⫺2, 1), B(1, 7), and C(4, 13)
54. TEMPERATURE CONVERSION The  relationship  between  the
temperature in degrees Fahrenheit (°F) and the temperature
in degrees Celsius (°C) is
F ⫽ 9
5

 C ⫹ 32

a. Sketch the line with the given equation.
b. What is the slope of the line? What does it represent?
c. What is the F-intercept of the line? What does it repre-

sent?

55. NUCLEAR PLANT UTILIZATION The United States is not build-
ing many nuclear plants, but the ones it has are running at
nearly  full  capacity.  The  output  (as  a  percentage  of  total
capacity) of nuclear plants is described by the equation

y ⫽ 1.9467t ⫹ 70.082

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
the beginning of 1990.
a. Sketch the line with the given equation.
b. What are the slope and the y-intercept of the line found

in part (a)?

c. Give an interpretation of the slope and the y-intercept of

the line found in part (a).

d. If  the  utilization  of  nuclear  power  continued  to  grow  at 
the same rate and the total capacity of nuclear plants in the
United States remained constant, by what year were the
plants generating at maximum capacity?

Source: Nuclear Energy Institute.

56. SOCIAL SECURITY CONTRIBUTIONS For  wages  less  than  the
maximum taxable wage base, Social Security contributions
(including those for Medicare) by employees are 7.65% of
the employee’s wages.
a. Find an equation that expresses the relationship between
the wages earned (x) and the Social Security taxes paid
( y) by an employee who earns less than the maximum
taxable wage base.

b. For  each  additional  dollar  that  an  employee  earns,  by
how  much  is  his  or  her  Social  Security  contribution
increased? (Assume that the employee’s wages are less
than the maximum taxable wage base.)

c. What  Social  Security  contributions  will  an  employee
who  earns  $65,000  (which  is  less  than  the  maximum
taxable wage base) be required to make?

Source: Social Security Administration.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

84

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

57. COLLEGE ADMISSIONS Using  data  compiled  by  the  Admis-
sions Office at Faber University, college admissions offi-
cers  estimate  that  55%  of  the  students  who  are  offered
admission to the freshman class at the university will actu-
ally enroll.
a. Find an equation that expresses the relationship between
the number of students who actually enroll (y) and the
number  of  students  who  are  offered  admission  to  the
university (x).

b. If the desired freshman class size for the upcoming aca-
demic year is 1100 students, how many students should
be admitted?

58. WEIGHT OF WHALES The  equation  W ⫽ 3.51L ⫺ 192,
expressing the relationship between the length L (in feet)
and the expected weight W (in British tons) of adult blue
whales, was adopted in the late 1960s by the International
Whaling Commission.
a. What is the expected weight of an 80-ft blue whale?
b. Sketch the straight line that represents the equation.

59. THE NARROWING GENDER GAP Since  the  founding  of  the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and the pas-
sage  of  equal-pay  laws,  the  gulf  between  men’s  and
women’s earnings has continued to close gradually. At the
beginning of 1990 (t ⫽ 0), women’s wages were 68% of
men’s  wages,  and  by  the  beginning  of  2000  (t ⫽ 10),
women’s  wages  were  80%  of  men’s  wages.  If  this  gap
between  women’s  and  men’s  wages  continued  to  narrow
linearly,  then  women’s  wages  were  what  percentage  of
men’s wages at the beginning of 2004?
Source: Journal of Economic Perspectives.

60. SALES OF NAVIGATION SYSTEMS The  projected  number  of
navigation  systems  (in  millions)  installed  in  vehicles  in
North  America,  Europe,  and  Japan  from  2002  through
2006 are shown in the following table (x ⫽ 0 corresponds
to 2002):

Year, x
Systems Installed, y

0
3.9

1
4.7

2
5.8

3
6.8

4
7.8

a. Plot the annual sales (y) versus the year (x).
b. Draw a straight line L through the points corresponding

to 2002 and 2006.

c. Derive an equation of the line L.
d. Use the equation found in part (c) to estimate the num-
ber  of  navigation  systems  installed  in  2005.  Compare
this figure with the sales for that year.

Source: ABI Research.

61. SALES OF GPS EQUIPMENT The  annual  sales  (in  billions  of
dollars)  of  global  positioning  systems  (GPS)  equipment
from 2000 through 2006 are shown in the following table
(x ⫽ 0 corresponds to 2000):

a. Plot the annual sales (y) versus the year (x).
b. Draw a straight line L through the points corresponding

to 2000 and 2006.

c. Derive an equation of the line L.
d. Use the equation found in part (c) to estimate the annual
sales  of  GPS  equipment  in  2005.  Compare  this  figure
with the projected sales for that year.

Source: ABI Research.

62. IDEAL HEIGHTS AND WEIGHTS FOR WOMEN The Venus Health
Club for Women provides its members with the following
table, which gives the average desirable weight (in pounds)
for women of a given height (in inches):

Height, x
Weight, y

60
108

63
118

66
129

69
140

72
152

a. Plot the weight (y) versus the height (x).
b. Draw a straight line L through the points corresponding

to heights of 5 ft and 6 ft.

c. Derive an equation of the line L.
d. Using  the  equation  of  part  (c),  estimate  the  average

desirable weight for a woman who is 5 ft, 5 in. tall.

63. COST OF A COMMODITY A manufacturer obtained the follow-
ing  data  relating  the  cost  y (in  dollars)  to  the  number  of
units (x) of a commodity produced:

Units
Produced, x
Cost in
Dollars, y

0

20

40

60

80

200

208

222

230

242

100

250

a. Plot the cost (y) versus the quantity produced (x).
b. Draw  a  straight  line  through  the  points  (0,  200)  and 

(100, 250).

c. Derive an equation of the straight line of part (b).
d. Taking  this  equation  to  be  an  approximation  of  the
relationship between the cost and the level of produc-
tion,  estimate  the  cost  of  producing  54  units  of  the
commodity.

64. DIGITAL TV SERVICES The percentage of homes with digital
TV services stood at 5% at the beginning of 1999 (t ⫽ 0)
and was projected to grow linearly so that, at the beginning
of 2003 (t ⫽ 4), the percentage of such homes was 25%.
a. Derive  an  equation  of  the  line  passing  through  the

points A(0, 5) and B(4, 25).

b. Plot the line with the equation found in part (a).
c. Using the equation found in part (a), find the percentage 
of  homes  with  digital  TV  services  at  the  beginning 
of 2001.

Source: Paul Kagan Associates.

65. SALES GROWTH Metro Department Store’s annual sales (in

millions of dollars) during the past 5 years were

Year, x
Annual Sales, y

0
7.9

1
9.6

2

3

4

11.5

13.3

15.2

5
17

6

18.8

Annual Sales, y
Year, x

5.8
1

6.2
2

7.2
3

8.4
4

9.0
5

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

a. Plot the annual sales (y) versus the year (x).
b. Draw a straight line L through the points corresponding

to the first and fifth years.

c. Derive an equation of the line L.
d. Using the equation found in part (c), estimate Metro’s

annual sales 4 years from now (x ⫽ 9).

In Exercises 66–72, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
66. Suppose the slope of a line L is 

and P is a given point
on L. If Q is the point on L lying 4 units to the left of P,
then Q is situated 2 units above P.

⫺1
2

67. The  point  (⫺1,  1)  lies  on  the  line  with  equation  3x ⫹

7y ⫽ 5.

68. The point (1, k) lies on the line with equation 3x ⫹ 4y ⫽

12 if and only if 

k ⫽ 9
4

.

69. The line with equation Ax ⫹ By ⫹ C ⫽ 0 (B ⫽ 0) and the
line with equation ax ⫹ by ⫹ c ⫽ 0 (b ⫽ 0) are parallel if 
Ab ⫺ aB ⫽ 0.

70. If the slope of the line L1 is positive, then the slope of a line

L2 perpendicular to L1 may be positive or negative.

71. The lines with equations ax ⫹ by ⫹ c1 ⫽ 0 and bx ⫺ ay ⫹
c2 ⫽ 0, where a ⫽ 0 and b ⫽ 0, are perpendicular to each
other.

2.2 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. Since  the  required  line  L is  perpendicular  to  a  line  with

slope 

⫺1
2

, the slope of L is

m ⫽ ⫺ 1
⫺1
2

⫽ 2

Next, using the point-slope form of the equation of a line,
we have

y ⫺ 1⫺12 ⫽ 21x ⫺ 32
 y ⫹ 1 ⫽ 2x ⫺ 6
 y ⫽ 2x ⫺ 7

2.2 EQUATIONS OF LINES

85

72. If  L is  the  line  with  equation  Ax ⫹ By ⫹ C ⫽ 0,  where 

A ⫽ 0, then L crosses the x-axis at the point (⫺C>A, 0).
73. Show that two distinct lines with equations a1x ⫹ b1y ⫹
c1 ⫽ 0 and a2 x ⫹ b2 y ⫹ c2 ⫽ 0, respectively, are parallel
if and only if a1b2 ⫺ b1a2 ⫽ 0.
Hint: Write  each  equation  in  the  slope-intercept  form  and  com-
pare.

74. Prove that if a line L1 with slope m1 is perpendicular to a

line L2 with slope m2, then m1m2 ⫽ ⫺1.
Hint: Refer to the accompanying figure. Show that m1 ⫽ b
and m2 ⫽ c. Next, apply the Pythagorean Theorem and the dis-
tance formula to the triangles OAC, OCB, and OBA to show that
1 ⫽ ⫺bc.

y

L1

A(1, b)

C(1, 0)

x

O

B(1, c)

L2

y

2

– 3

– 4

2x ⫺ 3y ⫺ 12 ⫽ 0

L

x

6

(3, – 3)

3. a and b. See the following figure.

2. Substituting x ⫽ 3 and y ⫽ ⫺3 into the left-hand side of the

y

given equation, we find

2(3) ⫺ 3(⫺3) ⫺ 12 ⫽ 3

which  is  not  equal  to  zero  (the  right-hand  side).  There-
fore,  (3,  ⫺3)  does  not  lie  on  the  line  with  equation 
2x ⫺ 3y ⫺ 12 ⫽ 0. (See the accompanying figure.)

Setting x ⫽ 0, we find y ⫽ ⫺4, the y-intercept. Next,
setting y ⫽ 0 gives x ⫽ 6, the x-intercept. We now draw the
line  passing  through  the  points  (0,  ⫺4)  and  (6,  0),  as
shown.

)
s
n
o
i
l
l
i

31
30
29
28
27
26
25
24
23
22S

s
r
e
b
i
r
c
s
b
u
s
 
V
T
 
e
t
i
l
l
e
t
a

 

m
n
i
(

1

3

2
Years

4

t

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

86

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

c. The slope of L is

m ⫽ 30.7 ⫺ 22.5

4 ⫺ 0

⫽ 2.05

Using the point-slope form of the equation of a line with
the point (0, 22.5), we find

y ⫺ 22.5 ⫽ 2.05(t ⫺ 0)

y ⫽ 2.05t ⫹ 22.5

d. Here  the  year  2010  corresponds  to  t ⫽ 6,  so  the  esti-
mated number of satellite TV subscribers in the United
States in 2010 is

y ⫽ 2.05(6) ⫹ 22.5 ⫽ 34.8

or 34.8 million.

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Graphing a Straight Line

Graphing Utility
The first step in plotting a straight line with a graphing utility is to select a suitable view-
ing window. We usually do this by experimenting. For example, you might first plot the
straight line using the standard viewing window [⫺10, 10] ⫻ [⫺10, 10]. If necessary,
you then might adjust the viewing window by enlarging it or reducing it to obtain a suf-
ficiently complete view of the line or at least the portion of the line that is of interest.

EXAMPLE 1 Plot the straight line 2x ⫹ 3y ⫺ 6 ⫽ 0 in the standard viewing window.

Solution The straight line in the standard viewing window is shown in Figure T1.

FIGURE T1
The straight line 2x ⫹ 3y ⫺ 6 ⫽ 0 in the
standard viewing window

_10

10

_10

10

EXAMPLE 2 Plot the straight line 2x ⫹ 3y ⫺ 30 ⫽ 0 in (a) the standard viewing
window and (b) the viewing window [⫺5, 20] ⫻ [⫺5, 20].

Solution

a. The straight line in the standard viewing window is shown in Figure T2a.
b. The straight line in the viewing window [⫺5, 20] ⫻ [⫺5, 20] is shown in Fig-
ure T2b. This figure certainly gives a more complete view of the straight line.

_10

10

_10

10

_5

20

_5

20

FIGURE T2

(a) The graph of 2x ⫹ 3y ⫺ 30 ⫽ 0 in 
the standard viewing window

(b) The graph of 2x ⫹ 3y ⫺ 30 ⫽ 0 in 
the viewing window [⫺5, 20] ⫻ [⫺5, 20]

Excel
In the examples and exercises that follow, we assume that you are familiar with the
basic features of Microsoft Excel. Please consult your Excel manual or use Excel’s
Help features  to  answer  questions  regarding  the  standard  commands  and  operating
instructions for Excel. Here we use Microsoft Excel 2010.*

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

*Instructions for solving these examples and exercises using Microsoft Excel 2007 are given on CourseMate.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

EXAMPLE 3 Plot the graph of the straight line 2x ⫹ 3y ⫺ 6 ⫽ 0 over the interval
[⫺10, 10].

2.2 EQUATIONS OF LINES

87

Solution

1. Write the equation in the slope-intercept form:

y ⫽ ⫺2
3

 x ⫹ 2

2. Create a table of values. First, enter the input values: Enter the values of the end-
points of the interval over which you are graphing the straight line. (Recall that we
need only two distinct data points to draw the graph of a straight line. In general,
we select the endpoints of the interval over which the straight line is to be drawn
as our data points.) In this case, we enter —10 in cell B1 and 10 in cell C1.
Second, enter the formula for computing the y-values: Here, we enter

= —(2/3)*B1+2

in cell B2 and then press 

Enter

.

Third, evaluate the function at the other input value: To extend the formula to cell

C2, move the pointer to the small black box at the lower right corner of cell B2 (the
cell containing the formula). Observe that the pointer now appears as a black ⫹ (plus
sign). Drag this pointer through cell C2 and then release it. The y-value, – 4.66667,
corresponding to the x-value in cell C1(10) will appear in cell C2 (Figure T3).

FIGURE T3
Table of values for x and y

A

x
y

1
2

B

-10
8.666667

C

10
-4.66667

3. Graph the straight line determined by these points. First, highlight the numerical

values in the table. Here we highlight cells B1:B2 and C1:C2.

Step 1 Click on the 

Insert

ribbon tab and then select 

Scatter

from the Charts

group. Select the chart subtype in the first row and second column. A
chart will then appear on your worksheet. 

Step 2

Layout

Chart Title

. Click 

Axis Titles

from the Labels

. Type y =-(2/3)x + 2 and press 

tab and then select 
Above Chart

From the Chart Tools group that now appears at the end of the ribbon,
click the 
group followed by 
Enter
Primary Horizontal Axis Title
and then press 
Primary Vertical Axis Title
press 

from the Labels group and select 
Title Below Axis

again and select 

Enter

. Next, click 

Axis Titles

followed by 

followed by 

Vertical Title

. Type y and 

. Type x

Enter

.

Step 3 Click 
press 

Series1
Delete

.

which appears on the right side of the graph and 

Note: Boldfaced words/characters enclosed in a box (for example, 
required. Words/characters printed blue (for example, Chart Type) indicate words/characters that appear on the screen.
Words/characters printed in a monospace font (for example, =(—2/3)*A2+2) indicate words/characters that need to be typed
and entered.

) indicate that an action (click, select, or press) is

Enter

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(continued)
(continued)

88

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

The graph shown in Figure T4 will appear.

y

⫺15

⫺10

⫺5

y = -(2/3)x + 2

10
  8
  6
  4
  2
  0
⫺2
⫺4
⫺6

0

x

5

10

15

FIGURE T4
The graph of 

y ⫽ ⫺2

3 x ⫹ 2

over the interval 

3 ⫺10, 104

If the interval over which the straight line is to be plotted is not specified, then
you might have to experiment to find an appropriate interval for the x-values in your
graph. For example, you might first plot the straight line over the interval [⫺10, 10].
If  necessary  you  then  might  adjust  the  interval  by  enlarging  it  or  reducing  it  to
obtain a sufficiently complete view of the line or at least the portion of the line that
is of interest.

EXAMPLE 4 Plot the straight line 2x ⫹ 3y ⫺ 30 ⫽ 0 over the intervals 
(a) [⫺10, 10] and (b) [⫺5, 20].

Solution a and b. We first cast the equation in the slope-intercept form, obtaining
y ⫽ ⫺2
. Following the procedure given in Example 3, we obtain the graphs
shown in Figure T5.

3 x ⫹ 10

y = -(2/3)x + 10

y = -(2/3)x + 10

18
16
14
  12
10
8
6
4
2
0

0
x

y

⫺15

⫺10

⫺5

5

10

15

(a)
FIGURE T5
The graph of 

y ⫽ ⫺2

3 x ⫹ 10

over the intervals (a) [⫺10, 10] and (b) [⫺5, 20]

16
14
12
10
  8
  6
  4
  2
  0
⫺2
⫺4
⫺6

0

x

y

⫺10

⫺5

(b)

5

10

15

20

25

Observe that the graph in Figure T5b includes the x- and y-intercepts. This fig-

ure certainly gives a more complete view of the straight line.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

2.3 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

89

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

Graphing Utility
In Exercises 1–4, plot the straight line with the equation in the
standard viewing window.
1. 3.2x ⫹ 2.1y ⫺ 6.72 ⫽ 0

2. 2.3x ⫺ 4.1y ⫺ 9.43 ⫽ 0

Excel
In Exercises 1–4, plot the straight line with the equation over the
interval [ⴚ10, 10].
1. 3.2x ⫹ 2.1y ⫺ 6.72 ⫽ 0

2. 2.3x ⫺ 4.1y ⫺ 9.43 ⫽ 0

3. 1.6x ⫹ 5.1y ⫽ 8.16

4. ⫺3.2x ⫹ 2.1y ⫽ 6.72

3. 1.6x ⫹ 5.1y ⫽ 8.16

4. ⫺3.2x ⫹ 2.1y ⫽ 6.72

In Exercises 5–8, plot the straight line with the equation in (a) the
standard  viewing  window  and  (b)  the  indicated  viewing  win-
dow.
5. 12.1x ⫹ 4.1y ⫺ 49.61 ⫽ 0; [⫺10, 10] ⫻ [⫺10, 20]

6. 4.1x ⫺ 15.2y ⫺ 62.32 ⫽ 0; [⫺10, 20] ⫻ [⫺10, 10]

7. 20x ⫹ 16y ⫽ 300; [⫺10, 20] ⫻ [⫺10, 30]

8. 32.2x ⫹ 21y ⫽ 676.2; [⫺10, 30] ⫻ [⫺10, 40]

In Exercises 9–12, plot the straight line with the equation in an
appropriate viewing window. (Note: The answer is not unique.)
9. 20x ⫹ 30y ⫽ 600

10. 30x ⫺ 20y ⫽ 600

11. 22.4x ⫹ 16.1y ⫺ 352 ⫽ 0

12. 18.2x ⫺ 15.1y ⫽ 274.8

In Exercises 5–8, plot the straight line with the equation over the
given interval.
5. 12.1x ⫹ 4.1y ⫺ 49.61 ⫽ 0; [⫺10, 10]

6. 4.1x ⫺ 15.2y ⫺ 62.32 ⫽ 0; [⫺10, 20]

7. 20x ⫹ 16y ⫽ 300; [⫺10, 20]

8. 32.2x ⫹ 21y ⫽ 676.2; [⫺10, 30]

In Exercises 9–12, plot the straight line with the equation. (Note:
The answer is not unique.)
9. 20x ⫹ 30y ⫽ 600

10. 30x ⫺ 20y ⫽ 600

11. 22.4x ⫹ 16.1y ⫺ 352 ⫽ 0

12. 18.2x ⫺ 15.1y ⫽ 274.8

2.3

Functions and Their Graphs

Functions
A manufacturer would like to know how his company’s profit is related to its produc-
tion level; a biologist would like to know how the size of the population of a certain
culture of bacteria will change over time; a psychologist would like to know the rela-
tionship between the learning time of an individual and the length of a vocabulary list;
and  a  chemist  would  like  to  know  how  the  initial  speed  of  a  chemical  reaction  is
related to the amount of substrate used. In each instance, we are concerned with the
same  question:  How  does  one  quantity  depend  upon  another?  The  relationship
between two quantities is conveniently described in mathematics by using the concept
of a function.

Function
A function is a rule that assigns to each element in a set A one and only one ele-
ment in a set B.

The set A is called the domain of the function. It is customary to denote a function by
a letter of the alphabet, such as the letter f. If x is an element in the domain of a func-
tion f, then the element in B that f associates with x is written f(x) (read “f of x”) and

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

90

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

is  called  the  value  of  f at  x.  The  set  comprising  all  the  values  assumed  by  y ⫽ f(x) 
as x takes on all possible values in its domain is called the range of the function f.

We can think of a function f as a machine. The domain is the set of inputs (raw
material) for the machine, the rule describes how the input is to be processed, and the
values of the function are the outputs of the machine (Figure 23).

We  can  also  think  of  a  function  f as  a  mapping  in  which  an  element  x in  the

domain of f is mapped onto a unique element f(x) in B (Figure 24).

Notes

1. The output f(x) associated with an input x is unique. To appreciate the importance of
this uniqueness property, consider a rule that associates with each item x in a depart-
ment store its selling price y. Then, each x must correspond to one and only one y.
Notice, however, that different x’s may be associated with the same y. In the context
of the present example, this says that different items may have the same price.

2. Although the sets A and B that appear in the definition of a function may be quite

arbitrary, in this book they will denote sets of real numbers.

An example of a function may be taken from the familiar relationship between the
area of a circle and its radius. Letting x and y denote the radius and area of a circle,
respectively, we have, from elementary geometry,

y ⫽ px2

(5)

FIGURE 23
A function machine

FIGURE 24
The function f viewed as a mapping

Equation (5) defines y as a function of x since for each admissible value of x (that is,
for each nonnegative number representing the radius of a certain circle), there corre-
sponds precisely one number y ⫽ px2 that gives the area of the circle. The rule defin-
ing this “area function” may be written as

(6)

To compute the area of a circle of radius 5 inches, we simply replace x in Equation (6)
with the number 5. Thus, the area of the circle is

f1x2 ⫽ px2

f152 ⫽ p 52 ⫽ 25p

or 25p square inches.

In general, to evaluate a function at a specific value of x, we replace x with that

value, as illustrated in Examples 1 and 2.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 1 Let the function f be defined by the rule f1x2 ⫽ 2x2 ⫺ x ⫹ 1. Find:
a. f112

d. f1a ⫹ h2

b. f1⫺22

c. f1a2

Solution

a. f112 ⫽ 21122 ⫺ 112 ⫹ 1 ⫽ 2 ⫺ 1 ⫹ 1 ⫽ 2
b. f1⫺22 ⫽ 21⫺222 ⫺ 1⫺22 ⫹ 1 ⫽ 8 ⫹ 2 ⫹ 1 ⫽ 11
c. f1a2 ⫽ 21a22 ⫺ 1a2 ⫹ 1 ⫽ 2a2 ⫺ a ⫹ 1
d. f1a ⫹ h2 ⫽ 21a ⫹ h22 ⫺ 1a ⫹ h2 ⫹ 1 ⫽ 2a2 ⫹ 4ah ⫹ 2h2 ⫺ a ⫺ h ⫹ 1

APPLIED EXAMPLE 2 Profit Functions ThermoMaster manufactures an
indoor–outdoor thermometer at its Mexican subsidiary. Management

estimates that the profit (in dollars) realizable by ThermoMaster in the manufac-
ture and sale of x thermometers per week is

P1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.001x2 ⫹ 8x ⫺ 5000

Find ThermoMaster’s weekly profit if its level of production is (a) 1000 ther-
mometers per week and (b) 2000 thermometers per week.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Solution

2.3 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

91

a. The weekly profit when the level of production is 1000 units per week is

found by evaluating the profit function P at x ⫽ 1000. Thus,

P110002 ⫽ ⫺0.0011100022 ⫹ 8110002 ⫺ 5000 ⫽ 2000

or $2000.

b. When the level of production is 2000 units per week, the weekly profit is

given by

or $7000.

P120002 ⫽ ⫺0.0011200022 ⫹ 8120002 ⫺ 5000 ⫽ 7000

Determining the Domain of a Function
Suppose we are given the function y ⫽ f(x).* Then, the variable x is called the inde-
pendent variable. The variable y, whose value depends on x, is called the dependent
variable.

To determine the domain of a function, we need to find what restrictions, if any,
are  to  be  placed  on  the  independent  variable  x.  In  many  practical  applications,  the
domain of a function is dictated by the nature of the problem, as illustrated in Exam-
ple 3.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 3 Packaging An open box is to be made from a rect-
angular piece of cardboard 16 inches long and 10 inches wide by cutting 

away identical squares (x inches by x inches) from each corner and folding up the
resulting flaps (Figure 25). Find an expression that gives the volume V of the box
as a function of x. What is the domain of the function?

x

10 10 – 2x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

16 – 2x

16

x

1

0

–

2

x

1 6 – 2 x

(a) The box is constructed by cutting 
x ⬙ by x ⬙ squares from each corner.
FIGURE 25

(b) The dimensions of the resulting box
are (10 ⫺ 2x)⬙ by (16 ⫺ 2x)⬙ by x ⬙.

Solution The dimensions of the box are (10 ⫺ 2x) inches by (16 ⫺ 2x) inches
by x inches, so its volume (in cubic inches) is given by

V ⫽ f1x2 ⫽ 116 ⫺ 2x2110 ⫺ 2x2x
⫽ 1160 ⫺ 52x ⫹ 4x22x
⫽ 4x3 ⫺ 52x2 ⫹ 160x

Length ⭈ width ⭈ height

Since the length of each side of the box must be greater than or equal to zero, we
see that

16 ⫺ 2x ⱖ 0

10 ⫺ 2x ⱖ 0

x ⱖ 0

*It is customary to refer to a function f as f(x) or by the equation y ⫽ f(x) defining it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

92

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

simultaneously; that is,

x ⱕ 8

x ⱕ 5

x ⱖ 0

All three inequalities are satisfied simultaneously provided that 0 ⱕ x ⱕ 5. Thus,
the domain of the function f is the interval [0, 5].

In general, if a function is defined by a rule relating x to f(x) without specific men-
tion of its domain, it is understood that the domain will consist of all values of x for which
f(x) is a real number. In this connection, you should keep in mind that (1) division by zero
is not permitted and (2) the even root of a negative number is not a real number.

EXAMPLE 4 Find the domain of each function.

b.

f 1x2 ⫽ 1

x2 ⫺ 4

c. f1x2 ⫽ x2 ⫹ 3

f 1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫺ 1

a.

Solution

a. Since the square root of a negative number is not a real number, it is necessary

that x ⫺ 1 ⱖ 0. The inequality is satisfied by the set of real numbers x ⱖ 1. Thus,
the domain of f is the interval [1, ⬁).
b. The only restriction on x is that x2 ⫺ 4 be different from zero, since division by
zero is not allowed. But 1x2 ⫺ 42 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 221x ⫺ 22 ⫽ 0 if x ⫽ ⫺2 or x ⫽ 2. Thus,
the domain of f in this case consists of the intervals (⫺⬁, ⫺2), (⫺2, 2), and (2, ⬁).

c. Here, any real number satisfies the equation, so the domain of f is the set of all

real numbers.

Graphs of Functions
If f is a function with domain A, then corresponding to each real number x in A, there
is precisely one real number f(x). We can also express this fact by using ordered pairs
of real numbers. Write each number x in A as the first member of an ordered pair and
each number f(x) corresponding to x as the second member of the ordered pair. This
gives exactly one ordered pair (x, f(x)) for each x in A.

Observe  that  the  condition  that  there  be  one  and  only  one  number  f(x)  corre-
sponding to each number x in A translates into the requirement that no two ordered
pairs have the same first number.

Since ordered pairs of real numbers correspond to points in the plane, we have

found a way to exhibit a function graphically.

Graph of a Function of One Variable
The graph of a function f is the set of all points (x, y) in the xy-plane such that
x is in the domain of f and y ⫽ f(x).

Figure 26 shows the graph of a function f. Observe that the y-coordinate of the
point  (x,  y)  on  the  graph  of  f gives  the  height  of  that  point  (the  distance  above  the 
x-axis), if f(x) is positive. If f(x) is negative, then ⫺f(x) gives the depth of the point
(x, y) (the distance below the x-axis). Also, observe that the domain of f is a set of real
numbers lying on the x-axis, whereas the range of f lies on the y-axis.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2.3 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

93

y

y

Range

(x, y)

y =  f (x)

x

x

FIGURE 26
The graph of f

Domain

y

y = f (x)

EXAMPLE 5 The graph of a function f is shown in Figure 27.
a. What is the value of f(3)? The value of f(5)?
b. What is the height or depth of the point (3, f(3)) from the x-axis? The point 

(5, f(5)) from the x-axis?

c. What is the domain of f ? The range of f ?

1

3

5

7

x

7
6
5
4
3

1

–1
–2
–3
–4
–5

–2

FIGURE 27
The graph of f

Solution
a. From the graph of f, we see that y ⫽ ⫺2 when x ⫽ 3, and we conclude that 

f(3) ⫽ ⫺2. Similarly, we see that f(5) ⫽ 3.

b. Since the point (3, ⫺2) lies below the x-axis, we see that the depth of the
point (3, f (3)) is ⫺f (3) ⫽ ⫺(⫺2) ⫽ 2 units below the x-axis. The point 
(5, f (5)) lies above the x-axis and is located at a height of f (5), or 3 units
above the x-axis.

c. Observe that x may take on all values between x ⫽ ⫺1 and x ⫽ 7, inclusive, and

so the domain of f is [⫺1, 7]. Next, observe that as x takes on all values in the
domain of f, f(x) takes on all values between ⫺2 and 7, inclusive. (You can easily
see this by running your index finger along the x-axis from x ⫽ ⫺1 to x ⫽ 7 and
observing the corresponding values assumed by the y-coordinate of each point of
the graph of f.) Therefore, the range of f is [⫺2, 7].

Much information about the graph of a function can be gained by plotting a few
points on its graph. Later on, we will develop more systematic and sophisticated tech-
niques for graphing functions.

EXAMPLE 6 Sketch the graph of the function defined by the equation y ⫽ x2 ⫹ 1.
What is the range of f ?

Solution The domain of the function is the set of all real numbers. By assigning
several values to the variable x and computing the corresponding values for y, we
obtain the following solutions to the equation y ⫽ x2 ⫹ 1:

x

y

⫺3

10

⫺2

5

⫺1

2

0

1

1

2

2

5

3

10

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

94

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

y

(–3, 10)

(– 2, 5)

12

10

8

6

4

(3, 10)

(2, 5)

(–1, 2)

(1, 2)

– 4

x

4

FIGURE 28
The graph of y ⫽ x2 ⫹ 1 is a parabola.

y

4

2

4

2

– 2
– 4  
FIGURE 29
The graph of y ⫽ f(x) is obtained by
graphing y ⫽ ⫺x over (⫺⬁, 0) and 
y ⫽

over [0, ⬁).

1x

By plotting these points and then connecting them with a smooth curve, we obtain
the graph of y ⫽ f(x), which is a parabola (Figure 28). To determine the range of f,
we observe that x2 ⱖ 0 if x is any real number, and so x2 ⫹ 1 ⱖ 1 for all real num-
bers x. We conclude that the range of f is [1, ⬁). The graph of f confirms this result
visually.

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
Let f1x2 ⫽ x2.
1. Plot the graphs of F1x2 ⫽ x2 ⫹ c on the same set of axes for c ⫽ ⫺2, ⫺1, 
2. Plot the graphs of G1x2 ⫽1x ⫹ c2 2 on the same set of axes for c ⫽ ⫺2, ⫺1, 
3. Plot the graphs of H1x2 ⫽ cx2 on the same set of axes for c ⫽ ⫺2, ⫺1, 

0,  , 1, 2.

, 1, 2.

⫺1
2

, 

1
2

1
2

⫺1
2

, 0,

⫺1
2

,

⫺1
4

,

0,  ,  , 1, 2.

1
4

1
2

4. Study the family of graphs in parts 1–3, and describe the relationship between 

the graph of a function f and the graphs of the functions defined by 

(a) y ⫽ f1x2 ⫹ c, (b) y ⫽ f1x ⫹ c2, and (c) y ⫽ cf1x2, where c is a constant.

Sometimes a function is defined by giving different formulas for different parts of

its domain. Such a function is said to be a piecewise-defined function.

EXAMPLE 7 Sketch the graph of the function f defined by

1x
f 1x2 ⫽ e ⫺x

if x ⬍ 0
if x ⱖ 0

x

Solution The function f is defined in a piecewise fashion on the set of all real

numbers. In the subdomain (⫺⬁, 0), the rule for f is given by f1x2 ⫽ ⫺x. The equa-
tion y ⫽ ⫺x is a linear equation in the slope-intercept form (with slope ⫺1 and
intercept 0). Therefore, the graph of f corresponding to the subdomain (⫺⬁, 0) is the
f 1x2 ⫽ 1x
half-line shown in Figure 29. Next, in the subdomain [0, ⬁), the rule for f is given by
. The values of f1x2 corresponding to x ⫽ 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 are shown in the

following table:

x

f(x)

0

0

1

1

2

12

3

13

4

2

Using these values, we sketch the graph of the function f as shown in Figure 29.

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 8 Bank Deposits Madison Finance Company plans to
open two branch offices 2 years from now in two separate locations: an
industrial complex and a newly developed commercial center in the city. As a
result of these expansion plans, Madison’s total deposits during the next 5 years
are expected to grow in accordance with the rule

12x ⫹ 20
1
2  x2 ⫹ 20

f 1x2 ⫽c

if 0 ⱕ x ⱕ 2

if 2 ⬍ x ⱕ 5

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2.3 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

95

where y ⫽ f1x2 gives the total amount of money (in millions of dollars) on
deposit with Madison in year x (x ⫽ 0 corresponds to the present). Sketch the
graph of the function f.

Solution The function f is defined in a piecewise fashion on the interval [0, 5]. 
. The values 
In the subdomain [0, 2], the rule for f is given by 

f 1x2 ⫽ 12x ⫹ 20
of f1x2 corresponding to x ⫽ 0, 1, and 2 may be tabulated as follows:

x

f(x)

0

20

1

21.4

2

22

Next, in the subdomain (2, 5], the rule for f is given by f1x2 ⫽ x2 ⫹ 20. The 
values of f1x2 corresponding to x ⫽ 3, 4, and 5 are shown in the following table:

1
2 

x

f(x)

3

24.5

4

28

5

32.5

Using the values of f(x) in this table, we sketch the graph of the function f as
shown in Figure 30.

The Vertical Line Test
Although it is true that every function f of a variable x has a graph in the xy-plane, it
is not true that every curve in the xy-plane is the graph of a function. For example, con-
sider the curve depicted in Figure 31. This is the graph of the equation y2 ⫽ x. In gen-
eral, the graph of an equation is the set of all ordered pairs (x, y) that satisfy the given
equation. Observe that the points (9, ⫺3) and (9, 3) both lie on the curve. This implies
that the number x ⫽ 9 is associated with two numbers: y ⫽ ⫺3 and y ⫽ 3. But this
clearly  violates  the  uniqueness  property  of  a  function.  Thus,  we  conclude  that  the
curve under consideration cannot be the graph of a function.

This example suggests the following Vertical Line Test for determining whether

a curve is the graph of a function.

x

x

y

s
r
a
l
l
o
d

 

n
o
i
l
l
i

M

35

30

25

20

1

2

3
4
Years

5

6

FIGURE 30
We obtain the graph of the function 
y ⫽ f(x) by graphing y ⫽
⫹ 20 
over [0, 2] and y ⫽ x2 ⫹ 20 over 
(2, 5].

12x

1
2

x = 9

(9, 3)

4

8

12

(9, – 3)

y

8

4

– 4

– 8

FIGURE 31
Since a vertical line passes through the
curve at more than one point, we deduce
that the curve is not the graph of a 
function.

Vertical Line Test
A curve in the xy-plane is the graph of a function y ⫽ f(x) if and only if each
vertical line intersects it in at most one point.

EXAMPLE 9 Determine which of the curves shown in Figure 32 (see next page) are
the graphs of functions of x.

Solution The curves depicted in Figure 32a, c, and d are graphs of functions
because each curve satisfies the requirement that each vertical line intersects the
curve in at most one point. Note that the vertical line shown in Figure 32c does not
intersect the graph because the point on the x-axis through which this line passes
does not lie in the domain of the function. The curve depicted in Figure 32b is not

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

96

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

the graph of a function of x because the vertical line shown there intersects the graph
at three points.

y

y

(a)

(c)

y

y

x

x

x

x

(b)

(d)

FIGURE 32
The Vertical Line Test can be used to
determine which of these curves are
graphs of functions.

2.3 Self-Check Exercises

1. Let f be the function defined by

f 1x2 ⫽

a. Find the domain of f.
c. Compute f (a ⫹ h).

2. Let

1x ⫹ 1

x

b. Compute f (3).

a. Find f (0) and f (2).
b. Sketch the graph of f.

f 1x2 ⫽ 12x ⫹ 1 ⫹ 2

(4, 6) lies on the graph of f.

3. Let 

.  Determine  whether  the  point 

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 2.3 can be found on 
page 101.

2x ⫺ 1
f 1x2 ⫽ e ⫺x ⫹ 1

if ⫺1 ⱕ x ⬍ 1
if 1 ⱕ x ⱕ 5

2.3 Concept Questions

1. a. What is a function?

b. What is the domain of a function? The range of a func-

tion?

c. What is an independent variable? A dependent variable?

2. a. What is the graph of a function? Use a drawing to illus-
trate the graph, the domain, and the range of a function.
b. If you are given a curve in the xy-plane, how can you
tell whether the graph is that of a function f defined by
y ⫽ f(x)?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

3. Are the following graphs of functions? Explain.

4. What are the domain and range of the function f with the

2.3 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

97

a.

y

0

c.

y

0

b.
y

0

d.

x

x

x

x

y

0

following graph?

y

4

3

2

1

(2, 1)2

1

2

3

4

5

x

4

2.3 Exercises
1. Let f be the function defined by f1x2 ⫽ 5x ⫹ 6. Find f132,
f1⫺32, f1a2, f1⫺a2, and f1a ⫹ 32.
2. Let f be the function defined by f1x2 ⫽ 4x ⫺ 3. Find f142,
f1 ᎏ1
ᎏ2,  f102, f1a2, and f1a ⫹ 12.
3. Let t be the function defined by t1x2 ⫽ 3x2 ⫺ 6x ⫹ 3. Find
t102, t1⫺12, t1a2, t1⫺a2, and t1x ⫹ 12.
4. Let h be the function defined by h1x2 ⫽ x3 ⫺ x2 ⫹ x ⫹ 1.
Find h1⫺52, h102, h1a2, and h1⫺a2.
5. Let f be the function defined by f1x2 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 5. Find 
f1a ⫹ h2, f1⫺a2, f1a22, f1a ⫺ 2h2, and f12a ⫺ h2.
6. Let t be the function defined by t1x2 ⫽ ⫺x2 ⫹ 2x. Find
t1a ⫹ h2, t1⫺a2, t11a2, a ⫹ t1a2, and 
t 1a2
s1t2 ⫽ 2t

7. Let s be the function defined by 

s142, s102, s1a2, s12 ⫹ a2, and s1t ⫹ 12.
8. Let t be the function defined by t1u2 ⫽ 13u ⫺ 22 3/2. Find
t112, t162, t

, and t1u ⫹ 12.

111
3 2

. Find 

2 ⫺ 1

1

t 

.

9. Let f be the function defined by 

10. Let f be the function defined by 

f1a2, f1x ⫹ 12, and f1x ⫺ 12.
Find f1⫺42, f112, f

111
4 2

, and f1x ⫹ 52.

. Find f122,

f 1t2 ⫽ 2t 21t ⫺ 1
f 1x2 ⫽ 2 ⫹ 215 ⫺ x

. 

11. Let f be the function defined by

1x
f 1x2 ⫽ e x2 ⫹ 1

if x ⱕ 0
if x ⬎ 0

Find f(⫺3), f(0), and f(1).

12. Let t be the function defined by

2  x ⫹ 1
1x ⫺ 2
Find t(⫺2), t(0), t(2), and t(4).
13. Let f be the function defined by

2  x2 ⫹ 3
2x2 ⫹ 1

t 1x2 ⫽c⫺1
f 1x2 ⫽c⫺1
f 1x2 ⫽c2 ⫹ 11 ⫺ x

1 ⫺ x

1

Find f(⫺1), f(0), f(1), and f(2).

14. Let f be the function defined by

Find f(0), f(1), and f(2).

if x ⬍ 2

if x ⱖ 2

if x ⬍ 1

if x ⱖ 1

if x ⱕ 1

if x ⬎ 1

(continued)
(continued)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

98

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

15. Refer to the graph of the function f in the following fig-

ure.

y

6

5

4

3

2

1

–1

–2

y = f (x)

1

2

3

4

5

6

x

a. Find the value of f(0).
b. Find the value of x for which (i) f(x) ⫽ 3 and 

(ii) f (x) ⫽ 0.

c. Find the domain of f.
d. Find the range of f.

16. Refer to the graph of the function f in the following figure.

y

7
6
5
4
3
2

1

−3

−3 −2

y = f (x)

1

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

x

a. Find the value of f(7).
b. Find the values of x corresponding to the point(s) on the
graph of f located at a height of 5 units from the x-axis.
c. Find  the  point  on  the  x-axis  at  which  the  graph  of  f

crosses it. What is the value of f (x) at this point?

d. Find the domain and range of f.

In  Exercises  17–20,  determine  whether  the  point  lies  on  the
graph of the function.
17.

12, 232; t1x2 ⫽ 2x2 ⫺ 1
x ⫹ 12x2 ⫹ 7
13, 32; f 1x2 ⫽
兩 t ⫺ 1兩
t ⫹ 1

1⫺2, ⫺32; f  1t2 ⫽

⫹ 2

18.

19.

20.

a ⫺3, ⫺ 1

13b ; h1t2 ⫽

兩 t ⫹ 1兩
3 ⫹ 1
t 

In  Exercises  21  and  22,  find  the  value  of  c such  that  the  point 
P(a, b) lies on the graph of the function f.

21. f1x2 ⫽ 2x2 ⫺ 4x ⫹ c; P11, 52
22. f1x2 ⫽
⫹ c; P12, 42

x29 ⫺ x 2

In Exercises 23–36, find the domain of the function.

2

x 

27.

25.

23. f1x2 ⫽ x2 ⫹ 3
f  1x2 ⫽ 3x ⫹ 1
f  1x2 ⫽ 2x 2 ⫹ 1
f  1x2 ⫽ 15 ⫺ x
f  1x2 ⫽

2 ⫺ 4
33. f1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 32 3/2
11 ⫺ x

29.

31.

x 

x

35.

f  1x2 ⫽

x 

2 ⫺ 4

26.

x ⫺ 1

24. f1x2 ⫽ 7 ⫺ x2
t1x2 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 1
f  1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫺ 5
t1x2 ⫽ 22x 2 ⫹ 3
f  1x2 ⫽

28.

30.

32.

1

x 

2 ⫹ x ⫺ 2

34. t1x2 ⫽ 21x ⫺ 12 5/2
1x ⫺ 1

36.

f  1x2 ⫽

1x ⫹ 221x ⫺ 32

37. Let f be the function defined by the rule f(x) ⫽ x2 ⫺ x ⫺ 6.

a. Find the domain of f.
b. Compute f(x) for 
c. Use the results obtained in parts (a) and (b) to sketch the

x ⫽ ⫺3, ⫺2, ⫺1, 0, 1

.
2, 1, 2, 3

graph of f.

38. Let f be the function defined by the rule f(x) ⫽ 2x2 ⫹ x ⫺ 3.

a. Find the domain of f.
b. Compute f(x) for 
c. Use the results obtained in parts (a) and (b) to sketch the

x ⫽ ⫺3, ⫺2, ⫺1, ⫺1

2, 0, 1, 2, 3

.

graph of f.

In Exercises 39–50, sketch the graph of the function f. Find the
domain and range of the function.

42.

40. f1x2 ⫽ 9 ⫺ x2
t 1x2 ⫽ 4 ⫺ 1x
f  1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫺ 1
f  1x2 ⫽ 兩 x 兩 ⫹ 1

44.

46.

45.

43.

41.

39. f1x2 ⫽ 2x2 ⫹ 1
f  1x2 ⫽ 2 ⫹ 1x
f  1x2 ⫽ 11 ⫺ x
f  1x2 ⫽ 兩 x 兩 ⫺ 1
f  1x2 ⫽ e x
f  1x2 ⫽ e 4 ⫺ x
f  1x2 ⫽ e ⫺x ⫹ 1

2x ⫹ 1

2x ⫺ 2

x2 ⫺ 1

47.

48.

49.

if x ⬍ 0
if x ⱖ 0

if x ⬍ 2
if x ⱖ 2

if x ⱕ 1
if x ⬎ 1

50. f 1x2 ⫽c⫺x ⫺ 1

0
x ⫹ 1

if x ⬍ ⫺1
if ⫺1 ⱕ x ⱕ 1
if  

⬎ 1

x

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

In  Exercises  51–58,  use  the  Vertical  Line  Test  to  determine
whether the graph represents y as a function of x.
51.

52.

y

y

53.

55.

57.

y

y

y

x

x

x

x

54.

y

56.

58.

y

y

x

x

x

x

59. The circumference of a circle is given by 

C1r2 ⫽ 2pr

where r is the radius of the circle. What is the circumfer-
ence of a circle with a 5-in. radius?

60. The volume of a sphere of radius r is given by

V1r2 ⫽ 4

3  pr3

Compute V(2.1) and V(2). What does the quantity V(2.1) ⫺
V(2) measure?

2.3 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

99

61. GROWTH OF A CANCEROUS TUMOR The volume of a spherical

cancerous tumor is given by the function

V1r2 ⫽ 4

3  pr3

where r is the radius of the tumor in centimeters. By what
factor is the volume of the tumor increased if its radius is
doubled?

62. LIFE EXPECTANCY AFTER AGE 65 The average life expectancy
after age 65 is soaring, putting pressure on the Social Secu-
rity  Administration’s  resources.  According  to  the  Social
Security Trustees, the average life expectancy after age 65 is
given by

L1t2 ⫽ 0.056t ⫹ 18.1

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 72

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
2003.
a. How  fast  is  the  average  life  expectancy  after  age  65
changing  at  any  time  during  the  period  under  consider-
ation?

b. What  was  the  average  life  expectancy  after  age  65  in

2010?

Source: Social Security Trustees.

63. CLOSING THE GENDER GAP IN EDUCATION The  following 
graph shows the ratio of the number of bachelor’s degrees
earned  by  women  to  that  of  men  from  1960  through 
1990.

y (ratio of degrees earned)

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.6

(0, 0.58) 

(30, 1.1) 

(20, 0.95) 

10

20

30

t (years)

a. Write the rule for the function f giving the ratio of the
number of bachelor’s degrees earned by women to that
of men in year t, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 1960.
Hint: The  function  f is  defined  piecewise  and  is  linear  over
each of two subintervals.

b. How fast was the ratio changing in the period from 1960

to 1980? From 1980 to 1990?

c. In what year (approximately) was the number of bache-
lor’s degrees earned by women equal for the first time
to the number earned by men?

Source: Department of Education.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

100

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

64. THE GENDER GAP The  following  graph  shows  the  ratio  of

68. HOTEL RATES The  average  daily  rate  of  U.S.  hotels  from

women’s earnings to men’s from 1960 through 2000.

2006 through 2009 is approximated by the function

y  (ratio of women’s to men’s earnings)

(40, 0.78)

(0, 0.61)

(10, 0.59)

(20, 0.60)

(30, 0.66)

0.80

0.75

0.70

0.65

0.60

0.55

10

20

30

40

t (years)

a. Write  the  rule  for  the  function  f giving  the  ratio  of
women’s earnings to men’s in year t, with t ⫽ 0 corre-
sponding to 1960.
Hint: The  function  f is  defined  piecewise  and  is  linear  over
each of four subintervals.

b. In  what  decade(s)  was  the  gender  gap  expanding?

Shrinking?

c. Refer to part (b). How fast was the gender gap expand-

ing or shrinking in each of these decades?

Source: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

65. WORKER EFFICIENCY An efficiency study conducted for Elek-
tra Electronics showed that the number of Space Commander
walkie-talkies  assembled  by  the  average  worker  t hr  after
starting work at 8 A.M. is given by

N1t2 ⫽ ⫺t3 ⫹ 6t 2 ⫹ 15t

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

How many walkie-talkies can an average worker be expected
to assemble between 8 and 9 A.M.? Between 9 and 10 A.M.?
66. POLITICS Political scientists have discovered the following
empirical rule, known as the “cube rule,” which gives the
relationship between the proportion of seats in the House
of Representatives won by Democratic candidates s(x) and
the proportion of popular votes  x received by the Demo-
cratic presidential candidate:

s1x2 ⫽

x3

x3 ⫹ 11 ⫺ x2 3

    10 ⱕ x ⱕ 12

Compute s(0.6), and interpret your result.

67. U.S.  HEALTH-CARE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SPENDING As
health-care costs increase, payers are turning to technology
and  outsourced  services  to  keep  a  lid  on  expenses.  The
amount of health-care information technology (IT) spend-
ing by payer is projected to be 

S1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.03t3 ⫹ 0.2t2 ⫹ 0.23t ⫹ 5.6

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

where S(t) is measured in billions of dollars and t is mea-
sured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 2004. What was
the  amount  spent  by  payers  on  health-care  IT  in  2004?
Assuming that the projection held true, what amount was
spent by payers in 2008?
Source: U.S. Department of Commerce.

f 1t2 ⫽ e 0.88t2 ⫹ 3.21t ⫹ 96.75

⫺5.58t ⫹ 117.85

if 0 ⱕ t ⬍ 2
if 2 ⱕ t ⱕ 3

where f(t) is measured in dollars and t ⫽ 0 corresponds to
2006.
a. What was the average daily rate of U.S. hotels in 2006?

In 2007? In 2008?

b. Sketch the graph of f.
Source: Smith Travel Research.

69. INVESTMENTS IN HEDGE FUNDS Investments  in  hedge  funds
have  increased  along  with  their  popularity.  The  assets  of
hedge  funds  (in  trillions  of  dollars)  from  2002  through
2007 are modeled by the function

f 1t2 ⫽ e 0.6

0.6t 0.43

if 0 ⱕ t ⬍ 1
if 1 ⱕ t ⱕ 5

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
the beginning of 2002.
a. What were the assets in hedge funds at the beginning of

2002? At the beginning of 2003?

b. What were the assets in hedge funds at the beginning of

2005? At the beginning of 2007?

Source: Hennessee Group.

70. RISING MEDIAN AGE Increased longevity and the aging of the
baby  boom  generation—those  born  between  1946  and
1965—are the primary reasons for a rising median age. The
median  age  (in  years)  of  the  U.S.  population  from  1900
through 2000 is approximated by the function

1.3t ⫹ 22.9
⫺0.7t 
2.6t ⫹ 9.4

2 ⫹ 7.2t ⫹ 11.5

if 0 ⱕ t ⱕ 3
if 3 ⬍ t ⱕ 7
if 7 ⬍ t ⱕ 10

f 1t2 ⫽c 

where t is measured in decades, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding
to the beginning of 1900.
a. What was the median age of the U.S. population at the
beginning  of  1900?  At  the  beginning  of  1950?  At  the
beginning of 1990?

b. Sketch the graph of f.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

71. HARBOR CLEANUP The  amount  of  solids  discharged  from
the  MWRA  (Massachusetts  Water  Resources  Authority)
sewage treatment plant on Deer Island (in Boston Harbor)
is given by the function

130
⫺30t ⫹ 160
100
⫺5t 
1.25t 

2 ⫹ 25t ⫹ 80
2 ⫺ 26.25t ⫹ 162.5

if 0 ⱕ t ⱕ 1
if 1 ⬍ t ⱕ 2
if 2 ⬍ t ⱕ 4
if 4 ⬍ t ⱕ 6
if 6 ⬍ t ⱕ 10

f  1t2 ⫽e 

where f(t) is measured in tons per day and t is measured in
years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 1989.
a. What  amount  of  solids  were  discharged  per  day  in

1989? In 1992? In 1996?

b. Sketch the graph of f.
Source: Metropolitan District Commission.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

In Exercises 72–76, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
72. If a ⫽ b, then f(a) ⫽ f(b).
73. If f(a) ⫽ f(b), then a ⫽ b.

74. If f is a function, then f(a ⫹ b) ⫽ f(a) ⫹ f(b).
75. A vertical line must intersect the graph of y ⫽ f(x) at exactly

one point.

76. The domain of 

f1x2 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 2  ⫹ 22 ⫺ x

is [⫺2, 2].

2.3 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

101

2.3 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. a. The expression under the radical sign must be nonneg-
ative, so x ⫹ 1 ⱖ 0 or x ⱖ ⫺1. Also, x ⫽ 0 because divi-
sion by zero is not permitted. Therefore, the domain of 
f is [⫺1, 0) 傼 (0, ⬁).
f  132 ⫽
f  1a ⫹ h2 ⫽

14
11a ⫹ h2 ⫹ 1

1a ⫹ h ⫹ 1

13 ⫹ 1

⫽ 2
3

a ⫹ h

a ⫹ h

b.

⫽

c.

⫽

3

3

2. a. The  function  f

b. In  the  subdomain 

is  defined  in  a  piecewise  fashion. 

For x ⫽ 0, the rule is f1x2 ⫽ ⫺x ⫹ 1, and so f102 ⫽ 1.
f 122 ⫽ 12 ⫺ 1 ⫽ 1
For  x ⫽ 2,  the  rule  is 
3 ⫺1, 12

f 1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫺ 1

segment 
slope ⫺1 and y-intercept 1. In the subdomain 
the  graph  of  f is  given  by  the  rule 
From the table below,

,  the  graph  of  f is  the  line
, which is a linear equation with
,
.

31, 54
f 1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫺ 1

y ⫽ ⫺x ⫹ 1

,  and  so

.

we obtain the following graph of f.

y

3

2

1

– 1

1

2

3

4

5

x

3. A point (x, y) lies on the graph of the function f if the coor-

dinates satisfy the equation y ⫽ f(x). Now,

f  142 ⫽ 12142 ⫹ 1 ⫹ 2 ⫽ 19 ⫹ 2 ⫽ 5 ⫽ 6

and we conclude that the given point does  not lie on the
graph of f.

x
f(x)

1
0

2
1

3

12

4

13

5
2

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Graphing a Function
Most of the graphs of functions in this book can be plotted with the help of a graph-
ing utility. Furthermore, a graphing utility can be used to analyze the nature of a
function. However, the amount and accuracy of the information obtained by using
a graphing utility depend on the experience and sophistication of the user. As you
progress through this book, you will see that the more knowledge of mathematics
you gain, the more effective the graphing utility will prove to be as a tool in prob-
lem solving.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(continued)

102

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

EXAMPLE 1 Plot the graph of f1x2 ⫽ 2x2 ⫺ 4x ⫺ 5 in the standard viewing window.

Solution The graph of f, shown in Figure T1a, is a parabola. From our previous
work (Example 6, Section 2.3), we know that the figure does give a good view of
the graph.

_10

10

_10

10

WINDOW

Xmin = -10
Xmax = 10
Xsc1 = 1
Ymin = -10
Ymax = 10
Ysc1 = 1
Xres = 1

Plot1 Plot2 Plot3
\Y1=2X^2-4X-5
\Y2=
\Y3=
\Y4=
\Y5=
\Y6=
\Y7=

(a)
FIGURE T1
(a) The graph of f(x) ⫽ 2x2 ⫺ 4x ⫺ 5 on [⫺10, 10] ⫻ [⫺10, 10]; (b) the TI-83/84 window screen 
for (a); (c) the TI-83/84 equation screen 

(b)

(c)

EXAMPLE 2 Let f1x2 ⫽ x 31x ⫺ 32 4.
a. Plot the graph of f in the standard viewing window.
b. Plot the graph of f in the window [⫺1, 5] ⫻ [⫺40, 40].

Solution

a. The graph of f in the standard viewing window is shown in Figure T2a. Since the

graph does not appear to be complete, we need to adjust the viewing window.

10

_10

_10

(a)

10

Plot1 Plot2 Plot3
\Y1=X^3(X-3)^4
\Y2 =
\Y3 =
\Y4 =
\Y5 =
\Y6 =
\Y7 =

(b)

b. The graph of f in the window [⫺1, 5] ⫻ [⫺40, 40], shown in Figure T3a, is an
improvement over the previous graph. (Later we will be able to show that the fig-
ure does in fact give a rather complete view of the graph of f.)

40

_40

_1

(a)

5

WINDOW

Xmin = -1
Xmax = 5
Xsc1 = 1
Ymin = -40
Ymax =  40
Ysc1 = 1
Xres = 1

(b)

FIGURE T2
(a) An incomplete sketch of 
f(x) ⫽ x3(x ⫺ 3)4 on [⫺10, 10] ⫻
[⫺10, 10]; (b) the TI-83/84 equation
screen

FIGURE T3
(a) A complete sketch of f(x) ⫽
x3(x ⫺ 3)4 is shown using the window
[⫺1, 5] ⫻ [⫺40, 40]; (b) the TI-83/84 
window screen 

Evaluating a Function
A graphing utility can be used to find the value of a function with minimal effort, as
the next example shows.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

2.3 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

103

EXAMPLE 3 Let f1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 4x 2 ⫹ 4x ⫹ 2.

a. Plot the graph of f in the standard viewing window.
b. Find f(3) and verify your result by direct computation.
c. Find f(4.215).

Solution

a. The graph of f is shown in Figure T4a.

10

_10

_10

(a)

10

Plot1 Plot2 Plot3
\Y1=X^3-4X^2+4X+2
\Y2=
\Y3=
\Y4=
\Y5=
\Y6=

(b)

FIGURE T4
(a) The graph of f(x) ⫽ x3 ⫺ 4x2 ⫹
4x ⫹ 2 in the standard viewing window;
(b) the TI-83/84 equation screen

b. Using the evaluation function of the graphing utility and the value 3 for x, we find

y ⫽ 5. This result is verified by computing

f132 ⫽ 33 ⫺ 41322 ⫹ 4132 ⫹ 2 ⫽ 27 ⫺ 36 ⫹ 12 ⫹ 2 ⫽ 5

c. Using the evaluation function of the graphing utility and the value 4.215 for x, we
find y ⫽ 22.679738. Thus, f(4.215)  ⫽ 22.679738. The efficacy of the graphing
utility is clearly demonstrated here!

APPLIED EXAMPLE 4 Number of Alzheimer’s Patients The number of
Alzheimer’s patients in the United States is approximated by

f1t2 ⫽ 0.142t 3 ⫺ 0.557t 2 ⫹ 1.340t ⫹ 3.8

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

where f(t) is measured in millions and t is measured in decades, with t ⫽ 0 corre-
sponding to the beginning of 1990.
a. Use a graphing utility to plot the graph of f in the viewing window [0, 4] ⫻

[0, 12].

b. What is the projected number of Alzheimer’s patients in the United States at

the beginning of 2020 (t ⫽ 3)?

Source: Alzheimer’s Association.

Solution
a. The graph of f in the viewing window [0, 4] ⫻ [0, 12] is shown in Figure T5a.

FIGURE T5
(a) The graph of f in the viewing window
[0, 4] ⫻ [0, 12]; (b) the TI-83/84 equation
screen

12

0
(a)

Plot1 Plot2 Plot3
\Y1=.142X^3-.557X^2+ 
1.34X+3.8
\Y2=
\Y3=
\Y4=
\Y5=

4

(b)

(continued)
(continued)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

104

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

b. Using the evaluation function of the graphing utility and the value 3 for x, 

we see that the anticipated number of Alzheimer’s patients at the beginning of
2020 is given by f(3) ⬇ 6.64, or approximately 6.6 million.

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

In Exercises 1–4, plot the graph of the function f in (a) the standard
viewing window and (b) the indicated window.
1.

f 1x2 ⫽ x 4 ⫺ 2x2 ⫹ 8; 3 ⫺2, 24 ⫻ 36, 104
f 1x2 ⫽ x3 ⫺ 20x2 ⫹ 8x ⫺ 10; 3 ⫺20, 204 ⫻ 3 ⫺1200, 1004
f  1x2 ⫽ x24 ⫺ x2; 3⫺3, 34 ⫻ 3 ⫺2, 24
f  1x2 ⫽ 4
; 3 ⫺5, 54 ⫻ 3 ⫺5, 54

2.

3.

4.

x2 ⫺ 8

In Exercises 5–8, plot the graph of the function f in an appropri-
ate viewing window. (Note: The answer is not unique.)

5. f1x2 ⫽ 2x 4 ⫺ 3x 3 ⫹ 5x 2 ⫺ 20x ⫹ 40
6. f1x2 ⫽ ⫺2x 4 ⫹ 5x 2 ⫺ 4

7.

f  1x2 ⫽

x3

x3 ⫹ 1

8.

f  1x2 ⫽ 2x4 ⫺ 3x

2 ⫺ 1

x 

In  Exercises  9–12,  use  the  evaluation  function  of  your  graphing
utility to find the value of f at the indicated value of x. Express your
answer accurate to four decimal places.

9. f1x2 ⫽ 3x 3 ⫺ 2x 2 ⫹ x ⫺ 4; x ⫽ 2.145
10. f1x2 ⫽ 5x 4 ⫺ 2x 2 ⫹ 8x ⫺ 3; x ⫽ 1.28

11.

12.

3x ⫺ 2

f  1x2 ⫽ 2x3 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 1
f  1x2 ⫽ 22x2 ⫹ 1 ⫹ 23x2 ⫺ 1; x ⫽ 0.62

; x ⫽ 2.41

13. LOBBYISTS’ SPENDING Lobbyists  try  to  persuade  legislators
to propose, pass, or defeat legislation or to change existing
laws. The amount (in billions of dollars) spent by lobbyists
from 2003 through 2009, where t ⫽ 0 corresponds to 2003,
is given by

f1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.0056t3 ⫹ 0.112t2 ⫹ 0.51t ⫹ 8
10 ⱕ t ⱕ 62
a. Plot  the  graph  of  f in  the  viewing  window  [0,  6]  ⫻

[0, 15].

b. What amount was spent by lobbyists in the year 2005?

In 2009?

Source: OpenSecrets.org.

14. SURVEILLANCE CAMERAS Research  reports  indicate  that  sur-
veillance cameras at major intersections dramatically reduce
the  number  of  drivers  who  barrel  through  red  lights.  The
cameras  automatically  photograph  vehicles  that  drive  into
intersections  after  the  light  turns  red.  Vehicle  owners  are
then mailed citations instructing them to pay a fine or sign an
affidavit that they weren’t driving at the time. The function

N1t2 ⫽ 6.08t3 ⫺ 26.79t2 ⫹ 53.06t ⫹ 69.5

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

gives the number, N(t), of U.S. communities using surveil-
lance cameras at intersections in year t, with t ⫽ 0 corre-
sponding to 2003.
a. Plot  the  graph  of  N in  the  viewing  window  [0,  4]  ⫻

[0, 250].

b. How  many  communities  used  surveillance  cameras  at

intersections in 2004? In 2006?

Source: Insurance Institute for Highway Safety.

15. KEEPING WITH THE TRAFFIC FLOW By driving at a speed to
match  the  prevailing  traffic  speed,  you  decrease  the
chances of an accident. According to data obtained in a
university study, the number of accidents per 100 million
vehicle miles, y, is related to the deviation from the mean
speed, x, in miles per hour by

y ⫽ 1.05x 3 ⫺ 21.95x 2 ⫹ 155.9x ⫺ 327.3

16 ⱕ x ⱕ 112
a. Plot  the  graph  of  y in  the  viewing  window  [6,  11]  ⫻

[20, 150].

b. What is the number of accidents per 100 million vehicle
miles  if  the  deviation  from  the  mean  speed  is  6  mph, 
8 mph, and 11 mph?

Source: University of Virginia School of Engineering and Applied
Science.

16. SAFE DRIVERS The fatality rate in the United States (per 100
million miles traveled) by age of driver (in years) is given
by the function

f1x2 ⫽ 0.00000304x 4 ⫺ 0.0005764x 3 ⫹ 0.04105x 2
118 ⱕ x ⱕ 822

⫺ 1.30366x ⫹ 16.579

a. Plot  the  graph  of  f in  the  viewing  window  [18,  82]  ⫻

[0, 8].

b. What  is  the  fatality  rate  for  18-year-old  drivers?  For 

50-year-old drivers? For 80-year-old drivers?
Source: National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2.4 THE ALGEBRA OF FUNCTIONS

105

2.4

The Algebra of Functions

The Sum, Difference, Product, and Quotient of Functions
Let S(t) and R(t) denote the federal government’s spending and revenue, respectively,
at any time t, measured in billions of dollars. The graphs of these functions for the
period between 2004 and 2009 are shown in Figure 33.

y

3500

S(t)
3000

2500
R(t)

2000

s
r
a
l
l
o
d

 
f
o

 
s
n
o
i
l
l
i

B

Spending

Revenue

S(t)

R(t)

FIGURE 33
R(t) ⫺ S(t) gives the federal budget deficit
(surplus) at any time t.

2004

2005

2006

2007

Year

t

2008

t

2009

Source: Office of Management and Budget.

The difference R(t) ⫺ S(t) gives the deficit (surplus) in billions of dollars at any time
t if R(t) ⫺ S(t) is negative (positive). This observation suggests that we can define a func-
tion D whose value at any time t is given by R(t) ⫺ S(t). The function D, the difference
of the two functions R and S, is written D ⫽ R ⫺ S and may be called the “deficit (sur-
plus) function,” since it gives the budget deficit or surplus at any time t. It has the same
domain as the functions S and R. The graph of the function D is shown in Figure 34.

y

2004
2004
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Year

t

t

s
r
a
l
l
o
d

 
f
o

 
s
n
o
i
l
l
i

B

–200

–400

–600

–800

Source: Office of Management and Budget.

FIGURE 34
The graph of D(t)

y = D(t)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

106

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

Most functions are built up from other, generally simpler, functions. For example,
we may view the function f(x) ⫽ 2x ⫹ 4 as the sum of the two functions t(x) ⫽ 2x
and h(x) ⫽ 4. The function t(x) ⫽ 2x may in turn be viewed as the product of the func-
tions p(x) ⫽ 2 and q(x) ⫽ x.
In general, given the functions f and t, we define the sum f ⫹ t, the difference 

f ⫺ t, the product ft, and the quotient f>t of f and t as follows.

The Sum, Difference, Product, and Quotient of Functions
Let  f and t be  functions  with  domains  A and  B,  respectively.  Then  the  sum
f ⫹ t, difference f ⫺ t, and product ft of f and t are functions with domain 
A 傽 B* and rule given by

1 f ⫹ t21x2 ⫽ f1x2 ⫹ t1x2
1 f ⫺ t21x2 ⫽ f1x2 ⫺ t1x2

1 ft21x2 ⫽ f1x2t1x2

Sum

Difference

Product

The quotient f>t of f and t has domain A 傽 B excluding all numbers x such that
t(x) ⫽ 0 and rule given by
a f
tb1x2 ⫽  

Quotient

f 1x2t1x2

*A 傽 B is read “A intersected with B” and denotes the set of all points common to both A and B.

1x ⫹ 1

and t1x2 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 1. Find the sum s, the difference
EXAMPLE 1 Let f1x2 ⫽
d, the product p, and the quotient q of the functions f and t.
Solution Since the domain of f is A ⫽ [⫺1, ⬁) and the domain of t is B ⫽ (⫺⬁, ⬁),
we see that the domain of s, d, and p is A 傽 B ⫽ [⫺1, ⬁). The rules follow.
 s1x2 ⫽ 1   f ⫹ t21x2 ⫽ f 1x2 ⫹ t 1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 1 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 1
 d1x2 ⫽ 1   f ⫺ t21x2 ⫽ f 1x2 ⫺ t 1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 1 ⫺ 12x ⫹ 12 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 1 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 1
 p1x2 ⫽ 1   ft21x2 ⫽ f 1x2t 1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 112x ⫹ 12 ⫽ 12x ⫹ 121x ⫹ 1

The quotient function q has rule

q1x2 ⫽ a f

tb1x2 ⫽

1x ⫹ 1

2x ⫹ 1

f 1x2
t 1x2 ⫽

Its domain is [⫺1, ⬁) together with the restriction x ⫽ . We denote this by 
3⫺1, 

Ô 傼 Ó

, ⬁Ô.

⫺1
2

⫺1
2

⫺1
2

The  mathematical  formulation  of  a  problem  arising  from  a  practical  situation
often leads to an expression that involves the combination of functions. Consider, for
example, the costs incurred in operating a business. Costs that remain more or less
constant regardless of the firm’s level of activity are called fixed costs. Examples of
fixed costs are rental fees and executive salaries. On the other hand, costs that vary
with  production  or  sales  are  called variable  costs. Examples  of  variable  costs  are
wages and costs of raw materials. The total cost of operating a business is thus given
by the sum of the variable costs and the fixed costs, as illustrated in the next example.

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 2 Cost Functions Suppose Puritron, a manufacturer of
water filters, has a monthly fixed cost of $10,000 and a variable cost of

⫺0.0001x 2 ⫹ 10x

10 ⱕ x ⱕ 40,0002

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2.4 THE ALGEBRA OF FUNCTIONS

107

dollars, where x denotes the number of filters manufactured per month. Find a
function C that gives the total monthly cost incurred by Puritron in the manufac-
ture of x filters.

Solution Puritron’s monthly fixed cost is always $10,000, regardless of the
level of production, and it is described by the constant function F(x) ⫽ 10,000.
Next, the variable cost is described by the function V(x) ⫽ ⫺0.0001x 2 ⫹ 10x.
Since the total cost incurred by Puritron at any level of production is the sum of
the variable cost and the fixed cost, we see that the required total cost function is
given by

C1x2 ⫽ V1x2 ⫹ F1x2

⫽ ⫺0.0001x 2 ⫹ 10x ⫹ 10,000

10 ⱕ x ⱕ 40,0002

Next, the total profit realized by a firm in operating a business is the difference

between the total revenue realized and the total cost incurred; that is, 

P1x2 ⫽ R1x2 ⫺ C1x2

APPLIED EXAMPLE 3 Profit Functions Refer to Example 2. Suppose the
total revenue realized by Puritron from the sale of x water filters is 

given by the total revenue function

R1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.0005x2 ⫹ 20x

10 ⱕ x ⱕ 40,0002

a. Find the total profit function—that is, the function that describes the total profit

Puritron realizes in manufacturing and selling x water filters per month.

b. What is the profit when the level of production is 10,000 filters per month?

Solution

a. The total profit realized by Puritron in manufacturing and selling x water fil-

ters per month is the difference between the total revenue realized and the total
cost incurred. Thus, the required total profit function is given by

P1x2 ⫽ R1x2 ⫺ C1x2

⫽ 1⫺0.0005x 2 ⫹ 20x2 ⫺ 1⫺0.0001x 2 ⫹ 10x ⫹ 10,0002
⫽ ⫺0.0004x 2 ⫹ 10x ⫺ 10,000

b. The profit realized by Puritron when the level of production is 10,000 filters

per month is

or $50,000 per month.

P110,0002 ⫽ ⫺0.0004110,00022 ⫹ 10110,0002 ⫺ 10,000 ⫽ 50,000

Composition of Functions
Another way to build up a function from other functions is through a process known
as the composition of functions. Consider, for example, the function h, whose rule is
. Let f and t be functions defined by the rules f(x) ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 1 and
given by h(x) ⫽
. Evaluating the function t at the point f(x) [remember that for each real
t(x) ⫽
number x in the domain of f, f(x) is simply a real number], we find that

2x2 ⫺ 1

1x

t 1    f 1x22 ⫽ 2f 1x2 ⫽ 2x2 ⫺ 1

which is just the rule defining the function h!

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

108

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

In general, the composition of a function t with a function f is defined as follows.

The Composition of Two Functions
Let f and t be functions. Then the composition of t and f is the function t 폶 f
defined by

The domain of t 폶 f is the set of all x in the domain of f such that f(x) lies in the
domain of t.

1t 폶 f 21x2 ⫽ t1 f1x22

g

g

FIGURE 35
The composite function h ⫽ g 폶 f viewed
as a machine

The function t 폶 f (read “t circle f ”) is also called a composite function. The inter-
pretation of the function h ⫽ t 폶 f as a machine is illustrated in Figure 35, and its inter-
pretation as a mapping is shown in Figure 36.

f

g

x

f(x)

h(x) = g(f(x))

h = g ° f

FIGURE 36
The function h ⫽ g 폶 f viewed as a mapping

t 1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 1

. Find:

EXAMPLE 4 Let f1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 1 and 
a. The rule for the composite function t 폶 f.
b. The rule for the composite function f 폶 t.

Solution
a. To find the rule for the composite function t 폶 f, evaluate the function t at f(x).

We obtain

b. To find the rule for the composite function f 폶 t, evaluate the function f at t(x). Thus,

1t ⴰ f 21x2 ⫽ t1   f  1x22 ⫽ 2f 1x2 ⫹ 1 ⫽ 2x2 ⫺ 1 ⫹ 1
 1   f ⴰ t21x2 ⫽ f  1t 1x22 ⫽ 1t 1x22 2 ⫺ 1 ⫽ 11x ⫹ 12 2 ⫺ 1

 ⫽ x ⫹ 21x ⫹ 1 ⫺ 1 ⫽ x ⫹ 21x

Example 4 shows us that in general t 폶 f is different from f 폶 t, so care must be
taken in finding the rule for a composite function.

Explore & Discuss
Let
1. Show that (t 폶 f )(x) ⫽ x and ( f 폶 t)(x) ⫽ x. (Note: The function t is said to be the inverse

for x ⱖ 0, and let t1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫺ 12 2 for x ⱖ 1.

f 1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 1

2. Plot the graphs of f and t together with the straight line y ⫽ x. Describe the relationship

of f and vice versa.)

between the graphs of f and t.

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 5 Automobile Pollution An environmental impact
study conducted for the city of Oxnard indicates that under existing 

environmental protection laws, the level of carbon monoxide (CO) present in the
air due to pollution from automobile exhaust will be 0.01x2/3 parts per million
when the number of motor vehicles is x thousand. A separate study conducted by

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

2.4 THE ALGEBRA OF FUNCTIONS

109

a state government agency estimates that t years from now, the number of motor
vehicles in Oxnard will be 0.2t 2 ⫹ 4t ⫹ 64 thousand.
a. Find  an  expression  for  the  concentration  of  CO in  the  air  due  to  automobile

exhaust t years from now.

b. What will be the level of concentration 5 years from now?

Solution

a. The level of CO present in the air due to pollution from automobile exhaust is
described by the function t(x) ⫽ 0.01x 2/3, where x is the number (in thousands)
of motor vehicles. But the number of motor vehicles x (in thousands) t years
from now may be estimated by the rule f(t) ⫽ 0.2t2 ⫹ 4t ⫹ 64. Therefore, the
concentration of CO due to automobile exhaust t years from now is given by

C1t2 ⫽ 1t 폶 f 21t2 ⫽ t1f1t22 ⫽ 0.0110.2t2 ⫹ 4t ⫹ 642 2/3

parts per million.

b. The level of concentration 5 years from now will be

C152 ⫽ 0.0130.2152 2 ⫹ 4152 ⫹ 644 2/3

⫽ 10.012892/3 ⬇ 0.20

or approximately 0.20 parts per million. 

2.4 Self-Check Exercises
1. Let f and t be functions defined by the rules
x

f 1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 1

and

t 1x2 ⫽

1 ⫹ x

respectively. Find the rules for
a. The sum s, the difference d, the product p, and the quo-
b. The composite functions f 폶 t and t 폶 f.

tient q of f and t.

2. HEALTH-CARE SPENDING Health-care  spending  per  person
by  the  private  sector  includes  payments  by  individuals,
corporations, and their insurance companies and is approx-
imated by the function

f1t2 ⫽ 2.48t2 ⫹ 18.47t ⫹ 509

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 62

where f(t) is measured in dollars and t is measured in years,
with  t ⫽ 0  corresponding  to  the  beginning  of  1994.  The

2.4 Concept Questions

1. The figure opposite shows the graphs of a total cost func-
tion and a total revenue function. Let P, defined by P(x) ⫽
R(x) ⫺ C(x), denote the total profit function.
a. Find an expression for P1x12. Explain its significance.
b. Find an expression for P1x22. Explain its significance.

corresponding  government  spending—including  expendi-
tures for Medicaid, Medicare, and other federal, state, and
local government public health care—is

t1t2 ⫽ ⫺1.12t2 ⫹ 29.09t ⫹ 429

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 62

where t has the same meaning as before.
a. Find  a  function  that  gives  the  difference  between  pri-
vate and government health-care spending per person at
any time t.

b. What  was  the  difference  between  private  and  govern-
ment expenditures per person at the beginning of 1995?
At the beginning of 2000?

Source: Health Care Financing Administration.

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 2.4 can be found on page 112.

y ($)

y = C(x)

y = R(x)

x1

x

x2

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

110

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

2. a. Explain what is meant by the sum, difference, product,
and quotient of the functions f and t with domains A and
B, respectively.
b. If f (2) ⫽ 3 and t(2) ⫽ ⫺2, what is ( f ⫹ t)(2)? ( f ⫺ t)(2)?

( ft)(2)? ( f>t)(2)?

3. Let f and t be functions, and suppose that (x, y) is a point 
on the graph of h. What is the value of y for h ⫽ f ⫹ t? 
h ⫽ f ⫺ t? h ⫽ ft? h ⫽ f>t?

2.4 Exercises

In Exercises 1–8, let f(x) ⫽ x3 ⫹ 5, g(x) ⫽ x2 ⫺ 2, and h(x) ⫽ 2x ⫹ 4.
Find the rule for each function.
1. f ⫹ t

4. tf

2. f ⫺ t
f ⫺ t
h

6.

5.

f
t

3. ft
ft
h

7.

11. ft
ft
h

15.

8. fth

1x ⫹ 1

, and 

12. tf
f h
t

16.

In Exercises 9–18, let f(x) ⫽ x ⫺ 1, g(x) ⫽
h(x) ⫽ 2x3 ⫺ 1. Find the rule for each function.
9. f ⫹ t

10. t ⫺ f

t
h

f ⫺ h

t

13.

17.

14.

h
t

th
t ⫺ f

18.

In Exercises 19–24, find the functions f ⫹ g, f ⫺ g, fg, and f>g.
19.

1

f 1x2 ⫽ x2 ⫹ 5; t1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫺ 2
f 1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫺ 1; t1x2 ⫽ x3 ⫹ 1
f 1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 3; t 1x2 ⫽  
; t 1x2 ⫽  
f 1x2 ⫽  
; t 1x2 ⫽  
f 1x2 ⫽  
f 1x2 ⫽ x2 ⫹ 1; t 1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 1

x ⫹ 1
x ⫺ 1

x ⫹ 2
x ⫺ 2

x2 ⫹ 1

x2 ⫺ 1

x ⫺ 1

1

1

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

In  Exercises  25–30,  find  the  rules  for  the  composite  functions 
f 폶 g and g 폶 f.
25. f1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 1; t1x2 ⫽ x2 ⫹ 1
26. f1x2 ⫽ 3x 2 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 1; t1x2 ⫽ x ⫹ 3
f 1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 1; t 1x2 ⫽ x2 ⫺ 1
f 1x2 ⫽ 21x ⫹ 3; t 1x2 ⫽ x2 ⫹ 1
f 1x2 ⫽  

28.

27.

x

x

29.

x2 ⫹ 1

; t 1x2 ⫽ 1
30. f 1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 1; t1x2 ⫽  

1

x ⫺ 1

4. a. What is the composition of the functions f and t? The
functions t and f ?
b. If f (2) ⫽ 3 and t(3) ⫽ 8, what is (t 폶 f )(2)? Can you
conclude from the given information what ( f 폶 t)(3) is?
Explain.

5. Let f be a function with domain A, and let t be a function
whose domain contains the range of f. If a is any number
in A, must (t 폶 f)(a) be defined? Explain with an example.

32.

In Exercises 31–34, evaluate h(2), where h ⫽ g 폶 f.
31. f1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 1; t1x2 ⫽ x 2
f 1x2 ⫽ 23 x2 ⫺ 1; t1x2 ⫽ 3x3 ⫹ 1
; t1x2 ⫽ 1x
f 1x2 ⫽  
; t1x2 ⫽ x2 ⫹ 1
f 1x2 ⫽  

2x ⫹ 1

33.

34.

x ⫺ 1

1

1

37.

In  Exercises  35–42,  find  functions  f and  g such  that  h ⫽ g 폶 f. 
(Note: The answer is not unique.)
35. h1x2 ⫽ 12x 3 ⫹ x 2 ⫹ 12 5 36. h1x2 ⫽ 13x2 ⫺ 42 ⫺3
38. h1x2 ⫽ 12x ⫺ 32 3/2
12x2 ⫺ 4
112x ⫹ 1

h1x2 ⫽ 2x2 ⫺ 1
h1x2 ⫽  

h1x2 ⫽  

h1x2 ⫽  

h1x2 ⫽

x2 ⫺ 1

41.

42.

40.

39.

1

1

⫹ 12x ⫹ 1

13x2 ⫹ 22 3/2

In Exercises 43–46, find f(a ⫹ h) ⫺ f(a) for each function. Simplify
your answer.

43. f1x2 ⫽ 3x ⫹ 4
45. f1x2 ⫽ 4 ⫺ x 2

44.

f 1x2 ⫽ ⫺1

x ⫹ 3
46. f1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫹ 1

2

In Exercises 47–52, find and simplify

f1a ⫹ h2 ⫺ f1a2

h

(h ⫽ 0)

for each function.

47. f1x2 ⫽ 2x 2 ⫹ 1
49. f1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ x

51.

f 1x2 ⫽  

1
x

48. f1x2 ⫽ 2x 2 ⫺ x ⫹ 1
50. f1x2 ⫽ 2x 3 ⫺ x 2 ⫹ 1

f 1x2 ⫽ 1x

52.

53. RESTAURANT REVENUE Nicole owns and operates two restau-
rants. The revenue of the first restaurant at time t is f(t) dol-
lars, and the revenue of the second restaurant at time t is t(t)
dollars. What does the function F(t) ⫽ f(t) ⫹ t(t) represent?
54. BIRTHRATE OF ENDANGERED SPECIES The birthrate of an endan-
gered  species  of  whales  in  year  t is  f(t)  whales/year.  This
species of whales is dying at the rate of t(t) whales/year in
year t. What does the function F(t) ⫽ f(t) ⫺ t(t) represent?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

55. VALUE OF AN INVESTMENT The  number  of  IBM  shares  that
Nancy  owns  is  given  by  f(t).  The  price  per  share  of  the
stock of IBM at time t is t(t) dollars. What does the func-
tion f(t)t(t) represent?

56. PRODUCTION COSTS The total cost incurred by time t in the
production of a certain commodity is f(t) dollars. The num-
ber of products produced by time t is t(t) units. What does
the function f(t)>t(t) represent?

57. CARBON MONOXIDE POLLUTION The number of cars running
in the business district of a town at time t is given by f(t).
Carbon  monoxide  pollution  coming  from  these  cars  is
given by t(x) parts per million, where x is the number of
cars being operated in the district. What does the function
t 폶 f represent?

58. EFFECT OF ADVERTISING ON REVENUE The revenue of Leisure
Travel is given by f(x) dollars, where x is the dollar amount
spent by the company on advertising. The amount spent by
Leisure  at  time  t on  advertising  is  given  by t(t)  dollars.
What does the function f 폶 t represent?

59. MANUFACTURING COSTS TMI, a manufacturer of blank DVDs,
has a monthly fixed cost of $12,100 and a variable cost of
$0.60/disc. Find a function C that gives the total cost incurred
by TMI in the manufacture of x discs/month.

60. SPAM MESSAGES The total number of email messages per day

(in billions) between 2003 and 2007 is approximated by

f1t2 ⫽ 1.54t 2 ⫹ 7.1t ⫹ 31.4

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
2003. Over the same period, the total number of spam mes-
sages per day (in billions) is approximated by

t1t2 ⫽ 1.21t 2 ⫹ 6t ⫹ 14.5

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

a. Find the rule for the function D ⫽ f ⫺ t. Compute D(4)
b. Find  the  rule  for  the  function  P ⫽ f>t.  Compute  P(4)

and explain what it measures.

and explain what it means.

Source: Technology Review.

61. PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION BUDGET DEFICIT According  to  the
Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA), the
projected cumulative MBTA budget deficit (in billions of
dollars) with a $160 million rescue package is given by

D11t2 ⫽ 0.0275t2 ⫹ 0.081t ⫹ 0.07    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 32

and the budget deficit without the rescue package is given by

D21t2 ⫽ 0.035t2 ⫹ 0.21t ⫹ 0.24    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 32

Find the function 
Source: MBTA Review.

D ⫽ D2 ⫺ D1

, and interpret your result.

62. MOTORCYCLE DEATHS Suppose the fatality rate (deaths per
100  million  miles  traveled)  of  motorcyclists  is  given  by
t(x), where x is the percentage of motorcyclists who wear
helmets.  Next,  suppose  the  percent  of  motorcyclists  who
wear  helmets  at  time  t (t measured  in  years)  is  f(t),  with 
t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 2000.
a. If f(0) ⫽ 0.64 and t(0.64) ⫽ 26, find (t 폶 f )(0) and inter-

pret your result.

2.4 THE ALGEBRA OF FUNCTIONS

111

b. If f(6) ⫽ 0.51 and t(0.51) ⫽ 42, find (t 폶 f )(6) and inter-

pret your result.

c. Comment on the results of parts (a) and (b).
Source: National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.

63. FIGHTING CRIME Suppose the reported serious crimes (crimes
that include homicide, rape, robbery, aggravated assault, bur-
glary, and car theft) that end in arrests or in the identification
of suspects is t(x) percent, where x denotes the total number
of detectives. Next, suppose the total number of detectives in
year t is f(t), with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 2001.
a. If f(1) ⫽ 406 and t(406) ⫽ 23, find (t 폶 f )(1) and inter-
b. If f(6) ⫽ 326 and t(326) ⫽ 18, find (t 폶 f )(6) and inter-

pret your result.

pret your result.

c. Comment on the results of parts (a) and (b).
Source: Boston Police Department.

64. COST OF PRODUCING SMARTPHONES Apollo manufactures smart-

phones at a variable cost of

V1x2 ⫽ 0.000003x 3 ⫺ 0.03x 2 ⫹ 200x

dollars, where x denotes the number of units manufactured per
month. The monthly fixed cost attributable to the division that
produces them is $100,000. Find a function C that gives the
total cost incurred by the manufacture of x smartphones. What
is the total cost incurred in producing 2000 units/month?

65. PROFIT FROM SALE OF SMARTPHONES Refer  to  Exercise  64.
Suppose the total revenue realized by Apollo from the sale
of x smartphones is given by the total revenue function

R1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.1x 2 ⫹ 500x

10 ⱕ x ⱕ 50002

where R(x) is measured in dollars.
a. Find the total profit function.
b. What  is  the  profit  when  1500  units  are  produced  and

sold each month?

66. PROFIT FROM SALE OF PAGERS A division of Chapman Cor-
poration manufactures a pager. The weekly fixed cost for
the division is $20,000, and the variable cost for producing
x pagers/week is

V1x2 ⫽ 0.000001x 3 ⫺ 0.01x 2 ⫹ 50x

dollars. The company realizes a revenue of

R1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.02x 2 ⫹ 150x

10 ⱕ x ⱕ 75002

dollars from the sale of x pagers/week.
a. Find the total cost function.
b. Find the total profit function.
c. What is the profit for the company if 2000 units are pro-

duced and sold each week?

67. OVERCROWDING OF PRISONS The 1980s saw a trend toward
old-fashioned punitive deterrence as opposed to the more
liberal  penal  policies  and  community-based  corrections
popular in the 1960s and early 1970s. As a result, prisons
became more crowded, and the gap between the number of
people  in  prison  and  the  prison  capacity  widened.  The
number  of  prisoners  (in  thousands)  in  federal  and  state
prisons is approximated by the function

N1t2 ⫽ 3.5t 2 ⫹ 26.7t ⫹ 436.2

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

112

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
1983.  The  number  of  inmates  for  which  prisons  were
designed is given by

C1t2 ⫽ 24.3t ⫹ 365

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

where  C(t)  is  measured  in  thousands  and  t has  the  same
meaning as before.
a. Find an expression that shows the gap between the num-
ber  of  prisoners  and  the  number  of  inmates  for  which
the prisons were designed at any time t.

b. Find the gap at the beginning of 1983 and at the begin-

ning of 1986.

Source: U.S. Department of Justice.

68. EFFECT OF MORTGAGE RATES ON HOUSING STARTS A  study
prepared  for  the  National  Association  of  Realtors  esti-
mated that the number of housing starts per year over the
next 5 years will be

N1r2 ⫽

7

1 ⫹ 0.02r 

2

million units, where r (percent) is the mortgage rate. Sup-
pose the mortgage rate t months from now will be

r1t2 ⫽  

5t ⫹ 75
t ⫹ 10

    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 242

percent/year.
a. Find an expression for the number of housing starts per

year as a function of t, t months from now.

b. Using  the  result  from  part  (a),  determine  the  number 
of housing starts at present, 12 months from now, and
18 months from now.

69. HOTEL OCCUPANCY RATE The occupancy rate of the all-suite
Wonderland  Hotel,  located  near  an  amusement  park,  is
given by the function

10
81  t 

2 ⫹ 200

3 ⫺ 10
3  t 

9  t ⫹ 55    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 112

r1t2 ⫽  
percent,  where  t is  measured  in  months  and  t ⫽ 0  corre-
sponds to the beginning of January. Management has esti-
mated that the monthly revenue (in thousands of dollars) is
approximated by the function

2.4 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

R1r2 ⫽ ⫺ 3

5000  r 

3 ⫹ 9
50  r 

2    10 ⱕ r ⱕ 1002

where r (percent) is the occupancy rate.
a. What is the hotel’s occupancy rate at the beginning of

January? At the beginning of June?

b. What is the hotel’s monthly revenue at the beginning of

January? At the beginning of June?
Hint: Compute R(r(0)) and R(r(5)).

70. HOUSING STARTS AND CONSTRUCTION JOBS The president of a
major housing construction firm reports that the number of
construction jobs (in millions) created is given by

N1x2 ⫽ 1.42x

where x denotes the number of housing starts. Suppose the
number of housing starts in the next t months is expected 
to be

x1t2 ⫽  

71t ⫹ 102 2

1t ⫹ 102 2 ⫹ 21t ⫹ 152 2

million  units.  Find  an  expression  for  the  number  of  jobs
created per year in the next t months. How many jobs/year
will have been created 6 months and 12 months from now?
71. a. Let f, t, and h be functions. How would you define the

“sum” of f, t, and h?

b. Give  a  real-life  example  involving  the  sum  of  three

functions. (Note: The answer is not unique.)

72. a. Let f, t, and h be functions. How would you define the

“composition” of h, t, and f, in that order? 

b. Give  a  real-life  example  involving  the  composition  of

these functions. (Note: The answer is not unique.)

In Exercises 73–76, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
73. If f and t are functions with domain D, then f ⫹ t ⫽ t ⫹ f.
74. If t 폶 f is defined at x ⫽ a, then f 폶 t must also be defined at

x ⫽ a.

75. If f and t are functions, then f 폶 t ⫽ t 폶 f.
76. If f is a function, then ( f 폶 f )(x) ⫽ [ f(x)]2.

1. a.

 s1x2 ⫽ f 1x2 ⫹ t1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 1 ⫹
 d1x2 ⫽ f 1x2 ⫺ t1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 1 ⫺
 p1x2 ⫽ f 1x2t1x2 ⫽ 11x ⫹ 12 #
 q1x2 ⫽

1x ⫹ 1

f 1x2t1x2 ⫽  

x

1 ⫹ x

x

1 ⫹ x

x

1 ⫹ x

x

⫽

x11x ⫹ 12

1 ⫹ x

1 ⫹ x

⫽ 11x ⫹ 1211 ⫹ x2

x

b.

 1   f ⴰ t21x2 ⫽ f 1t1x22 ⫽ A x
 1t ⴰ f 21x2 ⫽ t1   f 1x22 ⫽  

⫹ 1

1 ⫹ x

1x ⫹ 1
1 ⫹ 11x ⫹ 12 ⫽  

1x ⫹ 1
1x ⫹ 2

2. a. The difference between private and government health-
care spending per person at any time t is given by the
function d with the rule

 d1t2 ⫽ f 1t2 ⫺ t1t2 ⫽ 12.48t 

2 ⫹ 18.47t ⫹ 5092

  ⫺ 1⫺1.12t 
 ⫽ 3.6t 

2 ⫺ 10.62t ⫹ 80

2 ⫹ 29.09t ⫹ 4292

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

b. The difference between private and government expen-
ditures per person at the beginning of 1995 is given by

d112 ⫽ 3.6112 2 ⫺ 10.62112 ⫹ 80

or $72.98/person.

2.5 LINEAR FUNCTIONS

113

The  difference  between  private  and  government
expenditures per person at the beginning of 2000 is given
by

d162 ⫽ 3.6162 2 ⫺ 10.62162 ⫹ 80

or $145.88/person.

2.5

Linear Functions

We now focus our attention on an important class of functions known as linear func-
tions. Recall that a linear equation in x and y has the form Ax ⫹ By ⫹ C ⫽ 0, where
A, B, and C are constants and A and B are not both zero. If B ⫽ 0, the equation can
always be solved for y in terms of x; in fact, as we saw in Section 2.2, the equation
may be cast in the slope-intercept form:

y ⫽ mx ⫹ b

(m, b constants)

(7)

Equation (7) defines y as a function of x. The domain and range of this function
are the set of all real numbers. Furthermore, the graph of this function, as we saw in
Section 2.2, is a straight line in the plane. For this reason, the function f (x) ⫽ mx ⫹ b is
called a linear function. 

Linear Function
The function f defined by

where m and b are constants, is called a linear function.

f1x2 ⫽ mx ⫹ b

Linear functions play an important role in the quantitative analysis of business 
and economic problems. First, many problems that arise in these and other fields are
linear in nature or are linear in the intervals of interest and thus can be formulated in
terms of linear functions. Second, because linear functions are relatively easy to work
with, assumptions involving linearity are often made in the formulation of problems.
In many cases, these assumptions are justified, and acceptable mathematical models
are obtained that approximate real-life situations.

We now look at several applications that can be modeled by using linear func-

tions.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 1 Bounced-Check Charges Overdraft fees have
become an important piece of a bank’s total fee income. The following 

table gives the bank revenue from overdraft fees (in billions of dollars) from 2004
through 2009.

Year, t

0

Revenue, y

27.5

1

29

2

31

3

34

4

36

5

38

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 2004. A mathematical
model giving the approximate projected bank revenue from overdraft fees over the
period under consideration is given by the linear function

f 1t2 ⫽ 2.19t ⫹ 27.12    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 52

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

114

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

a. Plot the six data points and sketch the graph of the function f on the same set

of axes.

b. Assuming that the projection held and the trend continued, what was the pro-

jected bank revenue from overdraft fees in 2010 (t ⫽ 6)?

c. What was the rate of increase of the bank revenue from overdraft fees over the

period from 2004 through 2009?

Source: New York Times.

Solution

a. The graph of f is shown in Figure 37.

y

40

38

36

34

32

30

28

s
r
a
l
l
o
d
 
f
o

 
s
n
o
i
l
l
i

B

FIGURE 37
Bank revenue from overdraft fees from
2004 to 2009

1

2

3
Years

4

5

t

b. The projected bank revenue from overdraft fees in 2010 was

f 162 ⫽ 2.19162 ⫹ 27.12 ⫽ 40.26

or $40.26 billion.

c. The rate of increase of the bank revenue from overdraft fees over the period

from 2004 through 2009 is $2.19 billion per year.

Simple Depreciation
We  first  discussed  linear  depreciation  in  Section  2.1  as  a  real-world  application  of
straight lines. The following example illustrates how to derive an equation describing
the book value of an asset that is being depreciated linearly.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 2 Linear Depreciation A network server has an origi-
nal value of $10,000 and is to be depreciated linearly over 5 years

with a $3000 scrap value. Find an expression giving the book value at the end of
year t. What will be the book value of the server at the end of the second year?
What is the rate of depreciation of the server?

Solution Let V(t) denote the network server’s book value at the end of the t th
year. Since the depreciation is linear, V is a linear function of t. Equivalently, the
graph of the function is a straight line. Now, to find an equation of the straight
line, observe that V ⫽ 10,000 when t ⫽ 0; this tells us that the line passes through
the point (0, 10,000). Similarly, the condition that V ⫽ 3000 when t ⫽ 5 says that
the line also passes through the point (5, 3000). The slope of the line is given by

m ⫽

10,000 ⫺ 3000

0 ⫺ 5

⫽ ⫺7000
5

⫽ ⫺1400

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

V ($)

10,000

3000

(5, 3000)

t

1

2

3

4

5

Years

FIGURE 38
Linear depreciation of an asset

2.5 LINEAR FUNCTIONS

115

Using the point-slope form of an equation of a line with the point (0, 10,000)

and the slope m ⫽ ⫺1400, we have

V ⫺ 10,000 ⫽ ⫺14001t ⫺ 02

 V ⫽ ⫺1400t ⫹ 10,000

the required expression. The book value at the end of the second year is given by

V122 ⫽ ⫺1400122 ⫹ 10,000 ⫽ 7200

or $7200. The rate of depreciation of the server is given by the negative of the slope
of the depreciation line. Since the slope of the line is m ⫽ ⫺1400, the rate of depre-
ciation is $1400 per year. The graph of V ⫽ ⫺1400t ⫹ 10,000 is sketched in 
Figure 38.

Linear Cost, Revenue, and Profit Functions
Whether a business is a sole proprietorship or a large corporation, the owner or chief
executive must constantly keep track of operating costs, revenue resulting from the
sale of products or services, and, perhaps most important, the profits realized. Three
functions provide management with a measure of these quantities: the total cost func-
tion, the revenue function, and the profit function.

Cost, Revenue, and Profit Functions
Let x denote the number of units of a product manufactured or sold. Then, the
total cost function is

C1x2 ⫽ Total cost of manufacturing x units of the product

The revenue function is

The profit function is

R1x2 ⫽ Total revenue realized from the sale of x units of the product

P1x2 ⫽ Total profit realized from manufacturing and selling x units of the product

Generally speaking, the total cost, revenue, and profit functions associated with a
company will probably be nonlinear (these functions are best studied using the tools
of calculus). But linear cost, revenue, and profit functions do arise in practice, and we
will consider such functions in this section. Before deriving explicit forms of these
functions, we need to recall some common terminology.

The costs that are incurred in operating a business are usually classified into two
categories. Costs that remain more or less constant regardless of the firm’s activity
level  are  called  fixed  costs. Examples  of  fixed  costs  are  rental  fees  and  executive
salaries. Costs that vary with production or sales are called variable costs. Examples
of variable costs are wages and costs for raw materials.

Suppose a firm has a fixed cost of F dollars, a production cost of c dollars per unit,
and a selling price of s dollars per unit. Then the cost function C(x), the revenue func-
tion R(x), and the profit function P(x) for the firm are given by

C1x2 ⫽ cx ⫹ F
R1x2  ⫽ sx
P1x2  ⫽ R1x2 ⫺ C1x2
 ⫽ 1s ⫺ c2x ⫺ F

Revenue ⫺ cost

where x denotes the number of units of the commodity produced and sold. The func-
tions C, R, and P are linear functions of x.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

116

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 3 Profit Functions Puritron, a manufacturer of water
filters, has a monthly fixed cost of $20,000, a production cost of $20 per 

unit, and a selling price of $30 per unit. Find the cost function, the revenue func-
tion, and the profit function for Puritron.

Solution Let x denote the number of units produced and sold. Then

C1x2 ⫽ 20x ⫹ 20,000
R1x2  ⫽ 30x
P1x2  ⫽ R1x2 ⫺ C1x2
 ⫽ 30x ⫺ 120x ⫹ 20,0002
 ⫽ 10x ⫺ 20,000

y

 
P(x0, y0)

L1

x

L 2

Intersection of Straight Lines
The solution of certain practical problems involves finding the point of intersection of
two straight lines. To see how such a problem may be solved algebraically, suppose
we are given two straight lines L1 and L 2 with equations

y ⫽ m1x ⫹ b1

and

y ⫽ m2x ⫹ b2

(where m1, b1, m2, and b2 are constants) that intersect at the point P(x0, y0) (Figure 39).
The point P(x0, y0) lies on the line L1, so it satisfies the equation y ⫽ m1x ⫹ b1. It
also lies on the line L2, so it satisfies the equation y ⫽ m2x ⫹ b2. Therefore, to find the
point of intersection P(x0, y0) of the lines L1 and L2, we solve the system composed of
the two equations

FIGURE 39
L1 and L2 intersect at the point P(x0, y0).

for x and y.

y ⫽ m1x ⫹ b1

and

y ⫽ m2x ⫹ b2

L 2
       

 
y = – 2x + 4

 

L1

       
y = x + 1

y

5

(1,  2)

EXAMPLE 4 Find the point of intersection of the straight lines that have equations 
y ⫽ x ⫹ 1 and y ⫽ ⫺2x ⫹ 4.

Solution We solve the given simultaneous equations. Substituting the value y as
given in the first equation into the second, we obtain
x ⫹ 1 ⫽ ⫺2x ⫹ 4

– 5

x

5

 3x ⫽ 3
 x ⫽ 1

FIGURE 40
The point of intersection of L1 and L2 is 
(1, 2).

Substituting this value of x into either one of the given equations yields y ⫽ 2.
Therefore, the required point of intersection is (1, 2) (Figure 40).

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
1. Use  a  graphing  utility  to  plot  the  straight  lines  L1 and  L2 with  equations 
y ⫽ 3x ⫺ 2 and y ⫽ ⫺2x ⫹ 3, respectively, on the same set of axes in the 
standard viewing window. Then use  TRACE and  ZOOM to find the point  of
intersection  of  L1 and  L2.  Repeat  using  the  “intersection”  function  of  your
graphing utility.

2. Find the point of intersection of L1 and L2 algebraically.
3. Comment on the effectiveness of each method.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

We now turn to some applications involving the intersections of pairs of straight

lines.

2.5 LINEAR FUNCTIONS

117

Break-Even Analysis
Consider  a  firm  with  (linear)  cost  function  C(x),  revenue  function  R(x),  and  profit
function P(x) given by

C1x2 ⫽ cx ⫹ F
R1x2  ⫽ sx
P1x2  ⫽ R1x2 ⫺ C1x2 ⫽ 1s ⫺ c2x ⫺ F

where c denotes the unit cost of production, s the selling price per unit, F the fixed
cost incurred by the firm, and x the level of production and sales. The level of pro-
duction at which the firm neither makes a profit nor sustains a loss is called the break-
even level of operation and may be determined by solving the equations y ⫽ C(x) and
y ⫽ R(x) simultaneously. At the level of production x0, the profit is zero, so

P1x02 ⫽ R1x02 ⫺ C1x02 ⫽ 0
R1x02 ⫽ C1x02

The  point  P0(x0,  y0),  the  solution  of  the  simultaneous  equations  y ⫽ R(x)  and 
y ⫽ C(x), is referred to as the break-even point; the number x0 and the number y0 are
called the break-even quantity and the break-even revenue, respectively.

Geometrically, the break-even point P0(x0, y0) is just the point of intersection of
the straight lines representing the cost and revenue functions, respectively. This fol-
lows because P0(x0, y0), being the solution of the simultaneous equations y ⫽ R(x) and
y ⫽ C(x), must lie on both these lines simultaneously (Figure 41).

Note that if x ⬍ x0, then R(x) ⬍ C(x), so P(x) ⫽ R(x) ⫺ C(x) ⬍ 0; thus, the firm
sustains a loss at this level of production. On the other hand, if x ⬎ x0, then P(x) ⬎ 0,
and the firm operates at a profitable level.

y

y = R(x)

Profit

y = C(x)

P0(x0, y0)

Loss

x

FIGURE 41
P0 is the break-even point.

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 5 Break-Even Level Prescott manufactures its products
at a cost of $4 per unit and sells them for $10 per unit. If the firm’s fixed 

cost is $12,000 per month, determine the firm’s break-even point.

R(x) = 10x

C(x) = 4x + 12,000

Solution The cost function C and the revenue function R are given by C(x) ⫽
4x ⫹ 12,000 and R(x) ⫽ 10x, respectively (Figure 42).

Setting R(x) ⫽ C(x), we obtain

10x ⫽ 4x ⫹ 12,000
 6x ⫽ 12,000
 x ⫽ 2000

y

30

20

s
r
a
l
l
o
d

 
f
o

 
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h

10T

x

2

1
4
Units of a thousand

3

FIGURE 42
The point at which R(x) ⫽ C(x) is the
break-even point.

Substituting this value of x into R(x) ⫽ 10x gives

R120002 ⫽ 1102120002 ⫽ 20,000

So for a break-even operation, the firm should manufacture 2000 units of its
product, resulting in a break-even revenue of $20,000 per month.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 6 Break-Even Analysis Using the data given in Exam-
ple 5, answer the following questions:

a. What is the loss sustained by the firm if only 1500 units are produced and sold

each month?

b. What is the profit if 3000 units are produced and sold each month?
c. How many units should the firm produce to realize a minimum monthly profit

of $9000?

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

118

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

Solution The profit function P is given by the rule

P1x2 ⫽ R1x2 ⫺ C1x2
 ⫽ 10x ⫺ 14x ⫹ 12,0002
 ⫽ 6x ⫺ 12,000

a. If 1500 units are produced and sold each month, we have

P115002 ⫽ 6115002 ⫺ 12,000 ⫽ ⫺3000

so the firm will sustain a loss of $3000 per month.

b. If 3000 units are produced and sold each month, we have

P130002 ⫽ 6130002 ⫺ 12,000 ⫽ 6000

or a monthly profit of $6000.

c. Substituting 9000 for P(x) in the equation P(x) ⫽ 6x ⫺ 12,000, we obtain

9000 ⫽ 6x ⫺ 12,000

 6x ⫽ 21,000
 x ⫽ 3500

Thus, the firm should produce at least 3500 units to realize a $9000 minimum
monthly profit.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 7 Decision Analysis The management of Robertson
Controls must decide between two manufacturing processes for its model C

electronic thermostat. The monthly cost of the first process is given by C1(x) ⫽
20x ⫹ 10,000 dollars, where x is the number of thermostats produced; the
monthly cost of the second process is given by C2(x) ⫽ 10x ⫹ 30,000 dollars. If
the projected monthly sales are 800 thermostats at a unit price of $40, which
process should management choose in order to maximize the company’s profit?

Solution The break-even level of operation using the first process is obtained
by solving the equation

40x ⫽ 20x ⫹ 10,000
 20x ⫽ 10,000

 x ⫽ 500

giving an output of 500 units. Next, we solve the equation

40x ⫽ 10x ⫹ 30,000
 30x ⫽ 30,000

 x ⫽ 1000

giving an output of 1000 units for a break-even operation using the second
process. Since the projected sales are 800 units, we conclude that management
should choose the first process, which will give the firm a profit.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 8 Decision Analysis Referring to Example 7, decide
which process Robertson’s management should choose if the projected 

monthly sales are (a) 1500 units and (b) 3000 units.

Solution In both cases, the production is past the break-even level. Since the
revenue is the same regardless of which process is employed, the decision will be
based on how much each process costs.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

a. If x ⫽ 1500, then

2.5 LINEAR FUNCTIONS

119

 C11x2 ⫽ 1202115002 ⫹ 10,000 ⫽ 40,000
 C21x2 ⫽ 1102115002 ⫹ 30,000 ⫽ 45,000

Hence, management should choose the first process.

b. If x ⫽ 3000, then

 C11x2 ⫽ 1202130002 ⫹ 10,000 ⫽ 70,000
 C21x2 ⫽ 1102130002 ⫹ 30,000 ⫽ 60,000

In this case, management should choose the second process.

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
1. Use  a  graphing  utility  to  plot  the  straight  lines  L1 and  L2 with  equations 
y ⫽ 2x ⫺ 1 and y ⫽ 2.1x ⫹ 3, respectively, on the same set of axes, using the
standard viewing window. Do the lines appear to intersect?

2. Plot the straight lines L1 and L2, using the viewing window [⫺100, 100] ⫻
[⫺100, 100]. Do the lines appear to intersect? Can you find the point of inter-
section  using  TRACE and  ZOOM?  Using  the  “intersection”  function  of  your
graphing utility?

3. Find the point of intersection of L1 and L2 algebraically.
4. Comment on the effectiveness of the solution methods in parts 2 and 3.

2.5 Self-Check Exercises

1. A manufacturer has a monthly fixed cost of $60,000 and a
production cost of $10 for each unit produced. The product
sells for $15/unit.
a. What is the cost function?
b. What is the revenue function?
c. What is the profit function?
d. Compute the profit (loss) corresponding to production

levels of 10,000 and 14,000 units/month.

2.5 Concept Questions

1. a. What is a linear function? Give an example.

b. What is the domain of a linear function? The range?
c. What is the graph of a linear function?

2. What is the general form of a linear cost function? A linear

revenue function? A linear profit function?

2.5 Exercises

2. Find  the  point  of  intersection  of  the  straight  lines  with

equations 2x ⫹ 3y ⫽ 6 and x ⫺ 3y ⫽ 4.

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 2.5 can be found on 
page 122.

3. Explain the meaning of each term:

a. Break-even point
b. Break-even quantity
c. Break-even revenue

In Exercises 1–10, determine whether the equation defines y as a
linear function of x. If so, write it in the form y ⫽ mx ⫹ b.
1. 2x ⫹ 3y ⫽ 6

2. ⫺2x ⫹ 4y ⫽ 7

3. x ⫽ 2y ⫺ 4

4. 2x ⫽ 3y ⫹ 8

5. 2x ⫺ 4y ⫹ 9 ⫽ 0

6. 3x ⫺ 6y ⫹ 7 ⫽ 0

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

120

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

7. 2x 2 ⫺ 8y ⫹ 4 ⫽ 0

9. 2x ⫺ 3y2 ⫹ 8 ⫽ 0

31x ⫹ 4y ⫽ 0
2x ⫹ 1y ⫺ 4 ⫽ 0

8.

10.

11. A manufacturer has a monthly fixed cost of $40,000 and a
production cost of $8 for each unit produced. The product
sells for $12/unit.
a. What is the cost function?
b. What is the revenue function?
c. What is the profit function?
d. Compute the profit (loss) corresponding to production

levels of 8000 and 12,000 units.

12. A manufacturer has a monthly fixed cost of $100,000 and
a production cost of $14 for each unit produced. The prod-
uct sells for $20/unit.
a. What is the cost function?
b. What is the revenue function?
c. What is the profit function?
d. Compute the profit (loss) corresponding to production

levels of 12,000 and 20,000 units.

13. Find  the  constants  m and  b in  the  linear  function  f(x)  ⫽

mx ⫹ b such that f(0) ⫽ 4 and f(3) ⫽ ⫺2.

14. Find  the  constants  m and  b in  the  linear  function  f(x)  ⫽
mx ⫹ b such that f(2) ⫽ 4 and the straight line represented
by f has slope ⫺1.

In Exercises 15–20, find the point of intersection of each pair of
straight lines.
15. y ⫽ 3x ⫹ 4

16.

y ⫽ ⫺2x ⫹ 19

17. 2x ⫺ 3y ⫽ 6
3x ⫹ 6y ⫽ 16
y ⫽ 1
4
2x ⫺ 3
2

 x ⫺ 5

 y ⫽ 1

19.

y ⫽ ⫺4x ⫺ 7
⫺y ⫽ 5x ⫹ 10

18.

20.

2x ⫹ 4y ⫽ 11
⫺5x ⫹ 3y ⫽ 5
y ⫽ 2
3
x ⫹ 3y ⫹ 3 ⫽ 0

 x ⫺ 4

In Exercises 21–24, find the break-even point for the firm whose
cost function C and revenue function R are given.

21. C1x2 ⫽ 5x ⫹ 10,000; R1x2 ⫽ 15x
22. C1x2 ⫽ 15x ⫹ 12,000; R1x2 ⫽ 21x
23. C1x2 ⫽ 0.2x ⫹ 120; R1x2 ⫽ 0.4x
24. C1x2 ⫽ 150x ⫹ 20,000; R1x2 ⫽ 270x

25. LINEAR DEPRECIATION An  office  building  worth  $1  million
when completed in 2005 is being depreciated linearly over
50 years. What was the book value of the building in 2010?
What  will  it  be  in  2015?  (Assume  that  the  scrap  value 
is $0.)

26. LINEAR DEPRECIATION An automobile purchased for use by
the manager of a firm at a price of $24,000 is to be depre-
ciated  using  the  straight-line  method  over  5  years.  What
will  be  the  book  value  of  the  automobile  at  the  end  of 
3 years? (Assume that the scrap value is $0.)

27. SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS Social Security recipients receive
an automatic cost-of-living adjustment (COLA) once each
year.  Their  monthly  benefit  is  increased  by  the  same  per-
centage that consumer prices have increased during the pre-
ceding  year.  Suppose  consumer  prices  have  increased  by
3.3% during the preceding year.
a. Express the adjusted monthly benefit of a Social Secu-
rity recipient as a function of his or her current monthly
benefit.

b. If  Carlos  Garcia’s  monthly  Social  Security  benefit  is
now $1520, what will be his adjusted monthly benefit?

28. PROFIT FUNCTIONS AutoTime, a manufacturer of 24-hr vari-
able timers, has a monthly fixed cost of $48,000 and a pro-
duction cost of $8 for each timer manufactured. The timers
sell for $14 each.
a. What is the cost function?
b. What is the revenue function?
c. What is the profit function?
d. Compute  the  profit  (loss)  corresponding  to  produc-
tion  levels  of  4000,  6000,  and  10,000  timers,  respec-
tively.

29. PROFIT FUNCTIONS The management of TMI finds that the
monthly fixed costs attributable to the production of their
100-watt light bulbs is $12,100.00. If the cost of producing
each twin-pack of light bulbs is $0.60 and each twin-pack
sells for $1.15, find the company’s cost function, revenue
function, and profit function.

30. LINEAR DEPRECIATION In 2007, National Textile installed a
new machine in one of its factories at a cost of $250,000.
The machine is depreciated linearly over 10 years with a
scrap value of $10,000.
a. Find an expression for the machine’s book value in the

t th year of use (0 ⱕ t ⱕ 10).

b. Sketch the graph of the function of part (a).
c. Find the machine’s book value in 2011.
d. Find the rate at which the machine is being depreciated.

31. LINEAR DEPRECIATION A workcenter system purchased at a
cost of $60,000 in 2010 has a scrap value of $12,000 at the
end of 4 years. If the straight-line method of depreciation
is used,
a. Find the rate of depreciation.
b. Find  the  linear  equation  expressing  the  system’s  book

value at the end of t years.

c. Sketch the graph of the function of part (b).
d. Find  the  system’s  book  value  at  the  end  of  the  third 

year.

32. LINEAR DEPRECIATION Suppose  an  asset  has  an  original
value of $C and is depreciated linearly over N years with a
scrap value of $S. Show that the asset’s book value at the
end of the tth year is described by the function

V1t2 ⫽ C ⫺ a C ⫺ S
N b t

Hint: Find  an  equation  of  the  straight  line  passing  through  the
points (0, C) and (N, S). (Why?)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

33. Rework  Exercise  25  using  the  formula  derived  in  Exer-

cise 32.

34. Rework  Exercise  26  using  the  formula  derived  in  Exer-

cise 32.

35. DRUG DOSAGES A method sometimes used by pediatricians
to calculate the dosage of medicine for children is based on
the child’s surface area. If a denotes the adult dosage (in
milligrams) and if S is the child’s surface area (in square
meters), then the child’s dosage is given by

D1S2 ⫽

Sa
1.7

a. Show that D is a linear function of S.
Hint: Think of D as having the form D(S) ⫽ mS ⫹ b. What are the
slope m and the y-intercept b?
b. If the adult dose of a drug is 500 mg, how much should

a child whose surface area is 0.4 m2 receive?

36. DRUG DOSAGES Cowling’s Rule is a method for calculating
pediatric  drug  dosages.  If  a denotes  the  adult  dosage  (in
milligrams) and if t is the child’s age (in years), then the
child’s dosage is given by

D 1t2 ⫽ a t ⫹ 1

24 b a

a. Show that D is a linear function of t.

Hint: Think of D(t) as having the form D(t) ⫽ mt ⫹ b. What is
the slope m and the y-intercept b?

b. If the adult dose of a drug is 500 mg, how much should

a 4-year-old child receive?

37. BROADBAND INTERNET HOUSEHOLDS The  number  of  U.S.
broadband  Internet  households  stood  at  20  million  at  the
beginning of 2002 and was projected to grow at the rate of
6.5 million households per year for the next 8 years.
a. Find a linear function f (t) giving the projected number
of U.S. broadband Internet households (in millions) in
year  t,  where  t ⫽ 0  corresponds  to  the  beginning  of
2002.

b. What  was  the  projected  number  of  U.S.  broadband

Internet households at the beginning of 2010?

Source: Jupiter Research.

38. DIAL-UP INTERNET HOUSEHOLDS The number of U.S. dial-up
Internet households stood at 42.5 million at the beginning
of  2004  and  was  projected  to  decline  at  the  rate  of 
3.9 million households per year for the next 6 years.
a. Find a linear function f giving the projected U.S. dial-up
Internet households (in millions) in year t, where t ⫽ 0
corresponds to the beginning of 2004.

b. What was the projected number of U.S. dial-up Internet

households at the beginning of 2010?

Source: Strategy Analytics, Inc.

39. CELSIUS AND FAHRENHEIT TEMPERATURES The  relationship
between temperature measured on the Celsius scale and on
the Fahrenheit scale is linear. The freezing point is 0°C and
32°F, and the boiling point is 100°C and 212°F.

2.5 LINEAR FUNCTIONS

121

a. Find  an  equation  giving  the  relationship  between  the
temperature F measured on the Fahrenheit scale and the
temperature C measured on the Celsius scale.

b. Find F as a function of C and use this formula to deter-
mine the temperature in Fahrenheit corresponding to a
temperature of 20°C.

c. Find C as a function of F and use this formula to deter-
mine the temperature in Celsius corresponding to a tem-
perature of 70°F.

40. CRICKET CHIRPING AND TEMPERATURE Entomologists  have
discovered that a linear relationship exists between the rate
of chirping of crickets of a certain species and the air tem-
perature. When the temperature is 70°F, the crickets chirp
at the rate of 120 chirps/min, and when the temperature is
80°F, they chirp at the rate of 160 chirps/min.
a. Find an equation giving the relationship between the air
temperature T and the number of chirps per minute N of
the crickets.

b. Find N as a function of T, and use this function to deter-
mine the rate at which the crickets chirp when the tem-
perature is 102°F.

41. BREAK-EVEN ANALYSIS AutoTime, a manufacturer of 24-hr
variable timers, has a monthly fixed cost of $48,000 and a
production  cost  of  $8  for  each  timer  manufactured.  The
units sell for $14 each.
a. Sketch  the  graphs  of  the  cost  function  and  the  reve-
nue  function  and  thereby  find  the  break-even  point
graphically.

b. Find the break-even point algebraically.
c. Sketch the graph of the profit function.
d. At what point does the graph of the profit function cross

the x-axis? Interpret your result.

42. BREAK-EVEN ANALYSIS A division of Carter Enterprises pro-
duces  “Personal  Income  Tax”  diaries.  Each  diary  sells  for
$8.  The  monthly  fixed  costs  incurred  by  the  division  are
$25,000, and the variable cost of producing each diary is $3.
a. Find the break-even point for the division.
b. What should be the level of sales in order for the divi-
sion to realize a 15% profit over the cost of making the
diaries?

43. BREAK-EVEN ANALYSIS A division of the Gibson Corporation
manufactures bicycle pumps. Each pump sells for $9, and
the variable cost of producing each unit is 40% of the sell-
ing price. The monthly fixed costs incurred by the division
are $50,000. What is the break-even point for the division?

44. LEASING Ace Truck Leasing Company leases a certain size
truck  for  $30/day  and  $0.50/mi,  whereas  Acme  Truck
Leasing Company leases the same size truck for $25/day
and $0.60/mi.
a. Find the functions describing the daily cost of leasing

from each company.

b. Sketch the graphs of the two functions on the same set

of axes.

c. If a customer plans to drive at most 70 mi, from which

company should he rent a truck for a single day?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

122

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

45. DECISION ANALYSIS A  product  may  be  made  by  using
Machine I or Machine II. The manufacturer estimates that
the  monthly  fixed  costs  of  using  Machine  I  are  $18,000,
whereas the monthly fixed costs of using Machine II are
$15,000. The variable costs of manufacturing 1 unit of the
product using Machine I and Machine II are $15 and $20,
respectively. The product sells for $50 each.
a. Find  the  cost  functions  associated  with  using  each

machine.

b. Sketch the graphs of the cost functions of part (a) and

the revenue functions on the same set of axes.

c. Which machine should management choose in order to
maximize their profit if the projected sales are 450 units?
550 units? 650 units?

d. What is the profit for each case in part (c)?

46. ANNUAL SALES The annual sales of Crimson Drug Store are
expected  to  be  given  by  S ⫽ 2.3  ⫹ 0.4t million  dollars 
t years from now, whereas the annual sales of Cambridge
Drug Store are expected to be given by S ⫽ 1.2 ⫹ 0.6t mil-
lion  dollars  t years  from  now.  When  will  Cambridge’s
annual sales first surpass Crimson’s annual sales?

47. LCDs  VERSUS CRTs The  global  shipments  of  traditional
cathode-ray tube monitors (CRTs) is approximated by the
equation

where y is measured in millions and t in years, with t ⫽ 0
corresponding to the beginning of 2001. The equation

y ⫽ ⫺12t ⫹ 88

y ⫽ 18t ⫹ 13.4

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 32

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 32

gives the approximate number (in millions) of liquid crys-
tal  displays  (LCDs)  over  the  same  period.  When  did  the
global  shipments  of  LCDs  first  overtake  the  global  ship-
ments of CRTs?
Source: International Data Corporation.

48. DIGITAL VERSUS FILM CAMERAS The sales of digital cameras

(in millions of units) in year t is given by the function

f1t2 ⫽ 3.05t ⫹ 6.85

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 32

where t ⫽ 0 corresponds to 2001. Over that same period,
the sales of film cameras (in millions of units) is given by

t1t2 ⫽ ⫺1.85t ⫹ 16.58

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 32

a. Show that more film cameras than digital cameras were

sold in 2001.

2.5 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. Let x denote the number of units produced and sold. Then

a. C1x2 ⫽ 10x ⫹ 60,000
b. R1x2 ⫽ 15x
c. P1x2 ⫽ R1x2 ⫺ C1x2 ⫽ 15x ⫺ 110x ⫹ 60,0002

⫽ 5x ⫺ 60,000

b. When did the sales of digital cameras first exceed those

of film cameras?

Source: Popular Science.

49. U.S. FINANCIAL TRANSACTIONS The percentage of U.S. trans-
actions by check between the beginning of 2001 (t ⫽ 0) and
the beginning of 2010 (t ⫽ 9) is approximated by

f  1t2 ⫽ ⫺11

9

 t ⫹ 43    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 92

whereas the percentage of transactions done electronically
during the same period is approximated by

t1t2 ⫽ 11

3

 t ⫹ 23    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 92

a. Sketch the graphs of f and t on the same set of axes.
b. Find the time when transactions done electronically first

exceeded those done by check.

Source: Foreign Policy.

50. BROADBAND VERSUS DIAL-UP The number of U.S. broadband
Internet households (in millions) between the beginning of
2004 (t ⫽ 0) and the beginning of 2008 (t ⫽ 4) is approxi-
mated by

f1t2 ⫽ 6.5t ⫹ 33

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

Over the same period, the number of U.S. dial-up Internet
households (in millions) is approximated by

t1t2 ⫽ ⫺3.9t ⫹ 42.5

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

a. Sketch the graphs of f and t on the same set of axes.
b. Solve the equation f (t) ⫽ t(t), and interpret your result.
Source: Strategic Analytics, Inc.

In Exercises 51 and 52, determine whether the statement is true
or  false.  If  it  is  true,  explain  why  it  is  true.  If  it  is  false,  give  an
example to show why it is false.
51. If the book value V at the end of the year t of an asset being
depreciated linearly is given by V ⫽ ⫺at ⫹ b, where a and
b are positive constants, then the rate of depreciation of the
asset is a units per year.

52. Suppose C(x) ⫽ cx ⫹ F and R(x) ⫽ sx are the cost and rev-
enue functions of a certain firm. Then the firm is operating
at a break-even level of production if its level of produc-

tion is F>(s ⫺ c).

d. P110,0002 ⫽ 5110,0002 ⫺ 60,000
P114,0002 ⫽ 5114,0002 ⫺ 60,000

or a loss of $10,000 per month.

⫽ ⫺10,000

⫽ 10,000

or a profit of $10,000 per month.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2. The point of intersection of the two straight lines is found

by solving the system of linear equations

Substituting this expression for y into the second equation,
we obtain

2.5 LINEAR FUNCTIONS

123

2x ⫹ 3y ⫽ 6
 x ⫺ 3y ⫽ 4

Solving the first equation for y in terms of x, we obtain

y ⫽ ⫺2
3

 x ⫹ 2

x ⫺ 3a ⫺2

3

 x ⫹ 2b ⫽ 4
 x ⫹ 2x ⫺ 6 ⫽ 4
 3x ⫽ 10

x ⫽ 10
3

or 
for y obtained earlier, we find

. Substituting this value of x into the expression

y ⫽ ⫺2

3a 10

3 b ⫹ 2 ⫽ ⫺2
110
92
3 , ⫺2

9

.

Therefore, the point of intersection is 

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Linear Functions

Graphing Utility
A graphing utility can be used to find the value of a function f at a given point with min-
imal effort. However, to find the value of y for a given value of x in a linear equation
such as Ax ⫹ By ⫹ C ⫽ 0, the equation must first be cast in the slope-intercept form 
y ⫽ mx ⫹ b, thus revealing the desired rule f(x) ⫽ mx ⫹ b for y as a function of x.

EXAMPLE 1 Consider the equation 2x ⫹ 5y ⫽ 7.
a. Plot the straight line with the given equation in the standard viewing window.
b. Find the value of y when x ⫽ 2 and verify your result by direct computation.
c. Find the value of y when x ⫽ 1.732.

Solution
a. The straight line with equation 2x ⫹ 5y ⫽ 7 or, equivalently, 

standard viewing window is shown in Figure T1.

y ⫽ ⫺2

5 x ⫹ 7
5

in the

FIGURE T1
The straight line 2x ⫹ 5y ⫽ 7 in the stan-
dard viewing window

_10

10

_10

10

b. Using the evaluation function of the graphing utility and the value of 2 for x, we

find y ⫽ 0.6. This result is verified by computing
⫹ 7
5

5   122 ⫹ 7

⫽ ⫺4
5

y ⫽ ⫺2

5

⫽ 3
5

⫽ 0.6

when x ⫽ 2.

c. Once again using the evaluation function of the graphing utility, this time with

the value 1.732 for x, we find y ⫽ 0.7072.

When evaluating f (x) at x ⫽ a, remember that the number a must lie between
xMin and xMax.

(continued)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

124

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

APPLIED EXAMPLE 2 Market for Cholesterol-Reducing Drugs In a study
conducted in early 2000, experts projected a rise in the market for 

cholesterol-reducing drugs. The U.S. market (in billions of dollars) for such 
drugs from 1999 through 2004 is approximated by

M1t2 ⫽ 1.95t ⫹ 12.19

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 1999.
a. Plot the graph of the function M in the viewing window [0, 5] ⫻ [0, 25].
b. What was the estimated market for cholesterol-reducing drugs in 2005 

(t ⫽ 6)?

c. What was the rate of increase of the market for cholesterol-reducing drugs

25

over the period in question?

Source: S. G. Cowen.

Solution

0
FIGURE T2
The graph of M in the viewing window 
[0, 5] ⫻ [0, 25]

5

a. The graph of M is shown in Figure T2.
b. The market in 2005 for cholesterol-reducing drugs was approximately

M162 ⫽ 1.95162 ⫹ 12.19 ⫽ 23.89

or $23.89 billion.

c. The function M is linear; hence, we see that the rate of increase of the market
for cholesterol-reducing drugs is given by the slope of the straight line repre-
sented by M, which is approximately $1.95 billion per year.

Excel
Excel can be used to find the value of a function at a given value with minimal effort.
However, to find the value of y for a given value of x in a linear equation such as 
Ax ⫹ By ⫹ C ⫽ 0, the equation must first be cast in the slope-intercept form y ⫽
mx ⫹ b, thus revealing the desired rule f (x) ⫽ mx ⫹ b for y as a function of x.

EXAMPLE 3 Consider the equation 2x ⫹ 5y ⫽ 7.
a. Find the value of y for x ⫽ 0, 5, and 10.
b. Plot the straight line with the given equation over the interval [0, 10].

Solution

a. Since this is a linear equation, we first cast the equation in slope-intercept form:

y ⫽ ⫺2
5

 x ⫹ 7
5

Next, we create a table of values (Figure T3), following the same procedure outlined
in Example 3, pages 87–88. In this case we use the formula =(—2/5)*B1+7/5
for the y-values.

A

x
y

1
2

B

0
1.4

C

5
-0.6

D

10
-2.6

FIGURE T3
Table of values for x and y

Note: Words/characters printed in a monospace font (for example, =(—2/3)*A2+2) indicate words/characters that need to
be typed and entered.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

b. Following the procedure outlined in Example 3, we obtain the graph shown in

Figure T4.

2.5 LINEAR FUNCTIONS

125

y

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
⫺0.5
⫺1
⫺1.5
⫺2
⫺2.5
⫺3

y = -(2/5)x + 7/5

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

x

FIGURE T4
The graph of 

y ⫽ ⫺2

5 x ⫹ 7
5

over the interval [0, 10]

APPLIED EXAMPLE 4 Market for Cholesterol-Reducing Drugs In a study
conducted in early 2000, experts projected a rise in the market for 

cholesterol-reducing drugs. The U.S. market (in billions of dollars) for such drugs
from 1999 through 2004 is approximated by

M1t2 ⫽ 1.95t ⫹ 12.19

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 1999.
a. Plot the graph of the function M over the interval [0, 6].
b. What was the estimated market for cholesterol-reducing drugs in 2005 

(t ⫽ 6)?

c. What was the rate of increase of the market for cholesterol-reducing drugs

over the period in question?

Source: S. G. Cowen.

Solution

a. Following the instructions given in Example 3, pages 87–88, we obtain the spread-
sheet and graph shown in Figure T5. [Note: We have made the appropriate entries
for the title and x- and y-axis labels. In particular, for Primary Vertical Axis Title,
select 

and type M(t) in billions of dollars].

Rotated Title

A

t
M(t)

1
2

B

0
12.19

C

5
21.94

D

6
23.89

(a)
FIGURE T5
(a) The table of values for t and M(t) and (b) the graph showing the
demand for cholesterol-reducing drugs

(b)

l
l

o
d
 
f
o
 
s
n
o

i
l
l
i

s
r
a

b
n

 

i
 
)
t
(

M

M(t) = 1.95t + 12.19

30
25
20
15
10
5
0

0

1

2

4
3
t in years

5

6

7

(continued)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

126

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

b. From the table of values, we see that

M162 ⫽ 1.95162 ⫹ 12.19 ⫽ 23.89

or $23.89 billion.

c. The function M is linear; hence, we see that the rate of increase of the market
for cholesterol-reducing drugs is given by the slope of the straight line repre-
sented by M, which is approximately $1.95 billion per year.

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

Find the value of y corresponding to the given value of x.
1. 3.1x ⫹ 2.4y ⫺ 12 ⫽ 0; x ⫽ 2.1

2. 1.2x ⫺ 3.2y ⫹ 8.2 ⫽ 0; x ⫽ 1.2

3. 2.8x ⫹ 4.2y ⫽ 16.3; x ⫽ 1.5

4. ⫺1.8x ⫹ 3.2y ⫺ 6.3 ⫽ 0; x ⫽ ⫺2.1

2.6 Quadratic Functions

5. 22.1x ⫹ 18.2y ⫺ 400 ⫽ 0; x ⫽ 12.1

6. 17.1x ⫺ 24.31y ⫺ 512 ⫽ 0; x ⫽ ⫺8.2

7. 2.8x ⫽ 1.41y ⫺ 2.64; x ⫽ 0.3

8. 0.8x ⫽ 3.2y ⫺ 4.3; x ⫽ ⫺0.4

y

(–3, 10)

(– 2, 5)

12

10

8

6

4

(3, 10)

(2, 5)

(–1, 2)

(1, 2)

– 4

x

4

FIGURE 43
The graph of f(x) ⫽ x2 ⫹ 1 is a parabola.

Quadratic Functions
A quadratic function is one of the form

f x ⫽ ax2 ⫹ bx ⫹ c

1

2

where a, b, and c are constants and a ⫽ 0. For example, the function f(x) ⫽ 2x2 ⫺
3x ⫹ 4  is  quadratic  (here,  a ⫽ 2,  b ⫽ ⫺3,  and  c ⫽ 4).  Also,  the  function  f(x) ⫽
x2 ⫹ 1  of  Example  6,  Section  2.3,  is  quadratic  (here,  a ⫽ 1,  b ⫽ 0,  and  c ⫽ 1).  Its
graph illustrates the general shape of the graph of a quadratic function, which is called
a parabola (Figure 43).

In general, the graph of a quadratic function is a parabola that opens upward or
downward (Figure 44). Furthermore, the parabola is symmetric with respect to a ver-
tical  line  called  the  axis  of  symmetry  (shown  dashed  in  Figure  44).  This  line  also
passes through the lowest point or the highest point of the parabola. The point of inter-
section of the parabola with its axis of symmetry is called the vertex of the parabola.

y

y

Vertex

Axis of symmetry

FIGURE 44
Graphs of quadratic functions are 
parabolas.

Vertex

Axis of symmetry

x

x

We can use these properties to help us sketch the graph of a quadratic function.

For example, suppose we want to sketch the graph of

1
f x ⫽ 2x 2 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 1

2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

If we complete the square in x, we obtain

1
f x ⫽ 2 x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫹ 1

2

2

1

Adding and subtracting 2

앗
⫽ 2 x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫹ ⫺1 2 ⫹ 1 ⫺ 2

앗

2

4

1
⫽ 2 x ⫺ 1 2 ⫺ 1

3
1

2

2.6 QUADRATIC FUNCTIONS

127

Factor out the coefficient of x 2
from the first two terms.

Because of the 2 outside the brackets, we 
have added 2(1) and must therefore 
subtract 2.
Factor the terms within the brackets.

Observe that the first term, 2(x ⫺ 1)2, is nonnegative. In fact, it is equal to zero
when x ⫽ 1 and is greater than zero if x ⫽ 1. Consequently, we see that f (x) ⱖ ⫺1
for all values of x. This tells us that the vertex (in this case, the lowest point) of the
parabola is the point (1, ⫺1). The axis of symmetry of the parabola is the vertical
line x ⫽ 1. Finally, plotting the vertex and a few additional points on either side of
the axes of symmetry of the parabola, we obtain the graph shown in Figure 45.

y

8

6

4

2

x

⫺1
0
2
3

y

7
1
1
7

FIGURE 45
The graph of f(x) ⫽ 2x2 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 1

⫺2

2

(1, ⫺1)

x

4

The x-intercepts of f, the x-coordinates of the points at which the parabola inter-
sects the x-axis, can be found by solving the equation f (x) ⫽ 0. Here, we use the qua-
dratic formula with a ⫽ 2, b ⫽ ⫺4, and c ⫽ 1 to find that

⫺1⫺42 ⫾ 21⫺42 2 ⫺ 4122112
22

2122

⫽ 4 ⫾ 28
>2 ⬇ 1.71 and 1 ⫺

4

⫽ 4 ⫾ 222
22

4

Therefore, the x-intercepts are 1 ⫹
of f (obtained by setting x ⫽ 0) is f (0) ⫽ 1.

>2 ⬇ 0.29. The y-intercept
The technique that we used to analyze f(x) ⫽ 2x 2 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 1 can be used to study

22

⫽ 1 ⫾

x ⫽

2

the general quadratic function

If we complete the square in x, we find

f x ⫽ ax 2 ⫹ bx ⫹ c

1

2

1

a ⫽ 0

2

f x ⫽

1

2

aa x ⫹

b

2ab 2

⫹ 4ac ⫺ b 2

4a

See Exercise 52.

From this equation, we obtain the following properties of the quadratic function f.

Properties of the Quadratic Function

1

2

f x ⫽ ax 2 ⫹ bx ⫹ c

a ⫽ 0

1

2

1. The domain of f is the set of all real numbers, and the graph of f is a parabola.
2. If a ⬎ 0, the parabola opens upward, and if a ⬍ 0, it opens downward.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(continued)

128

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

3. The vertex of the parabola is 

a ⫺

b
2a

, f a ⫺

b

2ab b

.

4. An equation of the axis of symmetry of the parabola is x ⫽

⫺

b
2a

.

5. The  x-intercepts  (if  any)  are  found  by  solving  f(x) ⫽ 0.  The  y-intercept  is 

f(0) ⫽ c.

VIDEO

(   ,  )

9
8

5
4

x-intercepts

x

y

2

1

Vertex

1
2

1

2

⫺1
y-intercept
⫺2

FIGURE 46
The graph of f(x) ⫽ ⫺2x2 ⫹ 5x ⫺ 2

EXAMPLE 1 Given the quadratic function

1
f x ⫽ ⫺2x 2 ⫹ 5x ⫺ 2

2

a. Find the vertex of the parabola.
b. Find the x-intercepts (if any) of the parabola.
c. Sketch the parabola.

Solution
a. Comparing f (x) ⫽ ⫺2x2 ⫹ 5x ⫺ 2 with the general form of the quadratic equa-

tion, we find that a ⫽ ⫺2, b ⫽ 5, and c ⫽ ⫺2. Therefore, the x-coordinate of the
vertex of the parabola is

⫺

b
2a

⫽ ⫺ 5

21⫺22 ⫽ 5

4

Next, to find the y-coordinate of the vertex, we evaluate f at x ⫽ , obtaining

5
4

 f a 5

4b 2
4b ⫽ ⫺2a 5
⫹ 25
 ⫽ ⫺25
4
8

⫹ 5a 5

⫺ 2

4b ⫺ 2
⫺2a 25

16b ⫽ ⫺25

8

 ⫽ 9
8

⫺25
8

⫹ 50
8

⫺ 16
8

⫽

9
8

b. To find the x-intercepts of the parabola, we solve the equation

⫺2x 2 ⫹ 5x ⫺ 2 ⫽ 0

using the quadratic formula with a ⫽ ⫺2, b ⫽ 5, and c ⫽ ⫺2. We find

⫺5 ⫾ 225 ⫺ 41⫺221⫺22
⫺5 ⫾ 29

21⫺22

⫺b ⫾ 2b2 ⫺ 4ac

2a

x ⫽

 x ⫽

 ⫽

 ⫽

⫺4
⫺5 ⫾ 3

⫺4
  or  2

 ⫽ 1
2

Thus, the x-intercepts of the parabola are  and 2.

1
2

c. Since a ⫽ ⫺2 ⬍ 0, the parabola opens downward. The vertex of the parabola 

is therefore the highest point on the curve. The parabola crosses the x-axis at the
points 
Finally, using this information, we sketch the parabola shown in Figure 46.

and (2, 0). Setting x ⫽ 0 gives ⫺2 as the y-intercept of the curve.

11
2, 02

15
82
4, 9

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

2.6 QUADRATIC FUNCTIONS

129

APPLIED EXAMPLE 2 Effect of Advertising on Profit The quarterly profit
(in thousands of dollars) of Cunningham Realty is given by

1
P x ⫽ ⫺ x 2 ⫹ 7x ⫹ 30

2

1
3

1

0 ⱕ x ⱕ 50

2

where x (in thousands of dollars) is the amount of money Cunningham spends on
advertising per quarter. Find the amount of money Cunningham should spend 
on advertising to realize a maximum quarterly profit. What is the maximum 
quarterly profit realizable by Cunningham?

Solution The profit function P is a quadratic function, so its graph is a parabola.
Furthermore, the coefficient of x 2 is a ⫽ ⫺ ⬍0, so the parabola opens down-
ward. The x-coordinate of the vertex of the parabola is

1
3

⫺

b
2a

⫽ ⫺ 7
21⫺1

32 ⫽ 21

2

⫽ 10.5

a ⫽ ⫺1
3

 and b ⫽ 7

The corresponding y-coordinate is

f a 21

2 b ⫽ ⫺1

2 b 2
3a 21

⫽ 66.75

⫹ 7a 21
2 b ⫹ 30 ⫽ 267
121
4 2
2 , 267

4

Therefore, the vertex of the parabola is 
ward, the vertex of the parabola is the highest point on the parabola. Accordingly,
the y-coordinate of the vertex gives the maximum value of P. This implies that
the maximum quarterly profit of $66,750 [remember that P(x) is measured in
thousands of dollars] is realized if Cunningham spends $10,500 per quarter on
advertising. The graph of P is shown in Figure 47.

. Since the parabola opens down-

P

70
60
50
40
30
20
10

s
r
a
l
l
o
d

 
f
o
 
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
T

⫺5

⫺10

5

10

20
Thousands of dollars

15

x

25

Demand and Supply Curves
In a free-market economy, consumer demand for a particular commodity depends on
the commodity’s unit price. A demand equation expresses the relationship between
the unit price and the quantity demanded. The graph of a demand equation is called a
demand curve. In general, the quantity demanded of a commodity decreases as the
commodity’s unit price increases, and vice versa. Accordingly, a demand function,
defined by p ⫽ f (x), where p measures the unit price and x measures the number of
units of the commodity in question, is generally characterized as a decreasing function
of x; that is, p ⫽ f(x) decreases as x increases. Since both x and p assume only non-
negative values, the demand curve is that part of the graph of f(x) that lies in the first
quadrant (Figure 48).

FIGURE 47
The graph of the profit function 
P(x) ⫽ ⫺ x2 ⫹ 7x ⫹ 30

1
3

p

p = f (x)

x

FIGURE 48
A demand curve

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

130

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

PORTFOLIO

Todd Kodet

Senior Vice-President of Supply

TITLE
INSTITUTION Earthbound Farm

Earthbound Farm is America’s

largest grower of organic produce,
offering more than 100 varieties of
organic salads, vegetables, fruits,
and herbs on 34,000 crop acres. As Senior Vice-President of
Supply, I am responsible for getting our products into and
out of Earthbound Farm. A major part of my work is schedul-
ing plantings for upcoming seasons, matching projected
supply to projected demand for any given day and season. I
use applied mathematics in every step of my planning to
create models for predicting supply and demand.

After the sales department provides me with information

about projected demand, I take their estimates, along with
historical data for expected yields, to determine how much
of each organic product we need to plant. There are several
factors that I have to think about when I make these deter-
minations. For example, I not only have to consider gross
yield per acre of farmland, but also have to calculate aver-

age trimming waste per acre, to arrive at net pounds
needed per customer.

Some of the other variables I consider are the amount of

organic land available, the location of the farms, seasonal
information (because days to maturity for each of our crops
varies greatly depending on the weather), and historical
information relating to weeds, pests, and diseases.

I emphasize the importance of understanding the math-
ematics that drives our business plans when I work with my
team to analyze the reports they have generated. They
need to recognize when the information they have gath-
ered does not make sense so that
they can spot errors that could skew
our projections. With a sound under-
standing of mathematics, we are 
able to create more accurate predic-
tions to help us meet our company’s
goals.

Alli Pura, Earthbound Farm; (inset) © istockphoto.com/Dan Moore

APPLIED EXAMPLE 3 Demand for Bluetooth Headsets The demand func-
tion for a certain brand of bluetooth wireless headsets is given by

p ⫽ d x ⫽ ⫺0.025x 2 ⫺ 0.5x ⫹ 60

1

2

where p is the wholesale unit price in dollars and x is the quantity demanded 
each month, measured in units of a thousand. Sketch the corresponding demand
curve. Above what price will there be no demand? What is the maximum 
quantity demanded per month?

Solution The given function is quadratic, and its graph may be sketched using
the methods just developed (Figure 49). The p-intercept, 60, gives the wholesale
unit price above which there will be no demand. To obtain the maximum quantity
demanded, set p ⫽ 0, which gives

⫺0.025x2 ⫺ 0.5x ⫹ 60 ⫽ 0
x2 ⫹ 20x ⫺ 2400 ⫽ 0
1
x ⫹ 60 x ⫺ 40 ⫽ 0

12

2

Upon multiplying both sides of the equation by ⫺40

That is, x ⫽ ⫺60 or x ⫽ 40. Since x must be nonnegative, we reject the root x ⫽ ⫺60.
Thus, the maximum number of headsets demanded per month is 40,000.

p ($)

p ⫽ d(x)

60

40

20

x

40

⫺60

⫺40 ⫺20

20
Units of a thousand

FIGURE 49
The demand curve p ⫽ d(x)

In  a  competitive  market,  a  relationship  also  exists  between  the  unit  price  of  a
commodity and the commodity’s availability in the market. In general, an increase in
the commodity’s unit price induces the producer to increase the supply of the com-
modity. Conversely, a decrease in the unit price generally leads to a drop in the sup-
ply. The equation that expresses the relation between the unit price and the quantity
supplied is called a supply equation, and its graph is called a supply curve. A supply
function, defined by p ⫽ f(x), is generally characterized as an increasing function of

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

p

x; that is, p ⫽ f(x) increases as x increases. Since both x and p assume only nonneg-
ative values, the supply curve is the part of the graph of f(x) that lies in the first quad-
rant (Figure 50).

2.6 QUADRATIC FUNCTIONS

131

p = f (x)

x

FIGURE 50
A supply curve

APPLIED EXAMPLE 4 Supply of Bluetooth Headsets The supply function
for a certain brand of bluetooth wireless headsets is given by

p ⫽ s x ⫽ 0.02x 2 ⫹ 0.6x ⫹ 20

1

2

where p is the unit wholesale price in dollars and x stands for the quantity 
in units of a thousand) that will be made available in the market by the supplier.
Sketch the corresponding supply curve. What is the lowest price at which the
supplier will make the headsets available in the market?

Solution A sketch of the supply curve appears in Figure 51. The p-intercept, 20,
gives the lowest price at which the supplier will make the headsets available in
the market.

p ($)

60

40

20

p ⫽ s(x)

FIGURE 51
The supply curve p ⫽ s1x2

⫺80 ⫺60

⫺20

⫺40
20
Units of a thousand

x

30

p

Demand
curve

Supply
curve

p0

(x0, p0)

x0

x

FIGURE 52
Market equilibrium corresponds to 
(x0, p0), the point at which the supply and
demand curves intersect.

Market Equilibrium
Under pure competition, the price of a commodity will eventually settle at a level dic-
tated by the following condition: The supply of the commodity will be equal to the
demand for it. If the price is too high, the consumer will not buy, and if the price is
too low, the supplier will not produce. Market equilibrium prevails when the quan-
tity  produced  is  equal  to  the  quantity  demanded.  The  quantity  produced  at  market
equilibrium is called the equilibrium quantity, and the corresponding price is called
the equilibrium price.

Market equilibrium corresponds to the point at which the demand  curve and the
supply curve intersect. In Figure 52, x0 represents the equilibrium quantity, and p0 rep-
resents the equilibrium price. The point (x0, p0) lies on the supply curve and therefore
satisfies the supply equation. At the same time, it also lies on the demand curve and
therefore satisfies the demand equation. Thus, to find the point (x0, p0), and hence the
equilibrium quantity and price, we solve the demand and supply equations simultane-
ously for x and p. For meaningful solutions, x and p must both be positive.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 5 Market Equilibrium Refer to Examples 3 and 4. The
demand function for a certain brand of bluetooth wireless headsets is 

given by

p ⫽ d x ⫽ ⫺0.025x 2 ⫺ 0.5x ⫹ 60

and the corresponding supply function is given by

p ⫽ s x ⫽ 0.02x 2 ⫹ 0.6x ⫹ 20

1

2
1

2

where p is expressed in dollars and x is measured in units of a thousand. Find the
equilibrium quantity and price.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

132

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

Solution We solve the following system of equations:
p ⫽ ⫺0.025x 2 ⫺ 0.5x ⫹ 60
p ⫽ 0.02x 2 ⫹ 0.6x ⫹ 20

Substituting the first equation into the second yields

⫺0.025x 2 ⫺ 0.5x ⫹ 60 ⫽ 0.02x 2 ⫹ 0.6x ⫹ 20

which is equivalent to

p ($)

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

10

20

30

40

Units of a thousand

x

FIGURE 53
The supply curve and the demand curve
intersect at the point (20, 40).

0.045x 2 ⫹ 1.1x ⫺ 40 ⫽ 0
45x 2 ⫹ 1100x ⫺ 40,000 ⫽ 0
9x 2 ⫹ 220x ⫺ 8000 ⫽ 0
1
9x ⫹ 400 x ⫺ 20 ⫽ 0

12

2

Multiply by 1000.

Divide by 5.

400
9

Thus, x ⫽ ⫺ or x ⫽ 20. Since x must be nonnegative, the root x ⫽ ⫺ is
rejected. Therefore, the equilibrium quantity is 20,000 headsets. The equilibrium
price is given by

400
9

p ⫽ 0.02 20 2 ⫹ 0.6 20 ⫹ 20 ⫽ 40

1

2

1

2

or $40 per headset (Figure 53).

2.6 Self-Check Exercises

Given the quadratic function

1
f x ⫽ 2x 2 ⫺ 3x ⫺ 3

2

1. Find the vertex of the parabola.

2.6 Concept Questions

1. Consider the quadratic function 

1

2

2
1
f x ⫽ ax2 ⫹ bx ⫹ c  a ⫽ 0 .
a. What is the domain of f ?
b. What can you say about the parabola if a ⬎ 0?
c. What is the vertex of the parabola in terms of a and b?
d. What is the axis of symmetry of the parabola?

2.6 Exercises

2. Find the x-intercepts (if any) of the parabola.
3. Sketch the parabola.

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 2.6 can be found on 
page 135.

2. a. What is a demand function? A supply function?

b. What is market equilibrium?
c. What are the equilibrium quantity and equilibrium

price? How do you determine these quantities?

In Exercises 1–18, find the vertex, the x-intercepts (if any), and
sketch the parabola.

1. f1x2 ⫽ x2 ⫹ x ⫺ 6
3. f1x2 ⫽ x2 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 4
5. f1x2 ⫽ ⫺x2 ⫹ 5x ⫺ 6
7. f1x2 ⫽ 3x2 ⫺ 5x ⫹ 1
9. f1x2 ⫽ 2x2 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 3

2. f1x2 ⫽ 3x2 ⫺ 5x ⫺ 2
4. f1x2 ⫽ x2 ⫹ 6x ⫹ 9
6. f1x2 ⫽ ⫺4x2 ⫹ 4x ⫹ 3
8. f1x2 ⫽ ⫺2x2 ⫹ 6x ⫺ 3
10. f1x2 ⫽ 3x2 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 2

12. f1x2 ⫽ 2x2 ⫹ 3
14. f1x2 ⫽ 5 ⫺ x2
16. f1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ x ⫹ 1

1
2

3
4

11. f1x2 ⫽ x2 ⫺ 4
13. f1x2 ⫽ 16 ⫺ x2
15. f1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫹ 2
17. f1x2 ⫽ 1.2x2 ⫹ 3.2x ⫺ 1.2
18. f1x2 ⫽ 2.3x2 ⫺ 4.1x ⫹ 3

3
8

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

1

2

1

1

2
1
2

1
1
1
1
1
1

2
2
2
2
2
2

In Exercises 19–24, find the points of intersection of the graphs
of the functions.
19. f x ⫽ ⫺x 2 ⫹ 4; t x ⫽ x ⫺ 2
20. f x ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 5x ⫹ 6; t x ⫽ x ⫹
3
1
2
2
21. f x ⫽ ⫺x 2 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 6; t x ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 6
22. f x ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 2; t x ⫽ ⫺x 2 ⫺ x ⫹ 1
23. f x ⫽ 2x 2 ⫺ 5x ⫺ 8; t x ⫽ ⫺3x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 5
24. f x ⫽ 0.2 x 2 ⫺ 1.2x ⫺ 4; t x ⫽ ⫺0.3x 2 ⫹ 0.7x ⫹ 8.2
For the demand equations in Exercises 25 and 26, where x repre-
sents the quantity demanded in units of a thousand and p is the
unit price in dollars, (a) sketch the demand curve and (b) deter-
mine the quantity demanded when the unit price is set at $p.
25. p ⫽ ⫺x 2 ⫹ 36; p ⫽ 11

26. p ⫽ ⫺x2 ⫹ 16; p ⫽ 7

2

1

2

2

1

For the supply equations in Exercises 27 and 28, where x is the
quantity supplied in units of a thousand and p is the unit price in
dollars, (a) sketch the supply curve and (b) determine the price at
which the supplier will make 2000 units of the commodity avail-
able in the market.
27. p ⫽ 2x 2 ⫹ 18

28. p ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 16x ⫹ 40

In  Exercises  29–32,  for  each  pair  of  supply  and  demand  equa-
tions,  where  x represents  the  quantity  demanded  in  units  of  a
thousand  and  p the  unit  price  in  dollars,  find  the  equilibrium
quantity and the equilibrium price.
29. p ⫽ ⫺2x 2 ⫹ 80 and p ⫽ 15x ⫹ 30
30. p ⫽ ⫺x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫹ 100 and p ⫽ 8x ⫹ 25
31. 11p ⫹ 3x ⫺ 66 ⫽ 0 and 2p2 ⫹ p ⫺ x ⫽ 10
32. p ⫽ 60 ⫺ 2x 2 and p ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 9x ⫹ 30
33. CANCER SURVIVORS The  number  of  living  Americans  who
have had a cancer diagnosis has increased drastically since
1971. In part, this is due to more testing for cancer and bet-
ter treatment for some cancers. In part, it is because the pop-
ulation  is  older,  and  cancer  is  largely  a  disease  of  the
elderly.  The  number  of  cancer  survivors  (in  millions)
between 1975 (t ⫽ 0) and 2000 (t ⫽ 25) is approximately

21
N t ⫽ 0.0031t 2 ⫹ 0.16t ⫹ 3.6

1

0 ⱕ t ⱕ 25

2

a. How many living Americans had a cancer diagnosis in

1975? In 2000?

b. Assuming  the  trend  continued,  how  many  cancer  sur-

vivors were there in 2005?
Source: National Cancer Institute.

34. PREVALENCE OF ALZHEIMER’S PATIENTS Based on a study con-
ducted  in  1997,  the  percent  of  the  U.S.  population  by  age
afflicted with Alzheimer’s disease is given by the function

2
2
1
P x ⫽ 0.0726x 2 ⫹ 0.7902x ⫹ 4.9623
where x is measured in years, with x ⫽ 0 corresponding to
age  65.  What  percent  of  the  U.S.  population  at  age  65  is
expected to have Alzheimer’s disease? At age 90?
Source: Alzheimer’s Association.

0 ⱕ x ⱕ 25

1

2.6 QUADRATIC FUNCTIONS

133

35. MOTION OF A STONE A stone is thrown straight up from the
roof of an 80-ft building. The distance of the stone from the
ground at any time t (in seconds) is given by

21
h t ⫽ ⫺16t 2 ⫹ 64t ⫹ 80

a. Sketch the graph of h.
b. At  what  time  does  the  stone  reach  the  highest  point?
What is the stone’s maximum height from the ground?

36. MAXIMIZING PROFIT Lynbrook  West,  an  apartment  com-
plex, has 100 two-bedroom units. The monthly profit real-
ized from renting out x apartments is given by

1
P x ⫽ ⫺10x 2 ⫹ 1760x ⫺ 50,000

2

dollars. How many units should be rented out to maximize
the monthly rental profit? What is the maximum monthly
profit realizable?

37. MAXIMIZING PROFIT The estimated monthly profit realizable
by the Cannon Precision Instruments Corporation for manu-
facturing and selling x units of its model M1 cameras is

1
P x ⫽ ⫺0.04x 2 ⫹ 240x ⫺ 10,000

2

dollars. Determine how many cameras Cannon should pro-
duce per month to maximize its profits.

38. EFFECT OF ADVERTISING ON PROFIT The relationship between
Northwood Realty’s quarterly profit, P(x), and the amount
of money x spent on advertising per quarter is described by
the function

1
P x ⫽ ⫺ x 2 ⫹ 7x ⫹ 30

1
8

2

1

0 ⱕ x ⱕ 50

2

where both P(x) and x are measured in thousands of dol-
lars.
a. Sketch the graph of P.
b. Find the amount of money the company should spend
on  advertising  per  quarter  to  maximize  its  quarterly
profits.

39. MAXIMIZING REVENUE The monthly revenue R (in hundreds
of dollars) realized in the sale of Royal electric shavers is
related to the unit price p (in dollars) by the equation

1
R p ⫽ ⫺ p 2 ⫹ 30p

1
2

2

a. Sketch the graph of R.
b. At what unit price is the monthly revenue maximized?

40. SUPPLY FUNCTIONS The  supply  function  for  the  Luminar

daylight LED desk lamp is given by

p ⫽ 0.1x 2 ⫹ 0.5x ⫹ 15

where x is the quantity supplied (in thousands) and p is the
unit price in dollars. Sketch the graph of the supply func-
tion. What unit price will induce the supplier to make 5000
lamps available in the marketplace?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

134

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

41. MARKET EQUILIBRIUM The weekly demand and supply func-

tions for Sportsman 5 ⫻ 7 tents are given by

p ⫽ ⫺0.1x 2 ⫺ x ⫹ 40
p ⫽ 0.1x 2 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 20

respectively, where p is measured in dollars and x is mea-
sured in units of a hundred. Find the equilibrium quantity
and price.

42. MARKET EQUILIBRIUM The  management  of  the  Titan  Tire
Company has determined that the weekly demand and sup-
ply functions for their Super Titan tires are given by

46. DISTANCE OF WATER FLOW A cylindrical tank of height h ft
is filled to the top with water. If a hole is punched into the
lateral side of the tank, the stream of water flowing out of
the tank will reach the ground at a distance of x ft from the
base of the tank where x ⫽
(see the accom-
panying figure). Find the location of the hole so that x is a
maximum. What is this maximum value of x?
Hint: It suffices to maximize the expression for x 2. (Why?)

22y1h ⫺ y2

p ⫽ 144 ⫺ x 2

p ⫽ 48 ⫹ x 2

1
2

h

respectively, where p is measured in dollars and x is mea-
sured in units of a thousand. Find the equilibrium quantity
and price.

y

x

43. POISEUILLE’S LAW According  to  a  law  discovered  by  the 
nineteenth  century  physician  Poiseuille,  the  velocity  (in 
centimeters/second) of blood r cm from the central axis of an
artery is given by

1
√ r ⫽ k R 2 ⫺ r 2

1

2

2

where k is a constant and R is the radius of the artery. Sup-
pose that for a certain artery, k ⫽ 1000 and R ⫽ 0.2 so that
1
2
√ r ⫽ 1000 0.04 ⫺ r 2 .
a. Sketch the graph of √.
b. For what value of r is √(r) largest? Smallest? Interpret

1

2

your results.

44. MOTION OF A BALL A ball is thrown straight upward from
the ground and attains a height of s(t) ⫽ ⫺16t 2 ⫹ 128t ⫹
4 ft above the ground after t sec. When does the ball reach
the maximum height? What is the maximum height?

45. DESIGNING A NORMAN WINDOW A Norman window has the
shape of a rectangle surmounted by a semicircle (see the
accompanying figure). If a Norman window is to have a
perimeter of 28 ft, what should be its dimensions in order
to allow the maximum amount of light through the win-
dow?

x 

y 

In Exercises 47–51, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, explain why or
give an example to show why it is false.
47. If f(x) ⫽ ax2 ⫹ bx ⫹ c (a ⫽ 0), then

f a ⫺b ⫹ 2b2 ⫺ 4ac

2a

b ⫽ 0

48. The quadratic function f(x) ⫽ ax2 ⫹ bx ⫹ c (a ⫽ 0) has no

x-intercepts if b2 ⫺ 4ac ⬎ 0.

49. If a and c have opposite signs, then the parabola with equa-
tion y ⫽ ax2 ⫹ bx ⫹ c intersects the x-axis at two distinct
points.

50. If b2 ⫽ 4ac, then the graph of the quadratic function f(x) ⫽
ax2 ⫹  bx ⫹ c  (a ⫽ 0)  touches  the  x-axis  at  exactly  one
point.

51. If a profit function is given by P(x) ⫽ ax2 ⫹ bx ⫹ c, where
x is the number of units produced and sold, then the level 

of production that yields the maximum profit is ⫺ units.

b
2a

52. Let f(x) ⫽ ax2 ⫹ bx ⫹ c (a ⫽ 0). By completing the square

in x, show that

f1x2 ⫽ aa x ⫹

b

2ab 2

⫹ 4ac ⫺ b2

4a

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

2.6 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. Here, a ⫽ 2, b ⫽ ⫺3, and c ⫽ ⫺3. The x-coordinate of the

vertex is 

⫺

b
2a

⫽ ⫺1⫺32

2122 ⫽ 3

4

The corresponding y-coordinate is

⫺ 3a 3

4b ⫺ 3 ⫽ 9

8

4b 2
4b ⫽ 2a 3
f a 3

Therefore, the vertex of the parabola is 

⫺ 3 ⫽ ⫺33
⫺ 9
8
4
8 2
13
4, ⫺33
2. Solving the equation 2x 2 ⫺ 3x ⫺ 3 ⫽ 0, we find
⫽ 3 ⫾ 233

⫺1⫺32 ⫾ 21⫺32 2 ⫺ 41221⫺32

.

x ⫽

2122
So the x-intercepts are  ⫺

3
4

4

233

4

⬇ ⫺0.7

and 

233

4

⫹

3
4

⬇ 2.2.

2.6 QUADRATIC FUNCTIONS

135

3. Since a ⫽ 2 ⬎ 0, the parabola opens upward. The y-intercept
is ⫺3. The graph of the parabola is shown in the accompa-
nying figure.

y

20

15

10

5

⫺4

⫺2

2

4

x

The graph of f(x) ⫽ 2x2 ⫺ 3x ⫺ 3

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Finding the Points of Intersection of Two Graphs

A graphing utility can be used to find the point(s) of intersection of the graphs of
two functions.

EXAMPLE 1 Find the points of intersection of the graphs of

f1x2 ⫽ 0.3x 2 ⫺ 1.4x ⫺ 3 and

t1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.4x 2 ⫹ 0.8x ⫹ 6.4

Solution The graphs of both f and t in the standard viewing window are shown 
in Figure T1a. Using the function for finding the points of intersection of two graphs
on a graphing utility, we find the point(s) of intersection, accurate to four decimal
places, to be (⫺2.4158, 2.1329) (Figure T1b) and (5.5587, ⫺1.5125) (Figure T1c).
To access this function on the TI-83/84, select 5: intersect on the Calc menu.

_10

10

_10

10

6

10

_10

_5

10

14

Intersection
X=-2.415796

_10

Y=2.1329353

Intersection
X=5.5586531

_10

Y=-1.512527

(a)
FIGURE T1
(a) The graphs of f and g in the standard viewing window; (b) and (c) the TI-83/84 intersection screens

(b)

(c)

(continued)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

136

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

EXAMPLE 2 Consider the demand and supply functions

p ⫽ d1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.01x 2 ⫺ 0.2x ⫹ 8 and

p ⫽ s1x2 ⫽ 0.01x 2 ⫹ 0.1x ⫹ 3

a. Plot the graphs of d and s in the viewing window [0, 15] ⫻ [0, 10].
b. Verify that the equilibrium point is (10, 5).

Solution

a. The graphs of d and s are shown in Figure T2a.

10

0

(a)

10

15

0

Intersection
X=10

Y=5

15

(b)

FIGURE T2
(a) The graphs of d and s in the window [0, 15] ⫻ [0, 10]; (b) the TI-83/84 intersection screen

b. Using the function for finding the point of intersection of two graphs, we see that

x ⫽ 10 and y ⫽ 5 (Figure T2b), so the equilibrium point is (10, 5).

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

1

2

In Exercises 1–6, find the points of intersection of the graphs of
the  functions.  Express  your  answer  accurate  to  four  decimal
places.
1. f x ⫽ 1.2x ⫹ 3.8; t x ⫽ ⫺0.4x 2 ⫹ 1.2x ⫹ 7.5
2. f x ⫽ 0.2x 2 ⫺ 1.3x ⫺ 3; t x ⫽ ⫺1.3x ⫹ 2.8
3. f x ⫽ 0.3x 2 ⫺ 1.7x ⫺ 3.2; t x ⫽ ⫺0.4x 2 ⫹ 0.9x ⫹ 6.7
4. f x ⫽ ⫺0.3x 2 ⫹ 0.6x ⫹ 3.2; t x ⫽ 0.2x 2 ⫺ 1.2x ⫺ 4.8
5. f x ⫽ ⫺1.8x 2 ⫹ 2.1x ⫺ 2; t x ⫽ 2.1x ⫺ 4.2
6. f x ⫽ 1.2x 2 ⫺ 1.2x ⫹ 2; t x ⫽ ⫺0.2x 2 ⫹ 0.8x ⫹ 2.1

2
1
2

1

2

2
1

1
2

1

1
1
1
1
1
1

2
2
2
2
2
2

7. MARKET EQUILIBRIUM The  monthly  demand  and  supply

functions for a certain brand of wall clocks are given by

p ⫽ ⫺0.2x 2 ⫺ 1.2x ⫹ 50

p ⫽ 0.1x 2 ⫹ 3.2x ⫹ 25

respectively, where p is measured in dollars and x is mea-
sured in units of a hundred.
a. Plot the graphs of both functions in an appropriate view-

ing window.

b. Find the equilibrium quantity and price.

8. MARKET EQUILIBRIUM The quantity demanded x (in units of
a  hundred)  of  Mikado  miniature  cameras  per  week  is
related to the unit price p (in dollars) by

p ⫽ ⫺0.2x 2 ⫹ 80

The quantity x (in units of a hundred) that the supplier is
willing to make available in the market is related to the unit
price p (in dollars) by

p ⫽ 0.1x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 40

a. Plot the graphs of both functions in an appropriate view-

ing window.

b. Find the equilibrium quantity and price.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

2.7

Functions and Mathematical Models

2.7 FUNCTIONS AND MATHEMATICAL MODELS

137

FIGURE 54

Mathematical Models
One of the fundamental goals in this book is to show how mathematics and, in partic-
ular, calculus can be used to solve real-world problems such as those arising from the
world of business and the social, life, and physical sciences. You have already seen
some of these problems earlier. Here are a few more examples of real-world phenom-
ena that we will analyze in this and ensuing chapters.

■ Global warming (page 138)
■ The solvency of the U.S. Social Security trust fund (page 139)
■ The total cost of the health-care bill (page 146)
■ Pharmaceutical theft (page 653)
■ The Case-Shiller Home Price Index (page 707)
■ Mexico’s hedging tactic (page 823)

Regardless of the field from which the real-world problem is drawn, the problem
is analyzed by using a process called mathematical modeling. The four steps in this
process are illustrated in Figure 54.

Formulate

Real-world

problem

Test

Mathematical

model

Solve

Solution of

real-world problem

Interpret

Solution of

mathematical model

1. Formulate Given a real-world problem, our first task is to formulate the problem,
using  the  language  of  mathematics.  The  many  techniques  used  in  constructing
mathematical models range from theoretical consideration of the problem on the
one extreme to an interpretation of data associated with the problem on the other.
For example, the mathematical model giving the accumulated amount at any time
when a certain sum of money is deposited in the bank can be derived theoretically
(see Chapter 4). On the other hand, many of the mathematical models in this book
are constructed by studying the data associated with the problem (see Using Tech-
nology,  pages  149–152).  In  calculus,  we  are  primarily  concerned  with  how  one
(dependent)  variable  depends  on  one  or  more  (independent)  variables.  Conse-
quently, most of our mathematical models will involve functions of one or more
variables or equations defining these functions (implicitly).

2. Solve Once a mathematical model has been constructed, we can use the appropri-
ate mathematical techniques, which we will develop throughout the book, to solve
the problem.

3. Interpret Bearing in mind that the solution obtained in Step 2 is just the solution
of the mathematical model, we need to interpret these results in the context of the
original real-world problem.

4. Test Some mathematical models of real-world applications describe the situations
with  complete  accuracy.  For  example,  the  model  describing  a  deposit  in  a  bank
account gives the exact accumulated amount in the account at any time. But other
mathematical models give, at best, an approximate description of the real-world
problem. In this case, we need to test the accuracy of the model by observing how
well  it  describes  the  original  real-world  problem  and  how  well  it  predicts  past

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

138

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

and/or future behavior. If the results are unsatisfactory, then we may have to recon-
sider the assumptions made in the construction of the model or, in the worst case,
return to Step 1.

Many real-world phenomena, including those mentioned at the beginning of this

section, are modeled by an appropriate function.

In what follows, we will recall some familiar functions and give examples of real-

world phenomena that are modeled by using these functions. 

Polynomial Functions
A polynomial function of degree n is a function of the form 

f1x2 ⫽ anxn ⫹ an⫺1xn⫺1 ⫹ . . . ⫹ a2x2 ⫹ a1x ⫹ a0

1an ⬆ 02

where n is a nonnegative integer and the numbers a0, a1, . . . , a n are constants, called
the coefficients of the polynomial function. For example, the functions

2  x3 ⫹ 22x2 ⫺ 6
f 1x2 ⫽ 2x5 ⫺ 3x4 ⫹ 1
t1x2 ⫽ 0.001x3 ⫺ 0.2x2 ⫹ 10x ⫹ 200

are polynomial functions of degrees 5 and 3, respectively. Observe that a polynomial
function is defined for every value of x and so its domain is (⫺⬁, ⬁).

A polynomial function of degree 1 (n ⫽ 1) has the form
1a1 ⬆ 02

y ⫽ f1x2 ⫽ a1x ⫹ a0

and is an equation of a straight line in the slope-intercept form with slope m ⫽ a1 and
y-intercept b ⫽ a0 (see Section 2.2). For this reason, a polynomial function of degree
1 is called a linear function.

Linear functions are used extensively in mathematical modeling for two impor-
tant reasons. First, some models are linear by nature. For example, the formula for
converting temperature from Celsius (°C) to Fahrenheit (°F) is 
, and F
is a linear function of C. Second, some natural phenomena exhibit linear characteris-
tics over a small range of values and can therefore be modeled by a linear function
restricted to a small interval. 

5 C ⫹ 32

F ⫽ 9

A polynomial function of degree 2 has the form

y ⫽ f1x2 ⫽ a2x2 ⫹ a1x ⫹ a0

1a2 苷 02

or, more simply, y ⫽ ax2 ⫹ bx ⫹ c, and is called a quadratic function.

Quadratic  functions  serve  as  mathematical  models  for  many  phenomena,  as

Example 1 shows.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 1 Global Warming The increase in carbon dioxide
(CO2) in the atmosphere is a major cause of global warming. The 

Keeling curve, named after Charles David Keeling, a professor at Scripps Institu-
tion of Oceanography, gives the average amount of CO2, measured in parts per
million volume (ppmv), in the atmosphere from 1958 through 2010. Even though
data were available for every year in this time interval, we’ll construct the curve
based only on the following randomly selected data points.

Year

1958

1970

1974

1978

1985

1991

1998

2003

2007

2010

Amount

315

325

330

335

345

355

365

375

380

390

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2.7 FUNCTIONS AND MATHEMATICAL MODELS

139

The scatter plot associated with these data is shown in Figure 55a. A mathemati-
cal model giving the approximate amount of CO2 in the atmosphere during this
period is given by 

A1t2 ⫽ 0.012313t2 ⫹ 0.7545t ⫹ 313.9

11 ⱕ t ⱕ 532

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 1 corresponding to 1958. The graph of A is
shown in Figure 55b.

y (ppmv)

400

380

360

340

320

y (ppmv)

400

380

360

340

320

FIGURE 55

0

10
(a) Scatter plot

20

30

40

50

t (years)

0

10

20

30

40

50

t (years)

(b) The graph of A superimposed upon the scatter plot 

a. Use the model to estimate the average amount of atmospheric CO2 in 1980 

(t ⫽ 23).

b. Assume that the trend continued, and use the model to predict the average

amount of atmospheric CO2 in 2013.
Source: Scripps Institution of Oceanography.

Solution

a. The average amount of atmospheric carbon dioxide in 1980 is given by

A1232 ⫽ 0.0123131232 2 ⫹ 0.75451232 ⫹ 313.9 ⬇ 337.77

or approximately 338 ppmv.

b. Assuming that the trend continued, the average amount of atmospheric CO2 in

2013 will be

A1562 ⫽ 0.0123131562 2 ⫹ 0.75451562 ⫹ 313.9 ⬇ 394.77

or approximately 395 ppmv.

The next example uses a polynomial of degree 4 to help us construct a model that

describes the projected assets of the Social Security trust fund.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 2 Social Security Trust Fund Assets The projected
assets of the Social Security trust fund (in trillions of dollars) from 2010 

through 2037 are given in the following table.

Year

Assets

2010

2.69

2015

3.56

2020

4.22

2025

4.24

2030

3.24

2035

0.87

2037

0

The scatter plot associated with these data are shown in Figure 56a, where t ⫽ 0
corresponds to 2010. A mathematical model giving the approximate value of the
assets in the trust fund A(t), in trillions of dollars in year t is 

A1t2 ⫽ 0.0000263t4 ⫺ 0.0017501t3 ⫹ 0.0206t2 ⫹ 0.0999t ⫹ 2.7

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 272

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

140

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

The graph of A(t) is shown in Figure 56b. (You will be asked to construct this
model in Exercise 14, Using Technology Exercises 2.7.)

A(t) ($ trillion)

A(t) ($ trillion)

5
4
3
2
1

5

⫺1
⫺2
(a) Scatter plot

FIGURE 56

10

15

20

25

t (years)

5
4
3
2
1

5

10

15

20

25

⫺1
⫺2
(b) The graph of A together with the scatter plot

t (years)

a. The first baby boomers will turn 65 in 2011. What will be the assets of the
Social Security system trust fund at that time? The last of the baby boomers
will turn 65 in 2029. What will the assets of the trust fund be at that time?

b. Unless payroll taxes are increased significantly and/or benefits are scaled back

dramatically, it is a matter of time before the assets of the current system are
depleted. Use the graph of the function A(t) to estimate the year in which the
current Social Security system is projected to go broke.

Source: Social Security Administration.

Solution
a. The assets of the Social Security trust fund in 2011 (t ⫽ 1) will be
A112 ⫽ 0.0000263112 4 ⫺ 0.0017501112 3 ⫹ 0.0206112 2 ⫹ 0.0999112 ⫹ 2.7 ⬇ 2.82
or approximately $2.82 trillion. The assets of the trust fund in 2029 (t ⫽ 19)
will be

A119) ⫽ 0.00002631192 4 ⫺ 0.00175011192 3 ⫹ 0.02061192 2

⫹ 0.09991192 ⫹ 2.7 ⬇ 3.46

or approximately $3.46 trillion.

b. From Figure 56b, we see that the graph of A crosses the t-axis at approxi-

mately t ⫽ 27. So unless the current system is changed, it is projected to go
broke in 2037. (At this time, the first of the baby boomers will be 91, and the
last of the baby boomers will be 73.)

Rational and Power Functions
Another important class of functions is rational functions. A rational function is sim-
ply the quotient of two polynomials. Examples of rational functions are

 F1x2 ⫽ 3x3 ⫹ x2 ⫺ x ⫹ 1
 G1x2 ⫽

x2 ⫹ 1
x2 ⫺ 1

x ⫺ 2

In general, a rational function has the form

R1x2 ⫽

f 1x2t1x2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

2.7 FUNCTIONS AND MATHEMATICAL MODELS

141

PORTFOLIO

Melissa Rich

TITLE Owner
INSTITUTION A Rich Experience Massage & Wellness Spa

A Rich Experience Massage &

Wellness Spa takes an integrative
approach to health-related ser-
vices in a modern spa environ-

ment. The spa provides a variety of services including mas-
sage therapy, spa facials and body treatments, Bowenwork,
hypnotherapy, and chiropractic care. A Rich Experience also
sells retail products and offers continuing education work-
shops for massage therapists.

As an owner, I closely evaluate the company’s fixed and
variable revenue streams—generated from our beauty and
spa services, retail sales, workshops, and rental space—to
determine if I am on track to meet my profitability goals. I
plot data points for all the revenue streams and apply the
least squares method to see if the best fit line matches my
profitability goals. This method allows me to see how
increases in specific revenue streams might affect overall
profitability. 

Bodywork and Spa Services provide us with our most

profitable revenue stream, so I try to maximize the number
of these services that we can provide. Based on our available
rooms and practitioners, we can provide 60 one-hour ser-
vices per week. At an average of $70 per service, this equals
$4200 per week or approximately $218,440 per year. In order
to gross $109,220 and meet my goals for net profitability,
after one year the spa needs to be booking at least 50% of
our available time slots. My commissioned practitioners earn
40% on all services they provide, so at 50% productivity, this
brings my net total for Beauty and Spa Services to $65,532. 

Applying my college mathematics and accounting

courses has helped me create a thriv-
ing business. With additional market-
ing efforts, name recognition, and a
positive reputation in the community,
I can anticipate that our bookings will
continue to increase each year. 

Courtesy of A Rich Experience; (inset) © Szasz-Fabian Ilka Erica/Shutterstock.com

where f (x) and t(x) are polynomial functions. Since division by zero is not allowed,
we conclude that the domain of a rational function is the set of all real numbers
except the zeros of t—that is, the roots of the equation t(x) ⫽ 0. Thus, the domain
of the function F is the set of all numbers except x ⫽ 2, whereas the domain of the
function  G is  the  set  of  all  numbers  except  those  that  satisfy  x 2 ⫺ 1  ⫽ 0,  or 
x ⫽ ⫾1.

Functions of the form

f1x2 ⫽ x r

where r is any real number, are called power functions. We encountered examples of
power functions earlier in our work. For example, the functions

f 1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫽ x1/2  and  t1x2 ⫽  

1
x2

⫽ x⫺
2
 

are power functions.

Many of the functions that we encounter later will involve combinations of the
functions  introduced  here.  For  example,  the  following  functions  may  be  viewed  as
combinations of such functions:

1 ⫹ x2

 f 1x2 ⫽ B 1 ⫺ x2
 t1x2 ⫽ 2x2 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 4
 h1x2 ⫽ 11 ⫹ 2x2 1/2 ⫹

1

1x2 ⫹ 22 3/2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

142

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

As with polynomials of degree 3 or greater, analyzing the properties of these functions
is facilitated by using the tools of calculus, to be developed later.

In the next example, we use a power function to construct a model that describes

the driving costs of a car.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 3 Driving Costs A study of driving costs based on a
2008 medium-sized sedan found the following average costs (car payments,

gas, insurance, upkeep, and depreciation), measured in cents per mile.

Miles/year

5000

Cost/mile, y (¢)

147.52

10,000

71.9

15,000

55.2

20,000

46.9

A mathematical model (using least-squares techniques) giving the average cost in
cents per mile is

C1x2 ⫽ 1735.2

x1.72

⫹ 38.6

where x (in thousands) denotes the number of miles the car is driven in each year.
The scatter plot associated with these data and the graph of C are shown in Figure
57. Using this model, estimate the average cost of driving a 2008 medium-sized
sedan 8000 miles per year and 18,000 miles per year.
Source: American Automobile Association.

C(x)

C(x)

160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20

s
t
n
e
C

(a)

5

10

15

20

Thousands of miles

x

160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20

s
t
n
e
C

(b)

5

10

15

20

Thousands of miles

x

Solution The average cost for driving a car 8000 miles per year is

C182 ⫽ 1735.2

81.72

⫹ 38.6 ⬇ 87.1

or approximately 87.1¢/mile. The average cost for driving it 18,000 miles per year is

C1182 ⫽ 1735.2

181.72

⫹ 38.6 ⬇ 50.6

or approximately 50.6¢/mile.

Constructing Mathematical Models
We close this section by showing how some mathematical models can be constructed by
using elementary geometric and algebraic arguments.

The following guidelines can be used to construct mathematical models.

FIGURE 57
(a) The scatter plot and (b) the
graph of the model for driving costs

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

2.7 FUNCTIONS AND MATHEMATICAL MODELS

143

Guidelines for Constructing Mathematical Models
1. Assign  a  letter  to  each  variable  mentioned  in  the  problem.  If  appropriate,

draw and label a figure.

2. Find an expression for the quantity sought.
3. Use  the  conditions  given  in  the  problem  to  write  the  quantity  sought  as  a
function f of one variable. Note any restrictions to be placed on the domain
of f from physical considerations of the problem.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 4 Enclosing an Area The owner of Rancho Los Feliz 
has 3000 yards of fencing with which to enclose a rectangular piece of 

grazing land along the straight portion of a river. Fencing is not required along the
river. Letting x denote the width of the rectangle, find a function f in the variable x
giving the area of the grazing land if she uses all of the fencing (Figure 58). 

x 

Solution

y

FIGURE 58
The rectangular grazing land has width 
x and length y.

1. This information was given.
2. The area of the rectangular grazing land is A ⫽ xy. Next, observe that the

amount of fencing is 2x ⫹ y and this must be equal to 3000, since all the fenc-
ing is used; that is,

2x ⫹ y ⫽ 3000

3. From the equation, we see that y ⫽ 3000 ⫺ 2x. Substituting this value of y

into the expression for A gives

A ⫽ xy ⫽ x13000 ⫺ 2x2 ⫽ 3000x ⫺ 2x 2

Finally, observe that both x and y must be nonnegative, since they represent
the width and length of a rectangle, respectively. Thus, x ⱖ 0 and y ⱖ 0. But
the latter is equivalent to 3000 ⫺ 2x ⱖ 0, or x ⱕ 1500. So the required func-
tion is f (x) ⫽ 3000x ⫺ 2x 2 with domain 0 ⱕ x ⱕ 1500.

Note Observe that if we view the function f(x) ⫽ 3000x ⫺ 2x 2 strictly as a mathe-
matical entity, then its domain is the set of all real numbers. But physical consider-
ations dictate that its domain should be restricted to the interval [0, 1500].

APPLIED EXAMPLE 5 Charter-Flight Revenue If exactly 200 people sign up
for a charter flight, Leisure World Travel Agency charges $300 per person. 

However, if more than 200 people sign up for the flight (assume that this is the
case), then each fare is reduced by $1 for each additional person. Letting x denote
the number of passengers above 200, find a function giving the revenue realized
by the company.

Solution

1. This information was given.
2. If there are x passengers above 200, then the number of passengers signing up for
the flight is 200 ⫹ x. Furthermore, the fare will be (300 ⫺ x) dollars per passenger.

3. The revenue will be

R ⫽ 1200 ⫹ x21300 ⫺ x2
⫽ ⫺x 2 ⫹ 100x ⫹ 60,000

Number of passengers ⴢ the fare per passenger

Clearly, x must be nonnegative, and 300 ⫺ x ⱖ 0, or x ⱕ 300. So the required
function is f(x) ⫽ ⫺x 2 ⫹ 100x ⫹ 60,000 with domain [0, 300].

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

144

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

2.7 Self-Check Exercise

The  Cunningham  Day  Care  Center  wants  to  enclose  a  play-
ground  of  rectangular  shape  having  an  area  of  500  ft2 with  a
wooden fence. Find a function f giving the amount of fencing
required in terms of the width x of the rectangular playground.

2.7 Concept Questions

The solution to Self-Check Exercise 2.7 can be found on 
page 149.

11. Describe mathematical modeling in your own words.

12. Define (a) a polynomial function and (b) a rational func-

tion. Give an example of each.

2.7 Exercises

In Exercises 1–6, determine whether the given function is a poly-
nomial  function,  a  rational  function,  or  some  other  function.
State the degree of each polynomial function.

1. f x ⫽ 3x6 ⫺ 2x 2 ⫹ 1

2. f x ⫽

3. G x ⫽ 2 x 2 ⫺ 3 3

4. H x ⫽ 2x⫺3 ⫹ 5x⫺2 ⫹ 6

5. f t ⫽ 2t 2 ⫹ 3

6. f r ⫽

1

2

2

1
21

1

2
2t

1

1

1

2

2

2

x 2 ⫺ 9
x ⫺ 3

6r

1r 3 ⫺ 82

7. INSTANT MESSAGING ACCOUNTS The  number  of  enterprise
instant  messaging  (IM)  accounts  is  projected  to  grow
according to the function

N1t2 ⫽ 2.96t2 ⫹ 11.37t ⫹ 59.7

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 52

where  N(t)  is  measured  in  millions  and  t in  years,  with 
t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 2006.
a. How many enterprise IM accounts were there in 2006?
b. What was the expected number of enterprise IM accounts

in 2010?

Source: The Radical Group.

8. SOLAR POWER More and more businesses and homeowners
are  installing  solar  panels  on  their  roofs  to  draw  energy
from  the  sun’s  rays.  According  to  the  U.S.  Department 
of  Energy,  the  solar  cell  kilowatt-hour  use  in  the  United
States (in millions) is projected to be

S1t2 ⫽ 0.73t 2 ⫹ 15.8t ⫹ 2.7

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 82

in year t, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 2000. What was the
projected solar cell kilowatt-hours used in the United States
for 2006? For 2008?
Source: U.S. Department of Energy.

9. AVERAGE SINGLE-FAMILY PROPERTY TAX Based on data from
298 of 351 cities and towns in Massachusetts, the average
single-family tax bill from 1997 through 2010 is approxi-
mated by the function

T1t2 ⫽ 7.26t2 ⫹ 91.7t ⫹ 2360

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 132

where T(t) is measured in dollars and t in years, with t ⫽ 0
corresponding to 1997.
a. What was the average property tax on a single-family

home in Massachusetts in 1997?

b. If  the  trend  continued,  what  was  the  average  property

tax in 2010?

Source: Massachusetts Department of Revenue.

10. REVENUE OF POLO RALPH LAUREN Citing  strong  sales  and
benefits from a new arm that will design lifestyle brands
for department and specialty stores, the company projects
revenue (in billions of dollars) to be

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 32

R1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.06t2 ⫹ 0.69t ⫹ 3.25
in year t, where t ⫽ 0 corresponds to 2005.
a. What was the revenue of the company in 2005?
b. Find R(1), R(2), and R(3) and interpret your results.
c. Sketch the graph of R.
Source: Company reports.

11. BABY BOOMERS AND SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS Aging  baby
boomers will put a strain on Social Security benefits unless
Congress takes action. The Social Security benefits to be
paid out from 2010 through 2040 are projected to be

2 ⫹ 0.5185t ⫹ 0.72    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 32

S1t2 ⫽ 0.1375t 
where S1t2 is measured in trillions of dollars and t is mea-
sured in decades with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 2010.
a. What  was  the  amount  of  the  Social  Security  benefits

paid out in 2010? 

b. What is the amount of the Social Security benefits pro-

jected to be paid out in 2040?

Source: Social Security and Medicare Trustees’ 2010 Report.

12. BABY BOOMERS AND MEDICARE BENEFITS Aging  baby
boomers will put a strain on Medicare benefits unless Con-
gress  takes  action.  The  Medicare  benefits  to  be  paid  out
from 2010 through 2040 are projected to be

B1t2 ⫽ 0.09t 

2 ⫹ 0.102t ⫹ 0.25    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 32

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

where B1t2 is measured in trillions of dollars and t is mea-
sured in decades with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 2010. 
a. What was the amount of Medicare benefits paid out in

2010?

b. What is the amount of Medicare benefits projected to be

paid out in 2040?

Source: Social Security and Medicare Trustees’ 2010 Report.

13. REACTION OF A FROG TO A DRUG Experiments conducted by
A. J. Clark suggest that the response R(x) of a frog’s heart
muscle to the injection of x units of acetylcholine (as a per-
cent of the maximum possible effect of the drug) may be
approximated by the rational function

R1x2 ⫽

100x
b ⫹ x

1

x ⱖ 0

2

where b is a positive constant that depends on the particu-
lar frog.
a. If a concentration of 40 units of acetylcholine produces
a response of 50% for a certain frog, find the “response
function” for this frog.

b. Using the model found in part (a), find the response of
the frog’s heart muscle when 60 units of acetylcholine
are administered.

14. AGING DRIVERS The number of fatalities due to car crashes,
based on the number of miles driven, begins to climb after
the driver is past age 65. Aside from declining ability as
one ages, the older driver is more fragile. The number of
fatalities per 100 million vehicle miles driven is approxi-
mately

where x denotes the age group of drivers, with x ⫽ 0 cor-
responding  to  those  aged  50–54,  x ⫽ 1  corresponding  to
those  aged  55–59,  x ⫽ 2  corresponding  to  those  aged
60–64, . . . , and x ⫽ 7 corresponding to those aged 85–89.
What  is  the  fatality  rate  per  100  million  vehicle  miles 
driven for an average driver in the 50–54 age group? In the
85–89 age group?
Source: U.S. Department of Transportation.

15. TOTAL GLOBAL MOBILE DATA TRAFFIC In  a  2009  report,
equipment  maker  Cisco  forecast  the  total  global  mobile
data traffic to be

f 1t2 ⫽ 0.021t3 ⫹ 0.015t2 ⫹ 0.12t ⫹ 0.06
10 ⱕ t ⱕ 52
million  terabytes  per  month  in  year  t,  where  t ⫽ 0  corre-
sponds to 2009.
a. What was the total global mobile data traffic in 2009?
b. According  to  Cisco,  what  will  the  total  global  mobile

data traffic per month be in 2012?

Source: Cisco.

16. GIFT CARDS Gift  cards  have  increased  in  popularity  in
recent years. Consumers appreciate gift cards because they
get  to  select  the  present  they  like.  The  U.S.  sales  of  gift
cards (in billions of dollars) is approximated by

S1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.6204t3 ⫹ 4.671t2 ⫹ 3.354t ⫹ 47.4

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 52

N x ⫽ 0.0336x 3 ⫺ 0.118x 2 ⫹ 0.215x ⫹ 0.7

0 ⱕ x ⱕ 7

1

2

1

2

2.7 FUNCTIONS AND MATHEMATICAL MODELS

145

in year t, where t ⫽ 0 corresponds to 2003.
a. What were the sales of gift cards for 2003?
b. What were the sales of gift cards for 2008?
Source: The Tower Group.

17. BLACKBERRY SUBSCRIBERS According  to  a  study  conducted
in  2004,  the  number  of  subscribers  of  BlackBerry,  the
handheld  email  devices  manufactured  by  Research  in
Motion Ltd., is approximated by

N1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.0675t 4 ⫹ 0.5083t 3 ⫺ 0.893t 2 ⫹ 0.66t ⫹ 0.32
10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

where  N(t)  is  measured  in  millions  and  t in  years,  with
t ⫽ 0 corresponding to the beginning of 2002.
a. How  many  BlackBerry  subscribers  were  there  at  the

beginning of 2002?

b. How  many  BlackBerry  subscribers  were  there  at  the

beginning of 2006?

Source: ThinkEquity Partners.

18. INFANT MORTALITY RATES IN MASSACHUSETTS The  deaths  of
children less than 1 year old per 1000 live births is mod-
eled by the function

R1t2 ⫽ 162.8t⫺3.025

11 ⱕ t ⱕ 32

where t is measured in 50-year intervals, with t ⫽ 1 corre-
sponding to 1900.
a. Find R(1), R(2), and R(3) and use your result to sketch

the graph of the function R over the domain [1, 3].

b. What was the infant mortality rate in 1900? in 1950? in

2000?

Source: Massachusetts Department of Public Health.

19. ONLINE VIDEO VIEWERS As broadband Internet grows more
popular, video services such as YouTube will continue to
expand. The number of online video viewers (in millions)
in year t is projected to grow according to the rule

N1t2 ⫽ 52t0.531

11 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

where t ⫽ 1 corresponds to 2003.
a. Sketch the graph of N.
b. How many online video viewers will there be in 

2012?

Source: eMarketer.com.

20. CHIP SALES The worldwide sales of flash memory chip (in

billions of dollars) is approximated by

S1t2 ⫽ 4.31t ⫹ 22 0.94

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 62

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
2002. Flash chips are used in cell phones, digital cameras,
and other products.
a. What  were  the  worldwide  flash  memory  chip  sales  in

2002?

b. What were the estimated sales for 2010?
Source: Web-Feet Research, Inc.

(continued)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

146

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

21. OUTSOURCING OF JOBS According  to  a  study  conducted  in
2003, the total number of U.S. jobs (in millions) that are
projected to leave the country by year t, where t ⫽ 0 cor-
responds to 2000, is

N1t2 ⫽ 0.00184251t ⫹ 52 2.5

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 152

What was the projected number of outsourced jobs for 2005
(t ⫽ 5)? For 2010 (t ⫽ 10)?
Source: Forrester Research.

22. IMMIGRATION TO THE UNITED STATES Immigration  to  the
United States from Europe, as a percentage of total immi-
gration, is approximately

P1t2 ⫽ 0.767t 3 ⫺ 0.636t 2 ⫺ 19.17t ⫹ 52.7
10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42
where t is measured in decades, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding
to the decade of the 1950s.
a. Complete the following table: 

0

1

2

3

4

t

P(t)

b. Use the result of part (a) to sketch the graph of P.
c. Use the result of part (b) to estimate the decade when
immigration, as a percentage of total immigration, was
the greatest and the decade when it was the smallest.

Source: Jeffrey Williamson, Harvard University.

23. SELLING PRICE OF DVD RECORDERS The rise of digital music
and  the  improvement  to  the  DVD  format  are  part  of  the
reasons why the average selling price of stand-alone DVD
recorders will drop in the coming years. The function

A1t2 ⫽

699

1t ⫹ 12 0.94        10 ⱕ t ⱕ 52

gives the average selling price (in dollars) of stand-alone
DVD recorders in year t, where t ⫽ 0 corresponds to the
beginning of 2002. What was the average selling price of
stand-alone DVD recorders at the beginning of 2002? at the
beginning of 2007?
Source: Consumer Electronics Association.

24. WALKING VERSUS RUNNING The  oxygen  consumption  (in
milliliter  per  pound  per  minute)  for  a  person  walking  at 
x mph is approximated by the function

f 1x2 ⫽  

5

3  x2 ⫹ 5

3  x ⫹ 10    10 ⱕ x ⱕ 92

whereas the oxygen consumption for a runner at x mph is
approximated by the function

t1x2 ⫽ 11x ⫹ 10

14 ⱕ x ⱕ 92

a. Sketch the graphs of f and t.
b. At what speed is the oxygen consumption the same for
a walker as it is for a runner? What is the level of oxy-
gen consumption at that speed?

c. What happens to the oxygen consumption of the walker
and the runner at speeds beyond that found in part (b)?
Source: William McArdley, Frank Katch, and Victor Katch, Exercise
Physiology.

25. PRICE OF AUTOMOBILE PARTS For  years,  automobile  manu-
facturers had a monopoly on the replacement-parts market,
particularly  for  sheet  metal  parts  such  as  fenders,  doors,
and hoods, the parts most often damaged in a crash. Begin-
ning in the late 1970s, however, competition appeared on
the scene. In a report conducted by an insurance company
to study the effects of the competition, the price of an OEM
(original  equipment  manufacturer)  fender  for  a  particular
1983 model car was found to be

f 1t2 ⫽ 110
1
2 t ⫹ 1

    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 22

where f(t) is measured in dollars and t is in years. Over the
same period of time, the price of a non-OEM fender for the
car was found to be

t1t2 ⫽ 26a 1
4  t 

2 ⫺ 1b 2

⫹ 52    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 22

where t(t) is also measured in dollars. Find a function h(t)
that gives the difference in price between an OEM fender
and  a  non-OEM  fender.  Compute  h(0),  h(1),  and  h(2).
What  does  the  result  of  your  computation  seem  to  say
about the  price gap between OEM and non-OEM fenders
over the 2 years?

26. OBESE CHILDREN IN THE UNITED STATES The  percentage  of
obese children aged 12–19 in the United States is approxi-
mately

P1t2 ⫽ e 0.04t ⫹ 4.6

⫺0.01005t 

2 ⫹ 0.945t ⫺ 3.4

if 0 ⱕ t ⬍ 10
if 10 ⱕ t ⱕ 30

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
the beginning of 1970. What was the percentage of obese
children  aged  12–19  at  the  beginning  of  1970?  At  the
beginning of 1985? At the beginning of 2000?
Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

27. COST OF THE HEALTH-CARE BILL The  Congressional  Budget
Office estimates that the health-care bill passed by the Sen-
ate  in  November  2009,  combined  with  a  package  of  revi-
sions known as the reconciliation bill, will result in a cost by
year t (in billions of dollars) of

f 1t2 ⫽ e 5

⫺0.5278t 

3 ⫹ 3.012t2 ⫹ 49.23t ⫺ 103.29

if 0 ⱕ t ⬍ 2
if 2 ⱕ t ⱕ 8

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
2010. What will be the cost of the health-care bill by 2011?
By 2015?
Source: U.S. Congressional Budget Office.

28. PRICE OF IVORY According  to  the  World  Wildlife  Fund,  a
group  in  the  forefront  of  the  fight  against  illegal  ivory
trade, the price of ivory (in dollars per kilo) compiled from a
variety of legal and black market sources is approximated by
the function

f 1t2 ⫽ e 8.37t ⫹ 7.44

2.84t ⫹ 51.68

if 0 ⱕ t ⱕ 8
if 8 ⬍ t ⱕ 30

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
the beginning of 1970.
a. Sketch the graph of the function f.
b. What was the price of ivory at the beginning of 1970?

At the beginning of 1990?

Source: World Wildlife Fund.

29. WORKING-AGE POPULATION The ratio of working-age popu-
lation to the elderly in the United States in year t (includ-
ing projections after 2000) is given by

4.1
⫺0.03t ⫹ 4.25
⫺0.075t ⫹ 4.925

if 0 ⱕ t ⬍ 5
if 5 ⱕ t ⬍ 15
if 15 ⱕ t ⱕ 35

f 1t2 ⫽c 

with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to the beginning of 1995.
a. Sketch the graph of f.
b. What was the ratio at the beginning of 2005? What will

the ratio be at the beginning of 2020?
c. Over what years is the ratio constant?
d. Over what years is the decline of the ratio greatest?
Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

30. DEMAND FOR SMOKE ALARMS The  demand  function  for  the

Sentinel smoke alarm is given by

p ⫽

30

0.02x2 ⫹ 1

    10 ⱕ x ⱕ 102

where x (measured in units of a thousand) is the quantity
demanded per week and p is the unit price in dollars.
a. Sketch the graph of the demand function.
b. What  is  the  unit  price  that  corresponds  to  a  quantity

demanded of 10,000 units?

31. DEMAND FOR COMMODITIES Assume  that  the  demand  func-

tion for a certain commodity has the form

p ⫽ 2⫺ax2 ⫹ b    1a ⱖ 0, b ⱖ 02

where x is the quantity demanded, measured in units of a
thousand  and  p is  the  unit  price  in  dollars.  Suppose  the
quantity demanded is 6000 (x ⫽ 6) when the unit price is
$8.00 and 8000 (x ⫽ 8) when the unit price is $6.00. Deter-
mine the demand equation. What is the quantity demanded
when the unit price is set at $7.50?

32. SUPPLY OF SATELLITE RADIOS Suppliers  of  satellite  radios
will  market  10,000  units  when  the  unit  price  is  $20  and
62,500 units when the unit price is $35. Determine the sup-
ply function if it is known to have the form

p ⫽ a1x ⫹ b    1a ⬎ 0, b ⬎ 02

where x is the quantity supplied and p is the unit price in
dollars. Sketch the graph of the supply function. What unit
price  will  induce  the  supplier  to  make  40,000  satellite
radios available in the marketplace?

33. Suppose  the  demand  and  supply  equations  for  a  certain
commodity  are  given  by  p ⫽ ax ⫹ b and  p ⫽ cx ⫹ d,
respectively, where a ⬍ 0, c ⬎ 0, and b ⬎ d ⬎ 0 (see the
following figure).

2.7 FUNCTIONS AND MATHEMATICAL MODELS

147

p

p = cx + d

p = ax + b

x

a. Find the equilibrium quantity and equilibrium price in

terms of a, b, c, and d.

b. Use  part  (a)  to  determine  what  happens  to  the  market
equilibrium  if  c is  increased  while  a,  b,  and  d remain
fixed. Interpret your answer in economic terms.

c. Use  part  (a)  to  determine  what  happens  to  the  market
equilibrium if b is decreased while a, c, and d remain
fixed. Interpret your answer in economic terms.

34. ENCLOSING AN AREA Patricia  wishes  to  have  a  rectangular
garden  in  her  backyard.  She  has  80  ft  of  fencing  with
which to enclose her garden. Letting x denote the width of
the garden, find a function f in the variable x giving the area
of the garden. What is its domain?

x

y

35. ENCLOSING AN AREA Juanita  wishes  to  have  a  rectangular
garden  in  her  backyard.  But  Juanita  wants  her  garden  to
have an area of 250 ft2. Letting x denote the width of the
garden, find a function f in the variable x giving the length
of the fencing required to construct the garden. What is the
domain of the function?
Hint: Refer to the figure for Exercise 34. The amount of fencing
required is equal to the perimeter of the rectangle, which is twice
the width plus twice the length of the rectangle.

36. PACKAGING By  cutting  away  identical  squares  from  each
corner of a rectangular piece of cardboard and folding up
the resulting flaps, an open box can be made. If the card-
board is 15 in. long and 8 in. wide and the square cutaways
have dimensions of x in. by x in., find a function giving the
volume of the resulting box.

x

x

8 8 – 2x

x

x

x

x

x

x

15 – 2x

15

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

41. PROFIT OF A VINEYARD Phillip,  the  proprietor  of  a  vineyard,
estimates  that  if  10,000  bottles  of  wine  were  produced  this
season, then the profit would be $5/bottle. But if more than
10,000 bottles were produced, then the profit per bottle for the
entire  lot  would  drop  by  $0.0002  for  each  additional  bottle
sold. Assume that at least 10,000 bottles of wine are produced
and sold, and let x denote the number of bottles produced and
sold in excess of 10,000.
a. Find a function P giving the profit in terms of x.
b. What  is  the  profit  Phillip  can  expect  from  the  sale  of

16,000 bottles of wine from his vineyard?

42. CHARTER REVENUE The owner of a luxury motor yacht that
sails  among  the  4000  Greek  islands  charges  $600/person/
day  if  exactly  20  people  sign  up  for  the  cruise.  However, 
if more than 20 people sign up for the cruise (up to the max-
imum  capacity  of  90),  the  fare  for  all  the  passengers  is
reduced  by  $4  per  person  for  each  additional  passenger.
Assume that at least 20 people sign up for the cruise, and let
x denote the number of passengers above 20.
a. Find  a  function  R giving  the  revenue  per  day  realized

from the charter.

b. What is the revenue per day if 60 people sign up for the

cruise?

c. What is the revenue per day if 80 people sign up for the

cruise?

In Exercises 43–46, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
43. A  polynomial  function  is  a  sum  of  constant  multiples  of

power functions.

44. A polynomial function is a rational function, but the con-

verse is false.

45. If r ⬎ 0, then the power function f(x) ⫽ xr is defined for

all values of x.

46. The function f(x) ⫽ 2 x is a power function.

148

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

37. CONSTRUCTION COSTS A rectangular box is to have a square
base and a volume of 20 ft3. The material for the base costs
30¢/ft2,  the  material  for  the  sides  costs  10¢/ft2,  and  the
material  for  the  top  costs  20¢/ft2.  Letting  x denote  the
length of one side of the base, find a function in the vari-
able x giving the cost of constructing the box.

y

x

x

38. OIL SPILLS The  oil  spilling  from  the  ruptured  hull  of  a
grounded  tanker  spreads  in  all  directions  in  calm  waters.
Suppose the area polluted is a circle of radius r ft and the
radius is increasing at the rate of 2 ft/sec.
a. Find a function f giving the area polluted in terms of r.
b. Find a function t giving the radius of the polluted area

in terms of t.

c. Find a function h giving the area polluted in terms of t.
d. What is the size of the polluted area 30 sec after the hull

was ruptured?

39. YIELD OF AN APPLE ORCHARD An apple orchard has an aver-
age  yield  of  36  bushels  of  apples/tree  if  tree  density  is 
22  trees/acre.  For  each  unit  increase  in  tree  density,  the
yield  decreases  by  2  bushels/tree.  Letting  x denote  the
number of trees beyond 22/acre, find a function in x that
gives the yield of apples.

40. BOOK DESIGN A book designer has decided that the pages
of a book should have 1-in. margins at the top and bottom
and  ᎏ1
ᎏ-in. margins on the sides. She further stipulated that
2
each page should have a total area of 50 in.2. Find a func-
tion in the variable x, giving the area of the printed part of
the page. What is the domain of the function?

x

1
 in.
2

y

1 in.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

2.7 Solution to Self-Check Exercise

Let  the  length  of  the  rectangular  playground  be  y ft  (see  the
figure).

2.7 FUNCTIONS AND MATHEMATICAL MODELS

149

Then, the amount of fencing required is L ⫽ 2x ⫹ 2y. But the
requirement  that  the  area  of  the  rectangular  playground  be 
500 ft2 implies that xy ⫽ 500, or upon solving for y, y ⫽ 500>x.

Therefore, the amount of fencing required is

x

y

L ⫽ f1x2 ⫽ 2x ⫹

with domain (0, ⬁).

2a 500

x b ⫽ 2x ⫹ 1000

x

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Constructing Mathematical Models from Raw Data
A graphing utility can sometimes be used to construct mathematical models from sets
of data. For example, if the points corresponding to the given data are scattered about
a straight line, then use LinReg(ax⫹b) (linear regression) from the statistical calcu-
lations menu of the graphing utility to obtain a function (model) that approximates the
data at hand. If the points seem to be scattered along a parabola (the graph of a qua-
dratic  function),  then  use  QuadReg (second-degree  polynomial  regression),  and  so
on. (These are functions on the TI-83/84 calculator.)

APPLIED EXAMPLE 1 Indian Gaming Industry The following table gives
the estimated gross revenues (in billions of dollars) from the Indian 

gaming industries from 2000 (t ⫽ 0) to 2008 (t ⫽ 8).

Year

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Revenue

11.0

12.8

14.7

16.8

19.5

22.7

25.1

26.4

26.8

a. Use a graphing utility to find a polynomial function f of degree 4 that models

the data.

b. Plot the graph of the function f, using the viewing window [0, 8] ⫻ [0, 30].
c. Use the function evaluation capability of the graphing utility to compute f(0),

f(1), . . . , f(8), and compare these values with the original data.

d. If the trend continued, what was the gross revenue for 2009 (t ⫽ 9)?
Source: National Indian Gaming Association.

Solution

a. First, enter the data using the statistical menu. Then choose QuartReg (fourth-

degree polynomial regression) from the statistical calculations menu of a
graphing utility. We find

f1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.00737t 4 ⫹ 0.0655t 3 ⫺ 0.008t 2 ⫹ 1.61t ⫹ 11

b. The graph of f is shown in Figure T1.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(continued)

150

30

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

c. The required values, which compare favorably with the given data, follow:

t

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

f(t)

11.0

12.7

14.6

16.9

19.6

22.4

25.0

26.6

26.7

0
FIGURE T1
The graph of f in the viewing window 
[0, 8] ⫻ [0, 30]

8

d. The gross revenue for 2009 (t ⫽ 9) is given by

f192 ⫽ ⫺0.00737192 4 ⫹ 0.0655192 3 ⫺ 0.008192 2 ⫹ 1.61192 ⫹ 11 ⬇ 24.24

or approximately $24.2 billion.

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

In  Exercises  1–14,  use  the  statistical  calculations  menu  to  con-
struct a mathematical model associated with the given data.
1. CONSUMPTION OF BOTTLED WATER The annual per-capita con-
sumption of bottled water (in gallons) and the scatter plot
for these data follow:

Year
Consumption

2001
18.8

2002
20.9

2003
22.4

2004
24

2005
26.1

2006
28.3

y (gallons)

30
28
26
24
22
20
18

1

2

3

4

5

6

t (year)

a. Use LinReg(ax⫹b) to find a first-degree (linear) poly-
nomial regression model for the data. Let t ⫽ 1 corre-
spond to 2001.

b. Plot the graph of the function f found in part (a), using

the viewing window [1, 6] ⫻ [0, 30].

c. Compute the values for t = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. How do

your figures compare with the given data?

d. If the trend continued, what was the annual per-capita

consumption of bottled water in 2008?

Source: Beverage Marketing Corporation.

2. WEB CONFERENCING Web  conferencing  is  a  big  business,
and  it’s  growing  rapidly.  The  amount  (in  billions  of  dol-
lars)  spent  on  Web  conferencing  from  the  beginning  of
2003  through  2010,  and  the  scatter  plot  for  these  data
follow:

Year
Amount

2003
0.50

2004
0.63

2005
0.78

2006
0.92

2007
1.16

2008
1.38

2009
1.60

2010
1.90

y ($ billion)

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

t (year)

a. Let t ⫽ 0 correspond to the beginning of 2003 and use
QuadReg to  find  a  second-degree  polynomial  regres-
sion model based on the given data. 

b. Plot the graph of the function f found in part (a) using

the window [0, 7] ⫻ [0, 2].

c. Compute f(0), f(3), f(6), and f(7). Compare these values

with the given data.
Source: Gartner Dataquest.

3. STUDENT POPULATION The  projected  total  number  of  stu-
dents  in  elementary  schools,  secondary  schools,  and  col-
leges (in millions) from 1995 through 2015 is given in the
following table:

Year
Number

1995
64.8

2000
68.7

2005
72.6

2010
74.8

2015
78

a. Use QuadReg to find a second-degree polynomial regres-
sion model for the data. Let t be measured in 5-year inter-
vals, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to the beginning of 1995.
b. Plot the graph of the function f found in part (a), using

the viewing window [0, 4] ⫻ [0, 85].

c. Using the model found in part (a), what will be the projected
total number of students (all categories) enrolled in 2015? 

Source: U.S. National Center for Education Statistics.

4. DIGITAL TV SHIPMENTS The estimated number of digital TV
shipments between the year 2000 and 2006 (in millions of
units) and the scatter plot for these data follow:

Year
Units
Shipped

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

0.63

1.43

2.57

4.1

6

8.1

10

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

y (million)

y ($ trillion)

2.7 FUNCTIONS AND MATHEMATICAL MODELS

151

5

4

3

2

1

10

8

6

4

2

 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6

t (year)

2

4

6

8

10

t (year)

a. Use CubicReg to find a third-degree polynomial regres-
sion  model  for  the  data.  Let  t ⫽ 0  correspond  to  the
beginning of 2000.

b. Plot the graph of the function f found in part (a), using

the viewing window [0, 6] ⫻ [0, 11].

c. Compute the values of f(t) for t ⫽ 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6.
Source: Consumer Electronics Manufacturers Association.

5. HEALTH-CARE SPENDING Health-care  spending  by  business
(in billions of dollars) from the year 2000 through 2006 is
summarized below:

Year
Number

2000
185

2001
235

2002
278

2003
333

2004
389

2005
450

2006
531

a. Plot the scatter diagram for the above data. Let  t ⫽ 0

correspond to the beginning of 2000.

b. Use  QuadReg to  find  a  second-degree  polynomial

regression model for the data.

c. If the trend continued, what was the spending in 2010?
Source: Centers for Medicine and Medicaid Services.

6. TIVO OWNERS The projected number of households (in mil-
lions)  with  digital  video  recorders  that  allow  viewers  to
record shows onto a server and skip commercials are given
in the following table:

Year
Households

2006
31.2

2007
49.0

2008
71.6

2009
97.0

2010
130.2

a. Let t ⫽ 0 correspond to the beginning of 2006, and use
QuadReg to  find  a  second-degree  polynomial  regres-
sion model based on the given data.

b. Obtain the scatter plot and the graph of the function f
found in part (a), using the viewing window [0, 4] ⫻
[0, 140].

Source: Strategy Analytics.

7. TELECOMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY REVENUE Telecommunica-
tions industry revenue is expected to grow in the coming
years, fueled by the demand for broadband and high-speed
data services. The worldwide revenue for the industry (in
trillions  of  dollars)  and  the  scatter  plot  for  these  data
follow:

Year
Revenue

2000
1.7

2002
2.0

2004
2.5

2006
3.0

2008
3.6

2010
4.2

a. Let t ⫽ 0 correspond to the beginning of 2000 and use
CubicReg to  find  a  third-degree  polynomial  regression
model based on the given data. 

b. Plot the graph of the function f found in part (a), using

the viewing window [0, 10] ⫻ [0, 5].

c. Find the worldwide revenue for the industry in 2001 and

2005 and find the projected revenue for 2010.

Source: Telecommunication Industry Association.

8. POPULATION GROWTH IN CLARK COUNTY Clark  County  in
Nevada—dominated by greater Las Vegas—is one of the
fastest-growing  metropolitan  areas  in  the  United  States.
The population of the county from 1970 through 2000 is
given in the following table:

Year
Population

1970

1980

1990

2000

273,288

463,087

741,459

1,375,765

a. Use  CubicReg to  find  a  third-degree  polynomial
regression  model  for  the  data.  Let  t be  measured  in
decades, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to the beginning of
1970.

b. Plot the graph of the function f found in part (a), using

the viewing window [0, 3] ⫻ [0, 1,500,000].

c. Compare the values of f at t ⫽ 0, 1, 2, and 3, with the

given data.

Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

9. LOBBYISTS’  SPENDING Lobbyists  try  to  persuade  legisla-
tors to propose, pass, or defeat legislation or to change
existing laws. The amount (in billions of dollars) spent
by lobbyists from 2003 through 2009 is shown in the fol-
lowing table:

Year
Amount

2003
8.0

2004
8.5

2005
9.7

2006
10.2

2007
11.3

2008
12.9

2009
13.8

a. Use CubicReg to find a third-degree polynomial regres-
sion  model  for  the  data,  letting  t ⫽ 0  correspond  to
2003.

b. Plot the scatter diagram and the graph of the function f
found  in  part  (a),  using  the  viewing  window  [0,  6]  ⫻
[0, 15].

c. Compare the values of f at t ⫽ 0, 3, and 6 with the given

data.

Source: Center for Public Integrity.

(continued)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.
Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

152

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

10. MOBILE ENTERPRISE IM ACCOUNTS The projected number of
mobile enterprise instant messaging (IM) accounts (in mil-
lions)  from  2006  through  2010  is  given  in  the  following
table (t ⫽ 0 corresponds to the beginning of 2006):

Year
Accounts

0
2.3

1
3.6

2
5.8

3
8.7

4

14.9

a. Use CubicReg to find a third-degree polynomial regres-
sion model for the data, letting t ⫽ 0 correspond to the
beginning of 2000.

b. Plot the scatter diagram and the graph of the function f

found in part (a).

c. Compute the values for t ⫽ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6.
Source: Cushman and Wakefield.

a. Use CubicReg to find a third-degree polynomial regres-

sion model based on the given data.

b. Plot the graph of the function f found in part (a), using

the viewing window [0, 5] ⫻ [0, 16].

c. Compute f(0), f(1), f(2), f(3), and f(4).
Source: The Radical Group.

13. NICOTINE CONTENT OF CIGARETTES Even as measures to dis-
courage  smoking  have  been  growing  more  stringent  in
recent years, the nicotine content of cigarettes has been ris-
ing, making it more difficult for smokers to quit. The fol-
lowing table gives the average amount of nicotine in ciga-
rette smoke from 1999 through 2004:

11. MEASLES DEATHS Measles is still a leading cause of vaccine-
preventable death among children, but because of improve-
ments  in  immunizations,  measles  deaths  have  dropped
globally. The following table gives the number of measles
deaths  (in  thousands)  in  sub-Saharan  Africa  from  1999
through 2005:

Year
Amount

1999
506

2001
338

2003
250

2005
126

a. Use CubicReg to find a third-degree polynomial regres-
sion model for the data, letting t ⫽ 0 correspond to the
beginning of 1999.

b. Plot the scatter diagram and the graph of the function f

found in part (a).

c. Compute the values of f for t ⫽ 0, 2, and 6.
Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and World
Health Organization.

12. OFFICE VACANCY RATE The total vacancy rate (as a percent)
of offices in Manhattan from 2000 through 2006 is shown
in the following table:

Year
Vacancy Rate

2000
3.8

2001
8.9

2002
12

2003
12.5

2004
11

2005
8.4

2006
6.7

Year
Yield per 
Cigarette (mg)

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

1.71

1.81

1.85

1.84

1.83

1.89

a. Use  QuartReg to  find  a  fourth-degree  polynomial
regression model for the data. Let t ⫽ 0 correspond to
the beginning of 1999.

b. Plot the graph of the function f found in part (a), using

the viewing window [0, 5] ⫻ [0, 2].

c. Compute the values of f(t) for t ⫽ 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5.
d. If the trend continued, what was the average amount of

nicotine in cigarettes in 2005?

Source: Massachusetts Tobacco Control Program.

14. SOCIAL SECURITY TRUST FUND ASSETS The projected assets of
the Social Security trust fund (in trillions of dollars) from
2010 through 2037 are given in the following table:

Year
Assets

2010
2.69

2015
3.56

2020
4.22

2025
4.24

2030
3.24

2035
0.87

2037

0

Use QuartReg to find a fourth-degree polynomial regres-
sion model for the data. Let t ⫽ 0 correspond to 2010.
Source: Social Security Administration.

CHAPTER 2

Summary of Principal Formulas and Terms

FORMULAS

1. Slope of a line

2. Equation of a vertical line

3. Equation of a horizontal line

4. Point-slope form of the equation of a line

⫺
y
m ⫽ ᎏy
1
ᎏ
⫺
x
1

2
x
2

x ⫽ a

y ⫽ b

y ⫺ y1 ⫽ m x ⫺ x1

1

2

5. Slope-intercept form of the equation of a line

y ⫽ mx ⫹ b

6. General equation of a line

Ax ⫹ By ⫹ C ⫽ 0

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CONCEPT REVIEW QUESTIONS

153

TERMS

Cartesian coordinate system (70)
origin (70)
ordered pair (70)
coordinates (70)
parallel lines (74)
perpendicular lines (78)
x-intercept (78)
y-intercept (78)
function (89)
domain (89)

range (90)
independent variable (91)
dependent variable (91)
graph of a function (92)
piecewise-defined function (94)
graph of an equation (95)
vertical line test (95)
composite function (108)
linear function (113)
total cost function (115)

revenue function (115)
profit function (115)
break-even point (117)
quadratic function (126)
demand function (129)
supply function (130)
market equilibrium (131)
polynomial function (138)
rational function (140)
power function (141)

CHAPTER 2

Concept Review Questions

Fill in the blanks.
1. A  point  in  the  plane  can  be  represented  uniquely  by  a/an
______ pair of numbers. The first number of the pair is called
the ______, and the second number of the pair is called the
______.

2. a. The point P(a, 0) lies on the ______-axis, and the point 

P(0, b) lies on the ______-axis.

b. If the point P(a, b) lies in the fourth quadrant, then the

point P(⫺a, b) lies in the ______ quadrant.

3. a. If P1(x1, y1) and P2(x2, y2) are any two distinct points on
a nonvertical line L, then the slope of L is m = ______.

b. The slope of a vertical line is ______.
c. The slope of a horizontal line is ______.
d. The slope of a line that slants upward from left to right

is ______.

4. If L1 and L2 are nonvertical lines with slopes m1 and m2,
respectively, then L1 is parallel to L2 if and only if ______
and L1 is perpendicular to L2 if and only if ______.

5. a. An  equation  of  the  line  passing  through  the  point 
P(x1, y1) and having slope m is ______. This form of the
equation of a line is called the ______ ______.

b. An equation of the line that has slope m and y-intercept
b is ______. It is called the ______ form of an equation
of a line.

6. a. The general form of an equation of a line is ______.

b. If a line has equation ax ⫹ by ⫹ c ⫽ 0 (b ⫽ 0), then its

slope is ______.

7. If f is a function from the set A to the set B, then A is called
the ______ of f, and the set of all values of f(x) as x takes

on all possible values in A is called the ______ of f. The
range of f is contained in the set ______.

8. The graph of a function is the set of all points (x, y) in the
xy-plane such that x is in the ______ of f and y ⫽ ______.
The Vertical Line Test states that a curve in the xy-plane is
the graph of a function y ⫽ f(x) if and only if each ______
line intersects it in at most one ______.

9. If f and t are functions with domains A and B, respectively,
then (a) ( f ⫾ t)(x) ⫽ ______, (b) ( ft)(x) ⫽ ______, and  
(x) ⫽ ______. The domain of f ⫹ t is ______. The 
(c) 

a f
tb

f
t

domain of
t(x) is never ______.

is ______ with the additional condition that 

10. The  composition  of  t and  f is  the  function  with  rule 
(t 폶 f )(x)  ⫽ ______.  Its  domain  is  the  set  of  all  x in  the
domain of ______ such that ______ lies in the domain of
______.

11. A quadratic function has the form f (x) ⫽ ______. Its graph
is a/an ______ that opens ______ if a ⬎ 0 and ______ if 
a ⬍ 0. Its highest point or lowest point is called its ______.
The x-coordinate of its vertex is ______, and an equation
of its axis of symmetry is ______.

12. a. A polynomial function of degree n is a function of the

form ______.

b. A polynomial function of degree 1 is called a/an ______
function; one of degree 2 is called a/an ______ function.

c. A rational function is a/an ______ of two ______.
d. A power function has the form f(x) ⫽ ______.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

154

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

CHAPTER 2

Review Exercises

In  Exercises  1–6,  find  an  equation  of  the  line  L that  passes
through the point (⫺2, 4) and satisfies the given condition.
1. L is a vertical line.

2. L is a horizontal line.

3. L passes through the point 

4. The x-intercept of L is 3.

13, 7
22

.

5. L is parallel to the line 5x ⫺ 2y ⫽ 6.

6. L is perpendicular to the line 4x ⫹ 3y ⫽ 6.

7. Find  an  equation  of  the  line  with  slope  ⫺ and  y-inter-

1
2

cept ⫺3.

8. Find  the  slope  and  y-intercept  of  the  line  with  equation 

3x ⫺ 5y ⫽ 6.

9. Find an equation of the line passing through the point (2, 3)

and parallel to the line with equation 3x ⫹ 4y ⫺ 8 ⫽ 0.

10. Find  an  equation  of  the  line  passing  through  the  point 
(⫺1, 3) and parallel to the line joining the points (⫺3, 4)
and (2, 1).

11. Find  an  equation  of  the  line  passing  through  the  point 
(⫺2,  ⫺4)  that  is  perpendicular  to  the  line  with  equation 
2 x ⫺ 3y ⫺ 24 ⫽ 0.

In Exercises 12 and 13, sketch the graph of the equation.
12. 3x ⫺ 4y ⫽ 24

13. ⫺2x ⫹ 5y ⫽ 15

In Exercises 14 and 15, find the domain of the function.
14. f x ⫽

29 ⫺ x

x ⫹ 3

2x2 ⫺ x ⫺ 3

16. Let f1x2 ⫽ 3x 2 ⫹ 5x ⫺ 2. Find:

1
1

2
2

15. f x ⫽

a. f1⫺22
b. f1a ⫹ 22
c. f12a2
d. f1a ⫹ h2

17. SALES OF PRERECORDED MUSIC The  following  graphs  show
the sales y of prerecorded music (in billions of dollars) by
format as a function of time t (in years), with t ⫽ 0 corre-
sponding to 1985.

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

y (billions of dollars)

CDs

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Cassettes

t (years)

a. In  what  years  were  the  sales  of  prerecorded  cassettes

greater than those of prerecorded CDs?

b. In what years were the sales of prerecorded CDs greater

than those of prerecorded cassettes?

c. In what year were the sales of prerecorded cassettes the
same as those of prerecorded CDs? Estimate the level of
sales in each format at that time.

Source: Recording Industry Association of America.

18. Let y 2 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 1.

a. Sketch the graph of this equation.
b. Is y a function of x? Why?
c. Is x a function of y? Why?

19. Sketch the graph of the function defined by

x ⫹ 1

f1x2 ⫽ 冦 ⫺x 2 ⫹ 4x ⫺ 1 if x ⱖ 1

if x ⬍ 1

1
x

20. Let f1x2 ⫽ and t1x2 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3. Find:
b. f1x2>t1x2
d. t( f1x22

a. f1x2t1x2
c. f1t1x22

In Exercises 21 and 22, find the vertex and the x-intercepts of
the parabola and sketch the parabola.
21. y ⫽ 6x 2 ⫺ 11x ⫺ 10

22. y ⫽ ⫺4x 2 ⫹ 4x ⫹ 3

In  Exercises  23  and  24,  find  the  point  of  intersection  of  the
lines with the given equations.
23. 3x ⫹ 4y ⫽ ⫺6 and 2x ⫹ 5y ⫽ ⫺11

24. y ⫽ x ⫹ 6 and 3x ⫺ 2y ⫹ 3 ⫽ 0

3
4

25. Find the point of intersection of the two straight lines hav-

ing the equations 7x ⫹ 9y ⫽ ⫺11 and 3x ⫽ 6y ⫺ 8.

26. The cost and revenue functions for a certain firm are given
by  C(x)  ⫽ 12x ⫹ 20,000  and  R(x)  ⫽ 20x,  respectively.
Find the company’s break-even point.

27. DEMAND FOR CLOCK RADIOS In the accompanying figure, L1
is the demand curve for the model A clock radios manu-
factured  by  Ace  Radio,  and  L 2 is  the  demand  curve  for
their  model  B  clock  radios.  Which  line  has  the  greater
slope? Interpret your results.

L1

p

L2

x

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

28. SUPPLY OF CLOCK RADIOS In the accompanying figure, L1 is
the  supply  curve  for  the  model  A  clock  radios  manufac-
tured  by  Ace  Radio,  and  L 2 is  the  supply  curve  for  their
model  B  clock  radios.  Which  line  has  the  greater  slope?
Interpret your results.

p

L2

L1

x

29. SALES OF MP3  PLAYERS Sales  of  a  certain  brand  of  MP3

player are approximated by the relationship

S1x2 ⫽ 6000x ⫹ 30,000

1

0 ⱕ x ⱕ 5

2

where S(x) denotes the number of MP3 players sold in year
x (x ⫽ 0 corresponds to 2007). Find the number of MP3
players expected to be sold in 2012.

30. COMPANY SALES A  company’s  total  sales  (in  millions  of
dollars) are approximately linear as a function of time (in

years). Sales in 2006 1x ⫽ 02 were $2.4 million, whereas

sales in 2011 amounted to $7.4 million.
a. Find an equation giving the company’s sales as a func-

tion of time.

b. What were the sales in 2009?

31. PROFIT FUNCTIONS A company has a fixed cost of $30,000
and a production cost of $6 for each CD it manufactures.
Each CD sells for $10.
a. What is the cost function?
b. What is the revenue function?
c. What is the profit function?
d. Compute the profit (loss) corresponding to production

levels of 6000, 8000, and 12,000 units, respectively.

32. LINEAR DEPRECIATION An  office  building  worth  $6  million
when  it  was  completed  in  2008  is  being  depreciated  lin-
early over 30 years.
a. What is the rate of depreciation?
b. What will be the book value of the building in 2018?

33. DEMAND EQUATIONS There is no demand for a certain com-
modity when the unit price is $200 or more, but for each
$10 decrease in price below $200, the quantity demanded
increases  by  200  units.  Find  the  demand  equation  and
sketch its graph.

34. SUPPLY EQUATIONS Bicycle  suppliers  will  make  200  bicy-
cles available in the market per month when the unit price
is $50 and 2000 bicycles available per month when the unit
price is $100. Find the supply equation if it is known to be
linear.

35. CLARK’S RULE Clark’s  Rule  is  a  method  for  calculating
pediatric  drug  dosages  based  on  a  child’s  weight.  If  a
denotes  the  adult  dosage  (in  milligrams)  and  w is  the

REVIEW EXERCISES

155

weight of the child (in pounds), then the child’s dosage is
given by

D w ⫽

1

2

aw
150

If  the  adult  dose  of  a  substance  is  500  mg,  how  much
should a child who weighs 35 lb receive?

36. COLLEGE ADMISSIONS The  accompanying  data  were  com-
piled  by  the  Admissions  Office  of  Carter  College  during
the  past  5  years.  The  data  relate  the  number  of  college
brochures and follow-up letters (x) sent to a preselected list
of high school juniors who took the PSAT and the number
of completed applications (y) received from these students
(both measured in thousands).

Brochures Sent, x
Applications Completed, y

1.8
0.4

2
0.5

3.2
0.7

4
1

4.8
1.3

a. Derive  an  equation  of  the  straight  line  L that  passes

through the points (2, 0.5) and (4, 1).

b. Use  this  equation  to  predict  the  number  of  completed
applications  that  might  be  expected  if  6400  brochures
and follow-up letters are sent out during the next year.

37. REVENUE FUNCTIONS The  monthly  revenue  R (in  hundreds
of dollars) realized in the sale of Royal electric shavers is
related to the unit price p (in dollars) by the equation

1
R p ⫽ ⫺ p2 ⫹ 30p

2

1
2

Find the revenue when an electric shaver is priced at $30.

38. HEALTH CLUB MEMBERSHIP The  membership  of  the  newly
opened Venus Health Club is approximated by the function

2
1
N x ⫽ 200 4 ⫹ x 1/2

1

2

1

1 ⱕ x ⱕ 24

2

where N(x) denotes the number of members x months after
the club’s grand opening. Find N(0) and N(12), and inter-
pret your results.

39. POPULATION GROWTH A study prepared for a Sunbelt town’s
Chamber of Commerce projected that the population of the
town in the next 3 years will grow according to the rule

P1x2 ⫽ 50,000 ⫹ 30x3/2 ⫹ 20x

where P(x) denotes the population x months from now. By 
how  much  will  the  population  increase  during  the  next 
9 months? During the next 16 months?

40. THURSTONE LEARNING CURVE Psychologist  L.  L.  Thurstone
discovered  the  following  model  for  the  relationship
between the learning time T and the length of a list n:

T ⫽ f n ⫽ An

1

2

2n ⫺ b

where A and b are constants that depend on the person and
the  task.  Suppose  that,  for  a  certain  person  and  a  certain
task, A ⫽ 4 and b ⫽ 4. Compute f(4), f(5), . . . , f(12), and
use this information to sketch the graph of the function f.
Interpret your results.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.
Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

156

CHAPTER 2 FUNCTIONS AND THEIR GRAPHS

41. TESTOSTERONE USE Fueled by the promotion of testosterone
as an antiaging elixir, use of the hormone by middle-age and
older men grew dramatically. The total number of prescrip-
tions for testosterone from 1999 through 2002 is given by

N1t2 ⫽ ⫺35.8t 3 ⫹ 202t 2 ⫹ 87.8t ⫹ 648
10 ⱕ t ⱕ 32
where N(t) is measured in thousands and t is measured in
years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to the beginning of 1999.
Find  the  total  number  of  prescriptions  for  testosterone  in
1999, 2000, 2001, and 2002.
Source: IMS Health.

42. U.S. NUTRITIONAL SUPPLEMENTS MARKET The size of the U.S.
nutritional supplements market from 1999 through 2003 is
approximated by the function

A1t2 ⫽ 16.41t ⫹ 12 0.1

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

where A(t) is measured in billions of dollars and t is mea-
sured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to the beginning
of 1999.
a. Compute  A(0),  A(1),  A(2),  A(3),  and  A(4).  Interpret  your

results.

b. Use the results of part (a) to sketch the graph of A.
Source: Nutrition Business Journal.

43. GLOBAL SUPPLY OF PLUTONIUM The global stockpile of pluto-
nium for military applications between 1990 (t ⫽ 0) and 2003
(t ⫽ 13) stood at a constant 267 tons. On the other hand, the
global stockpile of plutonium for civilian use was

2t 2 ⫹ 46t ⫹ 733
tons in year t over the same period.
a. Find the function f giving the global stockpile of pluto-
nium for military use from 1990 through 2003 and the
function t giving the global stockpile of plutonium for
civilian use over the same period.

b. Find the function h giving the total global stockpile of

plutonium between 1990 and 2003.

c. What was the total global stockpile of plutonium in 2003?
Source: Institute for Science and International Security.

44. MARKET EQUILIBRIUM The monthly demand and supply func-

tions for the Luminar desk lamp are given by

p ⫽ d1x2 ⫽ ⫺1.1x 2 ⫹ 1.5x ⫹ 40
p ⫽ s1x2 ⫽ 0.1x 2 ⫹ 0.5x ⫹ 15

CHAPTER 2

Before Moving On . . .

1. Find an equation of the line that passes through (⫺1, ⫺2)

and (4, 5).

2. Find an equation of the line that has slope ⫺ and y-inter-

1
3

4
cept  .
3

3. Let

f 1x2 ⫽ e ⫺2x ⫹ 1

x2 ⫹ 2

if ⫺1 ⱕ x ⬍ 0
if 0 ⱕ x ⱕ 2
f 13
22

.

Find (a) f(⫺1), (b) f(0), and (c) 

4. Let 

f 1x2 ⫽ 1

x ⫹ 1

and t(x) ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 1. Find the rules for 

(a) f ⫹ t, (b) ft, (c) f 폶 t, and (d) t 폶 f.

respectively, where p is measured in dollars and x in units
of a thousand. Find the equilibrium quantity and price.

45. INFLATING A BALLOON A spherical balloon is being inflated

at a rate of  ␲ ft3/min.
a. Find  a  function  f giving  the  radius  r of  the  balloon  in

9
2

terms of its volume V.
Hint: V ⫽ ␲r 3

4
3

b. Find  a  function t giving  the  volume  of  the  balloon  in

terms of time t.

c. Find  a  function  h giving  the  radius  of  the  balloon  in

terms of time.

d. What is the radius of the balloon after 8 min?

46. HOTEL OCCUPANCY RATE A forecast released by Pricewater-
houseCoopers  in  June  of  2004  predicted  the  occupancy 
rate of U.S. hotels between 2001 (t ⫽ 0) and 2005 (t ⫽ 4) 
to be

⫺0.9t ⫹ 59.8
0.3t ⫹ 58.6
56.79t 

0.06

if 0 ⱕ t ⬍ 1
if 1 ⱕ t ⬍ 2
if 2 ⱕ t ⱕ 4

P1t2 ⫽c 

percent.
a. Compute P(0), P(1), P(2), P(3), and P(4).
b. Sketch the graph of P.
c. What  was  the  predicted  occupancy  rate  of  hotels  for

2004?

Source: PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Hospitality & Leisure
Research.

47. PACKAGING By  cutting  away  identical  squares  from  each
corner of a 20-in. ⫻ 20-in. piece of cardboard and folding
up the resulting flaps, an open box can be made. Denoting
the length of a side of a cutaway by x, find a function of x
giving the volume of the resulting box.

48. CONSTRUCTION COSTS The length of a rectangular box is to
be twice its width, and its volume is to be 30 ft3. The mate-
rial  for  the  base  costs  30¢/ft2,  the  material  for  the  sides
costs 15¢/ft2, and the material for the top costs 20¢/ft2. Let-
ting x denote the width of the box, find a function in the
variable x giving the cost of constructing the box.

5. Postal  regulations  specify  that  a  parcel  sent  by  parcel  post
may have a combined length and girth of no more than 108
in. Suppose a rectangular package that has a square cross sec-
tion of x in. ⫻ x in. is to have a combined length and girth of
exactly 108 in. Find a function in terms of x giving the vol-
ume of the package.
Hint: The  length  plus  the  girth  is  4x ⫹ h (see  the  accompanying 
figure).

x

x

h

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

3

EXPONENTIAL AND
LOGARITHMIC
FUNCTIONS

© Mircea BEZERGHEANU 2010/Shutterstock.com

THE EXPONENTIAL FUNCTION is without doubt the most

important function in mathematics and its applications.

After a brief introduction to the exponential function and its

inverse, the logarithmic function, we explore some of the many

applications involving exponential functions, such as the growth

rate of a bacteria population in the laboratory, the way in which

radioactive matter decays, the rate at which a factory worker learns

a certain process, and the rate at which a communicable disease is

spread over time. Exponential functions also play an important role

in computing interest earned in a bank account, a topic to be

discussed in Chapter 4.

How many cameras can a new employee

at Eastman Optical assemble after

completing the basic training program,

and how many cameras can he

assemble after being on the job for 

6 months? In Example 5, page 179, you

will see how to answer these questions.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

157

158

CHAPTER 3 EXPONENTIAL AND LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS

3.1

Exponential Functions

Exponential Functions and Their Graphs
Suppose you deposit a sum of $1000 in an account earning interest at the rate of 10%
per year compounded continuously (the way most financial institutions compute inter-
est). Then, the accumulated amount at the end of t years (0 ⱕ t ⱕ 20) is described by
the function f, whose graph appears in Figure 1.* This function is called an exponen-
tial function. Observe that the graph of f rises rather slowly at first but very rapidly as
time goes by. For purposes of comparison, we have also shown the graph of the func-
tion y ⫽ t(t) ⫽ 1000(1 ⫹ 0.10t), giving the accumulated amount for the same princi-
pal ($1000) but earning simple interest at the rate of 10% per year. The moral of the
story: It is never too early to save.

y

s
r
a
l
l
o
D

7000

6000
5000

4000

3000

2000

1000

y = f(t)

y = g(t)

5

10 
Years

15 

20

t

FIGURE 1
Under continuous compounding, a sum
of money grows exponentially.

Exponential functions play an important role in many real-world applications, as

you will see throughout this chapter.

Recall that whenever b is a positive number and n is any real number, the expres-
sion bn is a real number. This enables us to define an exponential function as follows:

Exponential Function
The function defined by

f1x2 ⫽ b x

1b ⬎ 0, b ⫽ 12

is called an exponential function with base b and exponent x. The domain of
f is the set of all real numbers.

For example, the exponential function with base 2 is the function

f1x2 ⫽ 2 x

with domain (⫺⬁, ⬁). The values of f(x) for selected values of x follow:

f  132 ⫽ 23 ⫽ 8    f  a 3
f  1⫺12 ⫽ 2⫺1 ⫽ 1

2

2b ⫽ 23/2 ⫽ 2 # 21/2 ⫽ 212    f  102 ⫽ 20 ⫽ 1
    f  a ⫺2

3b ⫽ 2⫺2/3 ⫽ 1

⫽ 123 4

22/3

*We will derive the rule for f in Section 4.1.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

3.1 EXPONENTIAL FUNCTIONS

159

Computations  involving  exponentials  are  facilitated  by  the  laws  of  exponents.
These  laws  were  stated  in  Section  1.5,  and  you  might  want  to  review  the  material
there. For convenience, however, we will restate these laws.

Laws of Exponents
Let a and b be positive numbers and let x and y be real numbers. Then,
1. bx ⭈ b y ⫽ bx⫹y

4.

⫽ b 

x⫺y

5.

x

y

b 
b  

2.

3.

1b x2 y ⫽ bxy

1ab2 x ⫽ axbx
bb x
⫽ a 
a a
b 

x

x

The use of the laws of exponents is illustrated in the next two examples.

EXAMPLE 1
a. 16 7/4 ⭈ 16⫺1/2 ⫽ 16 7/4⫺1/2 ⫽ 165/4 ⫽ 25 ⫽ 32

Law 1

Law 2

b.

c.

d.

e.

⫽ 85/3⫺1⫺1/32 ⫽ 82 ⫽ 64

85/3
8⫺1/3
 1644/32 ⫺1/2 ⫽ 6414/321⫺1/22 ⫽ 64⫺2/3
⫽ 1
42
116 # 812 ⫺1/4 ⫽ 16⫺1/4 # 81⫺1/4 ⫽ 1
a 31/2
21/3b 4

 ⫽ 1
642/3

1641/32 2

⫽ 34/2
24/3

⫽ 9
24/3

⫽ 1

Law 5

⫽ 1
16
# 1
811/4

161/4

Law 3

# 1
3

⫽ 1
2

⫽ 1
6

Law 4

EXAMPLE 2 Let f(x) ⫽ 22x⫺1. Find the value of x for which f(x) ⫽ 16.

Solution We want to solve the equation

22x⫺1 ⫽ 16 ⫽ 24

But this equation holds if and only if

2x ⫺ 1 ⫽ 4

bm ⫽ bn ⇒ m ⫽ n

giving 

x ⫽ 5
2

.

Exponential  functions  play  an  important  role  in  mathematical  analysis.
Because of their special characteristics, they are some of the most useful functions
and are found in virtually every field in which mathematics is applied. To mention
a  few  examples:  Under  ideal  conditions,  the  number  of  bacteria  present  at  any 
time t in a culture may be described by an exponential function of t; radioactive
substances  decay  over  time  in  accordance  with  an  “exponential”  law  of  decay;
money left on fixed deposit and earning compound interest grows exponentially;
and some of the most important distribution functions encountered in statistics are
exponential.

Let’s  begin  our  investigation  into  the  properties  of  exponential  functions  by

studying their graphs.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

160

CHAPTER 3 EXPONENTIAL AND LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS

y

4

2

– 2

2

FIGURE 2
The graph of y ⫽ 2x

y

4

2

– 2

2

FIGURE 3
2bx
The graph of y ⫽ a1

y

y = b x
(0 < b < 1)

y = b x
(b > 1)

y = 1

x

FIGURE 4
y ⫽ bx is an increasing function of x
if b ⬎ 1, a constant function if 
b ⫽ 1, and a decreasing function if 
0 ⬍ b ⬍ 1.

EXAMPLE 3 Sketch the graph of the exponential function y ⫽ 2 x.

Solution First, as was discussed earlier, the domain of the exponential function 
y ⫽ f(x) ⫽ 2x is the set of real numbers. Next, putting x ⫽ 0 gives y ⫽ 20 ⫽ 1, the
y-intercept of f. There is no x-intercept, since there is no value of x for which y ⫽ 0.
To find the range of f, consider the following table of values:

x

y

⫺5
1
ᎏ
ᎏ
3
2

⫺4
1
ᎏ
ᎏ
1
6

⫺3
ᎏ1
ᎏ
8

⫺2
ᎏ1
ᎏ
4

⫺1
ᎏ1
ᎏ
2

0

1

1

2

2

4

3

8

4

16

5

32

VIDEO

x

x

We see from these computations that 2x decreases and approaches zero as x
decreases without bound and that 2x increases without bound as x increases without
bound. Thus, the range of f is the interval (0, ⬁)—that is, the set of positive real
numbers. Finally, we sketch the graph of y ⫽ f(x) ⫽ 2x in Figure 2.

EXAMPLE 4 Sketch the graph of the exponential function y ⫽ (1>2)x.
Solution The domain of the exponential function y ⫽ (1>2)x is the set of all real
numbers. The y-intercept is (1>2)0 ⫽ 1; there is no x-intercept, since there is no
value of x for which y ⫽ 0. From the following table of values

x

y

⫺5

32

⫺4

16

⫺3

8

⫺2

4

⫺1

2

0

1

1
ᎏ1
ᎏ
2

2
ᎏ1
ᎏ
4

3
ᎏ1
ᎏ
8

4
1
ᎏ
ᎏ
6
1

5
1
ᎏ
ᎏ
2
3

we deduce that (1>2)x ⫽ 1>2x increases without bound as x decreases without bound
and that (1>2)x decreases and approaches zero as x increases without bound. Thus, 
the range of f is the interval (0, ⬁). The graph of y ⫽ f(x) ⫽ (1>2)x is sketched in 

Figure 3.

The functions y ⫽ 2x and y ⫽ (1>2)x, whose graphs you studied in Examples 3 and
4,  are  special  cases  of  the  exponential  function  y ⫽ f(x)  ⫽ bx,  obtained  by  setting 
b ⫽ 2 and b ⫽ 1>2, respectively. In general, the exponential function y ⫽ bx with b ⬎ 1
has a graph similar to that of y ⫽ 2x, whereas the graph of y ⫽ bx for 0 ⬍ b ⬍ 1 is sim-
ilar to that of y ⫽ (1>2)x (Exercises 23 and 24 on page 162). When b ⫽ 1, the function
y ⫽ bx reduces to the constant function y ⫽ 1. For comparison, the graphs of all three
functions are sketched in Figure 4.

Properties of the Exponential Function
The exponential function y ⫽ bx (b ⬎ 0, b ⫽ 1) has the following properties:
1. Its domain is (⫺⬁, ⬁).
2. Its range is (0, ⬁).
3. Its graph passes through the point (0, 1).
4. Its graph is an unbroken curve devoid of holes or jumps.
5. Its graph rises from left to right if b ⬎ 1 and falls from left to right if b ⬍ 1.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

TABLE 1

m

10
100
1000
10,000
100,000
1,000,000

mbm
a1 ⴙ 1

2.59374
2.70481
2.71692
2.71815
2.71827
2.71828

3.1 EXPONENTIAL FUNCTIONS

161

The Base e
It can be shown, although we will not do so here, that as m gets larger and larger, the
value of the expression

a 1 ⫹ 1

mb m

approaches  the  irrational  number  2.7182818,  which  we  denote  by  e.  You  may 
convince yourself of the plausibility of this definition of the number e by examining
Table 1, which may be constructed with the help of a calculator. (Also, see the Explor-
ing with Technology exercise that follows.)

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY

To obtain a visual confirmation of the fact that the expression 11 ⫹ 1>m2 m
approaches the number e ⫽ 2.71828. . . as m gets larger and larger, plot the
graph of f1x2 ⫽ 11 ⫹ 1>x2 x in a suitable viewing window, and observe that
f1x2 approaches 2.71828. . . as x gets larger and larger. Use ZOOM and TRACE
to find the value of f1x2 for large values of x.

y

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 5 Sketch the graph of the function y ⫽ ex.

Solution Since e ⬎ 1, it follows from our previous discussion that the graph of 
y ⫽ e x is similar to the graph of y ⫽ 2x (see Figure 2). With the aid of a calculator,
we obtain the following table:

5

3

1

1

3

x

–1

–3
FIGURE 5
The graph of y ⫽ ex

y

5

3

1

–3

–1

1

3

x

FIGURE 6
The graph of y ⫽ e⫺x

x

y

⫺3

0.05

⫺2

0.14

⫺1

0.37

0

1

1

2

3

2.72

7.39

20.09

The graph of y ⫽ e x is sketched in Figure 5.

Next, we consider another exponential function to the base e that is closely related
to the previous function and is particularly useful in constructing models that describe
“exponential decay.”

EXAMPLE 6 Sketch the graph of the function y ⫽ e⫺x.
Solution Since e ⬎ 1, it follows that 0 ⬍ 1>e ⬍ 1, so f(x) ⫽ e⫺x ⫽ 1>ex ⫽ (1>e)x
that of the exponential function y ⫽ (1>2)x. As before, we construct the following
table of values of y ⫽ e⫺x for selected values of x:

is an exponential function with base less than 1. Therefore, it has a graph similar to

x

y

⫺3

20.09

⫺2

7.39

⫺1

2.72

0

1

1

2

3

0.37

0.14

0.05

Using this table, we sketch the graph of y ⫽ e⫺x in Figure 6.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

162

CHAPTER 3 EXPONENTIAL AND LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS

3.1 Self-Check Exercises

1. Solve the equation 22x⫹1 ⭈ 2⫺3 ⫽ 2 x⫺1.
2. Sketch the graph of y ⫽ e0.4x.

3.1 Concept Questions

1. Define the exponential function f with base b and exponent

x. What restrictions, if any, are placed on b?

3.1 Exercises

b.

2. a.

In Exercises 1–6, evaluate the expression.
b. 3⫺3 ⭈ 36
1. a. 4⫺3 ⭈ 45
13⫺22 3
12⫺12 3
3. a. 9192 ⫺1/2
b. 5152 ⫺1/2
3b2d⫺3
2b 3d ⫺2
c a ⫺1
ca⫺1
1⫺32 41⫺32 5
12⫺421262
2⫺1

5. a. ᎏ

b. ᎏ

4. a.

b.

1⫺32 8
6. a. 31/4 ⭈ 9⫺5/8

b. 23/4 ⭈ 4⫺3/2

In Exercises 7–12, simplify the expression.
7. a.

b.

164x 92 1/3
12x 321⫺4x⫺22
6a⫺4
3a⫺3

8. a.

9. a.

125x 3y 42 1/2
14x⫺221⫺3x 52
4b⫺4
12b⫺6

b.

b. ᎏ

11. a.

10. a. y⫺3/2y 5/3
12x 3y 22 3
12⫺3x⫺3y 
22 2

12. a.

50

b.

b. x⫺3/5x 8/3
14x 2y 2z 32 2
1x ⫹ y21x ⫺ y2
1x ⫺ y2 0

b.

In Exercises 13–22, solve the equation for x.
14. 5⫺x ⫽ 53
13. 62x ⫽ 66

15. 33x⫺4 ⫽ 35

17.

19.

12.12 x⫹2 ⫽ 12.12 5
32b x⫺2
8x ⫽ a 1

16. 102x⫺1 ⫽ 10 x⫹3

18.

20.

11.32 x⫺2 ⫽ 11.32 2x⫹1
3x⫺x2 ⫽ 1
9 

x

21. 32x ⫺ 12 ⭈ 3x ⫹ 27 ⫽ 0
22. 22x ⫺ 4 ⭈ 2x ⫹ 4 ⫽ 0

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 3.1 can be found on 
page 164.

2. For the exponential function y ⫽ bx (b ⬎ 0, b ⫽ 1), state 
(a) its domain and range, (b) its y-intercept, and (c) where
its graph rises and where it falls for the case b ⬎ 1 and the
case b ⬍ 1.

In Exercises 23–32, sketch the graphs of the given functions on
the same axes.
23. y ⫽ 2x, y ⫽ 3x, and y ⫽ 4x

24.

2b x
y ⫽ a 1

3b x
, y ⫽ a 1

4b x
, and y ⫽ a 1

25. y ⫽ 2⫺x, y ⫽ 3⫺x, and y ⫽ 4⫺x

26. y ⫽ 40.5x and y ⫽ 4⫺0.5x

27. y ⫽ 40.5x, y ⫽ 4x, and y ⫽ 42x

28. y ⫽ e x, y ⫽ 2e x, and y ⫽ 3e x

29. y ⫽ e0.5x, y ⫽ e x, and y ⫽ e1.5x

30. y ⫽ e⫺0.5x, y ⫽ e⫺x, and y ⫽ e⫺1.5x

31. y ⫽ 0.5e⫺x, y ⫽ e⫺x, and y ⫽ 2e⫺x

32. y ⫽ 1 ⫺ e⫺x and y ⫽ 1 ⫺ e⫺0.5x

33. A function f has the form f(x) ⫽ Aekx. Find f if it is known

that f(0) ⫽ 100 and f(1) ⫽ 120.
Hint: e kx ⫽ 1e k2 x
Hint: e kx ⫽ 1e k2 x

34. If f(x) ⫽ Axe⫺kx, find f(3) if f(1) ⫽ 5 and f(2) ⫽ 7.

35. If

f 1t2 ⫽ 1000
1 ⫹ Be⫺kt

find f(5) given that f(0) ⫽ 20 and f(2) ⫽ 30.
Hint: e kx ⫽ 1e k2 x

36. TRACKING WITH GPS Employers are increasingly turning to
GPS (global positioning system) technology to keep track
of  their  fleet  vehicles.  The  number  of  automatic  vehicle
trackers installed on fleet vehicles in the United States is
approximated by

N1t2 ⫽ 0.6e0.17t

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 52

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

where  N(t)  is  measured  in  millions  and  t is  measured  in
years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 2000.
a. How many automatic vehicle trackers were installed in

the year 2000? How many were installed in 2005?

b. Sketch the graph of N.
Source: C. J. Driscoll Associates.

37. DISABILITY RATES Because of medical technology advances,
the disability rates for people over 65 years old have been
dropping rather dramatically. The function

R1t2 ⫽ 26.3e⫺0.016t

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 182

gives the disability rate R(t), in percent, for people over age
65 from 1982 (t ⫽ 0) through 2000, where t is measured in
years.
a. What was the disability rate in 1982? In 1986? In 1994?

In 2000?

b. Sketch the graph of R.
Source: Frost and Sullivan.

38. MARRIED HOUSEHOLDS The percentage of families that were
married households in the United States between 1970 and
2000 is approximately

P1t2 ⫽ 86.9e⫺0.05t

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 32

where t is measured in decades, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding
to 1970.
a. What  percentage  of  families  in  the  United  States  were
married households in 1970? In 1980? In 1990? In 2000?

b. Sketch the graph of P.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

39. GROWTH IN NUMBER OF WEBSITES According to a study con-
ducted in 2000, the projected number of Web addresses (in
billions) is approximated by the function

N1t2 ⫽ 0.45e0.5696t

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 52

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
1997.
a. Complete the following table by finding the number of

Web addresses in each year:

0

1

2

3

4

5

Year
Number of 
Web Addresses 
(billions)

b. Sketch the graph of N.

40. INTERNET USERS IN CHINA The  number  of  Internet  users  in

China is approximated by

N1t2 ⫽ 94.5e0.2t

11 ⱕ t ⱕ 62

where  N(t)  is  measured  in  millions  and  t is  measured  in
years, with t ⫽ 1 corresponding to 2005.
a. How many Internet users were there in 2005? In 2006?
b. How many Internet users were there expected to be in

2010?

c. Sketch the graph of N.
Source: C. E. Unterberg.

3.1 EXPONENTIAL FUNCTIONS

163

41. ALTERNATIVE MINIMUM TAX The alternative minimum tax
was  created  in  1969  to  prevent  the  very  wealthy  from
using creative deductions and shelters to avoid having to
pay anything to the Internal Revenue Service. But it has
increasingly hit the middle class. The number of taxpay-
ers subjected to an alternative minimum tax is projected 
to be

N 1t2 ⫽

35.5

1 ⫹ 6.89e⫺0.8674t

    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 62

where  N(t)  is  measured  in  millions  and  t is  measured  in
years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 2004. What was the pro-
jected number of taxpayers subjected to an alternative min-
imum tax in 2010?
Source: Brookings Institution.

42. ABSORPTION OF DRUGS The  concentration  of  a  drug  in  an

organ at any time t (in seconds) is given by

C 1t2 ⫽ e 0.3t ⫺ 1811 ⫺ e⫺t/602
18e⫺t/60 ⫺ 12e⫺1t⫺202/60

if 0 ⱕ t ⱕ 20
if t ⬎ 20

where  C(t)  is  measured  in  grams  per  cubic  centimeter
(g/cm3).
a. What  is  the  initial  concentration  of  the  drug  in  the

organ?

b. What is the concentration of the drug in the organ after 

10 sec?

c. What is the concentration of the drug in the organ after 

30 sec?

43. ABSORPTION OF DRUGS The  concentration  of  a  drug  in  an

organ at any time t (in seconds) is given by

x1t2 ⫽ 0.08 ⫹ 0.1211 ⫺ e⫺0.02t2

where x(t) is measured in grams per cubic centimeter (g/cm3).
a. What  is  the  initial  concentration  of  the  drug  in  the

organ?

b. What is the concentration of the drug in the organ after 

20 sec?

44. ABSORPTION OF DRUGS Jane took 100 mg of a drug in the
morning and another 100 mg of the same drug at the same
time the following morning. The amount of the drug in her
body t days after the first dose was taken is given by

A 1t2 ⫽ e 100e⫺1.4t

10011 ⫹ e1.42e⫺1.4t

if 0 ⱕ t ⬍ 1
if t ⱖ 1

What was the amount of drug in Jane’s body immediately
after taking the second dose? After 2 days?

In Exercises 45–48, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
45.

1x 2 ⫹ 12 3 ⫽ x 6 ⫹ 1

46. e xy ⫽ e xe y

47. If x ⬍ y, then e x ⬍ e y.

48. If 0 ⬍ b ⬍ 1 and x ⬍ y, then b x ⬎ b y.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

164

CHAPTER 3 EXPONENTIAL AND LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS

3.1

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. 22x⫹1 ⭈ 2⫺3 ⫽ 2x⫺1
2(2x⫹1)⫹(⫺3) ⫽ 2x⫺1
Laws of exponents 
2x ⫹ 1 ⫺ 3 ⫽ x ⫺ 1    bm ⫽ bn ⇒ m ⫽ n

x ⫽ 1

This is true if and only if x ⫺ 1 ⫽ 0 or x ⫽ 1.

2. We first construct the following table of values:

x
y ⫽ e0.4x

⫺3
0.3

⫺2
0.4

⫺1
0.7

0
1

1
1.5

2
2.2

3
3.3

4
5

Next, we plot these points and join them by a smooth curve
to obtain the graph of f shown in the accompanying figure.

y

1

y = e0.4x

– 4 – 3 – 2 – 1

1

2

3

4

x

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Although the proof is outside the scope of this book, it can be proved that an expo-
nential function of the form f(x) ⫽ b x, where b ⬎ 1, will ultimately grow faster than
the power function t(x) ⫽ x n for any positive real number n. To give a visual demon-
stration of this result for the special case of the exponential function f(x) ⫽ e x, we can
use a graphing utility to plot the graphs of both f and t (for selected values of n) on
the same set of axes in an appropriate viewing window and observe that the graph of
f ultimately lies above that of t.

EXAMPLE 1 Use a graphing utility to plot the graphs of (a) f(x) ⫽ ex and 
t(x) ⫽ x 3 on the same set of axes in the viewing window [0, 6] ⫻ [0, 250] and 
(b) f(x) ⫽ ex and t(x) ⫽ x 5 in the viewing window [0, 20] ⫻ [0, 1,000,000].

Solution
a. The graphs of f(x) ⫽ ex and t(x) ⫽ x 3 in the viewing window [0, 6] ⫻ [0, 250]
b. The graphs of f(x) ⫽ ex and t(x) ⫽ x 5 in the viewing window [0, 20] ⫻

are shown in Figure T1a.

[0, 1,000,000] are shown in Figure T1b.

250

1,000,000

FIGURE T1

0
(a) The graphs of f(x) ⫽ ex and 
g(x) ⫽ x3 in the viewing window 
[0, 6] ⫻ [0, 250]

6

0

20

(b) The graphs of f(x) ⫽ ex and 
g(x) ⫽ x5 in the viewing window 
[0, 20] ⫻ [0, 1,000,000]

In the exercises that follow, you are asked to use a graphing utility to reveal the prop-
erties of exponential functions.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

In Exercises 1 and 2, plot the graphs of the functions f and g on
the same set of axes in the specified viewing window.

1. f1x2 ⫽ e x and t1x2 ⫽ x 2; 30, 44 ⫻ 30, 304
2. f1x2 ⫽ e x and t1x2 ⫽ x 4; 30, 154 ⫻ 30, 20,0004

In Exercises 3 and 4, plot the graphs of the functions f and g on
the  same  set  of  axes  in  an  appropriate  viewing  window  to
demonstrate  that  f ultimately  grows  faster  than  g.  (Note: Your
answer will not be unique.)

3. f1x2 ⫽ 2 x and t1x2 ⫽ x 2.5
4. f1x2 ⫽ 3 x and t1x2 ⫽ x 3
5. Plot the graphs of f(x) ⫽ 2x, t(x) ⫽ 3x, and h(x) ⫽ 4x on the
same set of axes in the viewing window [0, 5] ⫻ [0, 100].
Comment on the relationship between the base b and the
growth of the function f(x) ⫽ b x.

6. Plot  the  graphs  of  f(x)  ⫽ (1>2)x,  t(x)  ⫽ (1>3)x,  and 
h(x) ⫽ (1>4)x on the same set of axes in the viewing win-
dow [0, 4] ⫻ [0, 1]. Comment on the relationship between
the base b and the growth of the function f(x) ⫽ b x.

7. Plot the graphs of f(x) ⫽ e x, t(x) ⫽ 2e x, and h(x) ⫽ 3e x on
the  same  set  of  axes  in  the  viewing  window  [⫺3,  3]  ⫻
[0, 10]. Comment on the role played by the constant k in
the graph of f(x) ⫽ ke x.

8. Plot  the  graphs  of  f(x)  ⫽ ⫺e x,  t(x)  ⫽ ⫺2e x,  and 
h(x) ⫽ ⫺3e x on the same set of axes in the viewing win-
dow [⫺3, 3] ⫻ [⫺10, 0]. Comment on the role played by
the constant k in the graph of f(x) ⫽ ke x.

9. Plot the graphs of f(x) ⫽ e0.5x, t(x) ⫽ e x, and h(x) ⫽ e1.5x
on the same set of axes in the viewing window [⫺2, 2] ⫻
[0, 4]. Comment on the role played by the constant k in the
graph of f(x) ⫽ ekx.

10. Plot  the  graphs  of  f(x)  ⫽ e⫺0.5x, t(x)  ⫽ e⫺x,  and  h(x)  ⫽
e⫺1.5x on  the  same  set  of  axes  in  the  viewing  window 
[⫺2, 2] ⫻ [0, 4]. Comment on the role played by the con-
stant k in the graph of f(x) ⫽ ekx.

11. ABSORPTION OF DRUGS The  concentration  of  a  drug  in  an

organ at any time t (in seconds) is given by

x1t2 ⫽ 0.08 ⫹ 0.1211 ⫺ e⫺0.02t2

where  x(t)  is  measured  in  grams  per  cubic  centimeter
(g/cm3).

3.1 EXPONENTIAL FUNCTIONS

165

a. Plot the graph of the function x in the viewing window 

[0, 200] ⫻ [0, 0.2].

b. What  is  the  initial  concentration  of  the  drug  in  the

organ?

c. What is the concentration of the drug in the organ after

20 sec?

12. ABSORPTION OF DRUGS Jane took 100 mg of a drug in the
morning and another 100 mg of the same drug at the same
time the following morning. The amount of the drug in her
body t days after the first dosage was taken is given by

A 1t2 ⫽ e 100e⫺1.4t

10011 ⫹ e1.42e⫺1.4t

if 0 ⱕ t ⬍ 1
if t ⱖ 1

a. Plot the graph of the function A in the viewing window 

[0, 5] ⫻ [0, 140].

b. Verify the results of Exercise 44, page 163.

13. ABSORPTION OF DRUGS The  concentration  of  a  drug  in  an

organ at any time t (in seconds) is given by

C 1t2 ⫽ e 0.3t ⫺ 1811 ⫺ e⫺t/602
18e⫺t/60 ⫺ 12e⫺1t⫺202/60

if 0 ⱕ t ⱕ 20
if t ⬎ 20

where  C(t)  is  measured  in  grams  per  cubic  centimeter
(g/cm3).
a. Plot the graph of the function C in the viewing window

[0, 120] ⫻ [0, 1].

b. How long after the drug is first introduced will it take

for the concentration of the drug to reach a peak?

c. How long after the concentration of the drug has peaked
will it take for the concentration of the drug to fall back
to 0.5 g/cm3?
Hint: Plot the graphs of y1 ⫽ C(x) and y2 ⫽ 0.5, and use the
ISECT function of your graphing utility.

14. MODELING WITH DATA The  estimated  number  of  Internet
users  in  China  (in  millions)  from  2005  through  2010  are
shown in the following table:

Year
Number

2005
116.1

2006
141.9

2007
169.0

2008
209.0

2009
258.1

2010
314.8

a. Use  ExpReg to  find  an  exponential  regression  model

for the data. Let t ⫽ 1 correspond to 2005.
Hint: ax ⫽ e x ln a

b. Plot the scatter diagram and the graph of the function f

found in part (a).

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

166

CHAPTER 3 EXPONENTIAL AND LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS

3.2

Logarithmic Functions

Logarithms
You are already familiar with exponential equations of the form

by ⫽ x

1b ⬎ 0, b ⫽ 12

where the variable x is expressed in terms of a real number b and a variable y. But what
about solving this same equation for y? You may recall from your study of algebra that
the number y is called the logarithm of x to the base b and is denoted by logb x. It is
the power to which the base b must be raised to obtain the number x.

Logarithm of x to the Base b

y ⫽ logb x

if and only if

x ⫽ b y

1b ⬎ 0, b ⬆ 1, and x ⬎ 02

Observe that the logarithm logb x is defined only for positive values of x.

EXAMPLE 1
a. log10 100 ⫽ 2 since 100 ⫽ 102
b. log5 125 ⫽ 3 since 125 ⫽ 53
⫽ 1
33
d. log20 20 ⫽ 1 since 20 ⫽ 201

⫽ ⫺3 since 

1
27

1
27

c.

log3 

⫽ 3⫺3

b. log16 4 ⫽ x

EXAMPLE 2 Solve each of the following equations for x.
a. log3 x ⫽ 4
Solution
a. By definition, log3 x ⫽ 4 implies x ⫽ 34 ⫽ 81.
b. log16 4 ⫽ x is equivalent to 4 ⫽ 16x ⫽ 1422 x ⫽ 42x, or 41 ⫽ 42x, from which we

c. log x 8 ⫽ 3

deduce that

bm ⫽ bn 1 m ⫽ n

 2x ⫽ 1
 x ⫽ 1
2

c. Referring once again to the definition, we see that the equation logx 8 ⫽ 3 is

equivalent to

8 ⫽ 23 ⫽ x 3
x ⫽ 2

am ⫽ bm 1 a ⫽ b

The two most widely used systems of logarithms are the system of common log-
arithms, which uses the number 10 as its base, and the system of natural logarithms,
which uses the irrational number e ⫽ 2.71828. . . as its base. Also, it is standard prac-
tice to write log for log10 and ln for loge.

Logarithmic Notation

log x ⫽ log10 x
ln x ⫽ loge x

Common logarithm

Natural logarithm

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3.2 LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS

167

The system of natural logarithms is widely used in theoretical work. Using natural

logarithms rather than logarithms to other bases often leads to simpler expressions.

Laws of Logarithms
Computations  involving  logarithms  are  facilitated  by  the  following  laws  of 
logarithms.

Laws of Logarithms
If m and n are positive numbers and b ⬎ 0, b ⬆ 1, then
1. logb mn ⫽ logb m ⫹ logb n

2.

logb 

m
n

⫽ logb m ⫺ logb n

3. logb mn ⫽ n logb m
4. logb 1 ⫽ 0
5. logb b ⫽ 1

Do not confuse the expression log m>n (Law 2) with the expression log m>log n.

For example,

log 

100
10

⫽ log 100 ⫺ log 10 ⫽ 2 ⫺ 1 ⫽ 1 ⫽

log 100
log 10

⫽ 2
1

⫽ 2

You will be asked to prove these laws in Exercises 74–76 on page 174. Their deriva-
tions are based on the definition of a logarithm and the corresponding laws of expo-
nents. The following examples illustrate the properties of logarithms.

EXAMPLE 3

a. log(2 ⭈ 3) ⫽ log 2 ⫹ log 3
log17 ⫽ log 71/2 ⫽ 1

c.

 log 7

2

b.

ln 

5
3

⫽ ln 5 ⫺ ln 3

d. log 5 1 ⫽ 0

e. log45 45 ⫽ 1

EXAMPLE 4 Given that log 2 ⬇ 0.3010, log 3 ⬇ 0.4771, and log 5 ⬇ 0.6990, use
the laws of logarithms to find
a. log 15

b. log 7.5

d. log 50

c. log 81

Solution
a. Note that 15 ⫽ 3 ⭈ 5, so by Law 1 for logarithms,

 log 15 ⫽ log 3 # 5

 ⫽ log 3 ⫹ log 5
 ⬇ 0.4771 ⫹ 0.6990
 ⫽ 1.1761

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

168

CHAPTER 3 EXPONENTIAL AND LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS

b. Observing that 7.5 ⫽ 15>2 ⫽ (3 ⭈ 5)>2, we apply Laws 1 and 2, obtaining

log 7.5 ⫽ log 132152

2

 ⫽ log 3 ⫹ log 5 ⫺ log 2
 ⬇ 0.4771 ⫹ 0.6990 ⫺ 0.3010
 ⫽ 0.8751

c. Since 81 ⫽ 34, we apply Law 3 to obtain

 log 81 ⫽ log 34
 ⫽ 4 log 3
 ⬇ 410.47712
 ⫽ 1.9084

d. We write 50 ⫽ 5 ⭈ 10 and find

log 50 ⫽ log1521102
⫽ log 5 ⫹ log 10
⬇ 0.6990 ⫹ 1
⫽ 1.6990

Use Law 5

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 5 Expand and simplify the following expressions:

a. log3 x 2y 3

b.

log2   

x 

2 ⫹ 1
2x

x 

c.

ln   

Solution

a.

 log3  x 

2y 

2 ⫹ log3  y 

3 ⫽ log3  x 
 ⫽ 2 log3 x ⫹ 3 log3 y

3

Law 1

Law 3

22x 

2 ⫺ 1
x

e 

Law 2

Law 3

Law 5

Rewrite

b.

 log2 

2 ⫹ 1
x 
2x

22x 

x 

e 

c.

 ln 

⫽ log21x 
 ⫽ log21x 
 ⫽ log21x 
2 ⫺ 1
⫽ ln 
x

2 ⫹ 12 ⫺ log2 2x
2 ⫹ 12 ⫺ x log2 2
2 ⫹ 12 ⫺ x
21x 
2 ⫺ 12 1/2
2 ⫹ ln1x 
 ⫽ ln x 
 ⫽ 2 ln x ⫹ 1

e 

x 

x

 ⫽ 2 ln x ⫹ 1

x

2 ⫺ 12 1/2 ⫺ ln e 
2 ⫺ 12 ⫺ x ln e
2 ⫺ 12 ⫺ x

2   ln1x 
2   ln1x 

Laws 1 and 2

Law 3

Law 5

Examples 6 and 7 illustrate how the properties of logarithms are used to solve

equations.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3.2 LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS

169

EXAMPLE 6 Solve log3(x ⫹ 1) ⫺ log3(x ⫺ 1) ⫽ 1 for x.

Solution Using the properties of logarithms, we obtain

log3 x ⫹ 1 ⫺ log3 x ⫺ 1 ⫽ 1

1

2

1
log3

2
x ⫹ 1
x ⫺ 1
x ⫹ 1
x ⫺ 1

⫽ 1

Law 2

⫽ 31 ⫽ 3

Definition of logarithms

So

2

x ⫹ 1 ⫽ 3 x ⫺ 1
x ⫹ 1 ⫽ 3x ⫺ 3

1
4 ⫽ 2x
x ⫽ 2

EXAMPLE 7 Solve log x ⫹ log(2x ⫺ 1) ⫽ log 6.

Solution We have

log x ⫹ log 2x ⫺ 1 ⫽ log 6

log x ⫹ log 2x ⫺ 1 ⫺ log 6 ⫽ 0

1

2

1
2
c x12x ⫺ 12

6

log

x12x ⫺ 12

6

d

⫽ 0

Laws 1 and 2

⫽ 100 ⫽ 1

Definition of logarithms

So

1

1
x 2x ⫺ 1 ⫽ 6
2x2 ⫺ x ⫺ 6 ⫽ 0
1
2x ⫹ 3) x ⫺ 2 ⫽ 0

2
2
x ⫽ ⫺ or 2

3
2

1

2
2, ⬁2
11

Because  2x ⫺ 1 is defined for 2x ⫺ 1 ⬎ 0, or x ⬎ , the domain of log(2x ⫺ 1) is
. So we reject the root ⫺ of the quadratic equation and conclude
the interval 
that the solution of the given equation is x ⫽ 2.

3
2

1
2

Note Using the fact that log a ⫽ log b if and only if a ⫽ b, we can also solve the
equation of Example 7 as follows:

log x ⫹ log 2x ⫺ 1 ⫽ log 6
log x 2x ⫺ 1 ⫽ log 6

x 2x ⫺ 1 ⫽ 6

2
2
2

1
1
1

The rest of the solution is the same as that in Example 7.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

170

CHAPTER 3 EXPONENTIAL AND LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS

Logarithmic Functions and Their Graphs
The definition of a logarithm implies that if b and n are positive numbers and b is dif-
ferent from 1, then the expression logb n is a real number. This enables us to define a
logarithmic function as follows.

Logarithmic Function
The function defined by

f1x2 ⫽ logb x

1b ⬎ 0, b ⫽ 12

is called the logarithmic function with base b. The domain of f is the set of all
positive numbers.

y

u

√

(√, u)

y = x

(u, √ )

One way to obtain the graph of the logarithmic function y ⫽ logb x is to construct
a table of values of the logarithm (base b). However, another method—and a more
instructive one—is based on exploiting the intimate relationship between logarithmic
and exponential functions.

If a point (u, √) lies on the graph of y ⫽ logb x, then

√

u

FIGURE 7
The points (u, v) and (v, u) are mirror
reflections of each other.

y

y = b x

y = x
 

1

y = logb  x

1

x

FIGURE 8
The graphs of y ⫽ bx and y ⫽ log b x
are mirror reflections of each other.

y

y = e x

y = x

1

1

y = ln x

x

√ ⫽ logb u

x

But we can also write this equation in exponential form as

u ⫽ b√

So the point (√, u) also lies on the graph of the function y ⫽ b x. Let’s look at the rela-
tionship between the points (u, √) and (√, u) and the line y ⫽ x (Figure 7). If we think
of the line y ⫽ x as a mirror, then the point (√, u) is the mirror reflection of the point
(u, √). Similarly, the point (u, √) is the mirror reflection of the point (√, u). We can take
advantage of this relationship to help us draw the graph of logarithmic functions. For
example, if we wish to draw the graph of y ⫽ logb x, where b ⬎ 1, then we need only
draw  the  mirror  reflection  of  the  graph  of  y ⫽ b x with  respect  to  the  line  y ⫽ x
(Figure 8).

You may discover the following properties of the logarithmic function by taking
the reflection of the graph of an appropriate exponential function (Exercises 47 and 48
on page 173).

Properties of the Logarithmic Function
The logarithmic function y ⫽ log b x (b ⬎ 0, b ⫽ 1) has the following properties:
1. Its domain is (0, ⬁).
2. Its range is (⫺⬁, ⬁).
3. Its graph passes through the point (1, 0).
4. Its graph is an unbroken curve devoid of holes or jumps.
5. Its graph rises from left to right if b ⬎ 1 and falls from left to right if b ⬍ 1.

EXAMPLE 8 Sketch the graph of the function y ⫽ ln x.

FIGURE 9
The graph of y ⫽ ln x is the mirror reflec-
tion of the graph of y ⫽ e x.

Solution We first sketch the graph of y ⫽ e x. Then, the required graph is obtained
by tracing the mirror reflection of the graph of y ⫽ e x with respect to the line y ⫽ x
(Figure 9).

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

3.2 LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS

171

Properties Relating the Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
We  made  use  of  the  relationship  that  exists  between  the  exponential  function 
f(x)  ⫽ ex and  the  logarithmic  function  t(x)  ⫽ ln  x when  we  sketched  the  graph 
of t in Example 8. This relationship is further described by the following properties,
which are an immediate consequence of the definition of the logarithm of a number.

Properties Relating e x and ln x
eln x ⫽ x
ln ex ⫽ x

(for x ⬎ 0)
(for any real number x)

(1)
(2)

(Try to verify these properties.)

From Properties 1 and 2, we conclude that the composite function satisfies

 1   f ⴰ t2  1x2 ⫽ f  3t 1x24
  1t ⴰ f  2  1x2 ⫽ t3  f  1x24

 ⫽ eln x ⫽ x

(for all x ⬎ 0)

 ⫽ ln e 

x ⫽ x

(for all x ⬎ 0)

Any two functions f and t that satisfy this relationship are said to be inverses of each
other. Note that the function f undoes what the function t does, and vice versa, so the
composition  of  the  two  functions  in  any  order  results  in  the  identity  function 
H(x) ⫽ ( f 폶 t)(x) ⫽ (t 폶 f )(x).

The relationships expressed in Equations (1) and (2) are useful in solving equa-

tions that involve exponentials and logarithms.

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
You  can  demonstrate  the  validity  of  Properties  1  and  2,  which  state  that  the
exponential  function  f(x)  ⫽ ex and  the  logarithmic  function t(x)  ⫽ ln  x are
inverses of each other, as follows:
1. Sketch the graph of ( f 폶 t)(x) ⫽ eln x, using the viewing window [0, 10] ⫻
2. Sketch the graph of (t 폶 f )(x) ⫽ ln ex, using the standard viewing window.

[0, 10]. Interpret the result.

Interpret the result.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 9 Solve the equation 2e x⫹2 ⫽ 5.

Explore & Discuss
Consider the equation 
y ⫽ y0b kx, where y0 and k are
positive constants and b ⬎ 0,
b ⫽ 1. Suppose we want to
express y in the form y ⫽
y0e px. Use the laws of loga-
rithms to show that p ⫽ k ln b
and hence that y ⫽ y0e(k ln b)x
is an alternative form of 
y ⫽ y0bkx using the base e.

Solution We first divide both sides of the equation by 2 to obtain

e 

x⫹2 ⫽ 5
2

⫽ 2.5

Next, taking the natural logarithm of each side of the equation and using Equation
(2), we have

ln e x⫹2 ⫽ ln 2.5
x ⫹ 2 ⫽ ln 2.5

x ⫽ ⫺2 ⫹ ln 2.5
⬇ ⫺1.08

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

172

CHAPTER 3 EXPONENTIAL AND LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS

EXAMPLE 10 Solve the equation 5 ln x ⫹ 3 ⫽ 0.

Solution Adding ⫺3 to both sides of the equation leads to

and so

 5 ln x ⫽ ⫺3
 ln x ⫽ ⫺3
5

⫽ ⫺0.6

eln x ⫽ e⫺0.6

Using Equation (1), we conclude that

 x ⫽ e⫺0.6
 ⬇ 0.55

3.2 Self-Check Exercises

1. Sketch the graph of y ⫽ 3x and y ⫽ log 3 x on the same set

of axes.

2. Solve the equation 3e x⫹1 ⫺ 2 ⫽ 4.

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 3.2 can be found on 
page 175.

3.2 Concept Questions

1. Define the logarithmic function f with base b. What restric-

tions, if any, are placed on b?

3. a. If x ⬎ 0, what is eln x?

b. If x is any real number, what is ln ex?

2. For  the  logarithmic  function  y ⫽ logb x (b ⬎ 0,  b ⫽ 1),
state (a) its domain and range, (b) its x-intercept, (c) where
its graph rises and where it falls for the case b ⬎ 1 and the
case b ⬍ 1.

3.2 Exercises

In Exercises 1–10, express each equation in logarithmic form.
1. 26 ⫽ 64
4⫺2 ⫽ 1
16
⫽ 1
3

2. 35 ⫽ 243
5⫺3 ⫽ 1
125
2b ⫺4
a 1

3b 1
a 1

⫽ 16

3.

5.

4.

6.

7. 324/5 ⫽ 16

8. 813/4 ⫽ 27

9. 10⫺3 ⫽ 0.001

10. 16⫺1/4 ⫽ 0.5

In Exercises 11–16, given that log 3 ⬇ 0.4771 and log 4 ⬇ 0.6021,
find  each  quantity  using  the  laws  of  logarithms.  (Do  not  use  a
calculator.)

11. log 12

13. log 16

15. log 48

3
4

log  

log13

12.

14.

16. log  

1
300

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In Exercises 17–20, write the expression as the logarithm of a sin-
gle quantity.
17. 2 ln a ⫹ 3 ln b

18.

19.

20.

1
2   ln x ⫹ 2 ln y ⫺ 3 ln z
 ln x ⫹ ln y ⫺ 1
ln 3 ⫹ 1
3
2
 ln1x ⫹ 12 ⫺ 2 ln11 ⫹ 1x2
ln 2 ⫹ 1
2

 ln z

In  Exercises  21–28,  use  the  laws  of  logarithms  to  expand  and
simplify the expression.

21. log x1x ⫹ 12 4
1x ⫹ 1

23.

log 

2 ⫹ 1
x 

25. ln xe⫺x2

27.

ln 

x 1/2

221 ⫹ x 

2

x 

22. log x1x 2 ⫹ 12 ⫺1/2

24.

ln 

x

e 

1 ⫹ e 

x

26. ln x1x ⫹ 121x ⫹ 22
21x11 ⫹ x2 2

28.

ln 

x 

In Exercises 29–42, use the laws of logarithms to solve the equa-
tion.
29. log2 x ⫽ 3

30. log3 x ⫽ 2

32. log3 27 ⫽ 2x

34. logx ⫽ ⫺2

1
16

31. log2 8 ⫽ x

35. log2 2x ⫹ 5 ⫽ 4

33. logx 103 ⫽ 3
2
2

1
1

36. log4 5x ⫺ 4 ⫽ 2

37. log2 x ⫺ log2 x ⫺ 2 ⫽ 3

38. log x ⫺ log x ⫹ 6 ⫽ ⫺1

1

2
39. log5 2x ⫹ 1 ⫺ log5 x ⫺ 2 ⫽ 1
40. log x ⫹ 7 ⫺ log x ⫺ 2 ⫽ 1

2

1

2

1

41. log x ⫹ log 2x ⫺ 5 ⫽ log 3
2

42. log3 x ⫹ 1 ⫹ log3 2x ⫺ 3 ⫽ 1

1

1

2

1

1
2

2

1

2

2
1

In Exercises 43–46, sketch the graph of the equation.
43. y ⫽ log3 x

44. y ⫽ log1/3 x

45. y ⫽ ln 2x

46.

y ⫽ ln 

1
2   x

In Exercises 47 and 48, sketch the graphs of the equations on the
same coordinate axes.

47. y ⫽ 2 x and y ⫽ log2 x

48. y ⫽ e3x and y ⫽ ln x

1
3

3.2 LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS

173

In Exercises 49–58, use logarithms to solve the equation for t.

49. e0.4t ⫽ 8

51. 5e⫺2t ⫽ 6
53. 2e⫺0.2t ⫺ 4 ⫽ 6

55.

50
1 ⫹ 4e 

⫽ 20

0.2t

57. A ⫽ Be⫺t/2

50.

1
3

 e⫺3t ⫽ 0.9

52. 4et⫺1 ⫽ 4
54. 12 ⫺ e0.4t ⫽ 3

56.

200

1 ⫹ 3e⫺0.3t

⫽ 100

A
58. ᎏ

1 ⫹ Be 

⫽ C

t /2

59. A function f has the form f(x) ⫽ a ⫹ b ln x. Find f if it is

known that f(1) ⫽ 2 and f(2) ⫽ 4.

60. AVERAGE LIFE SPAN One reason for the increase in human
life span over the years has been the advances in medical
technology.  The  average  life  span  for  American  women
from 1907 through 2007 is given by

W1t2 ⫽ 49.9 ⫹ 17.1 ln t

11 ⱕ t ⱕ 62

where  W(t)  is  measured  in  years  and  t is  measured  in 
20-year intervals, with t ⫽ 1 corresponding to 1907.
a. What  was  the  average  life  expectancy  for  women  in

1907?

b. If  the  trend  continues,  what  will  be  the  average  life

expectancy for women in 2027 (t ⫽ 7)?

Source: American Association of Retired Persons (AARP).

61. BLOOD PRESSURE A normal child’s systolic blood pressure

may be approximated by the function

p1x2 ⫽ m1ln x2 ⫹ b

where  p(x)  is  measured  in  millimeters  of  mercury,  x is
measured in pounds, and m and b are constants. Given that 
m ⫽ 19.4 and b ⫽ 18, determine the systolic blood pres-
sure of a child who weighs 92 lb.

62. MAGNITUDE OF EARTHQUAKES On the Richter scale, the mag-

nitude R of an earthquake is given by the formula

R ⫽ log 

I
I0

where I is the intensity of the earthquake being measured
and I0 is the standard reference intensity.
a. Express  the  intensity  I of  an  earthquake  of  magnitude 

R ⫽ 5 in terms of the standard intensity I0.

b. Express  the  intensity  I of  an  earthquake  of  magnitude 
R ⫽ 8 in terms of the standard intensity I0. How many
times greater is the intensity of an earthquake of magni-
tude 8 than one of magnitude 5?

c. In modern times, the greatest loss of life attributable to
an  earthquake  occurred  in  eastern  China  in  1976.
Known as the Tangshan earthquake, it registered 8.2 on
the Richter scale. How does the intensity of this earth-
quake  compare  with  the  intensity  of  an  earthquake  of
magnitude R ⫽ 5?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

174

CHAPTER 3 EXPONENTIAL AND LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS

63. SOUND INTENSITY The  relative  loudness  of  a  sound  D of

a. How long would it take for the concentration of the drug

intensity I is measured in decibels (db), where

D ⫽ 10 log 

I
I0

and I0 is the standard threshold of audibility.
a. Express the intensity I of a 30-db sound (the sound level

of normal conversation) in terms of I0.

b. Determine how many times greater the intensity of an 
80-db sound (rock music) is than that of a 30-db sound.
c. Prolonged noise above 150 db causes permanent deaf-
ness. How does the intensity of a 150-db sound compare
with the intensity of an 80-db sound?

64. BAROMETRIC PRESSURE Halley’s  Law  states  that  the  baro-
metric pressure (in inches of mercury) at an altitude of x mi
above sea level is approximated by the equation

p1x2 ⫽ 29.92e⫺0.2x

1x ⱖ 02

If the barometric pressure as measured by a hot-air balloon-
ist is 20 in. of mercury, what is the balloonist’s altitude?

65. HEIGHT OF TREES The  height  (in  feet)  of  a  certain  kind  of

tree is approximated by

h 1t2 ⫽

160

1 ⫹ 240e⫺0.2t

where t is the age of the tree in years. Estimate the age of
an 80-ft tree.

66. NEWTON’S LAW OF COOLING The  temperature  of  a  cup  of

coffee t min after it is poured is given by

T ⫽ 70 ⫹ 100e⫺0.0446t

where T is measured in degrees Fahrenheit.
a. What  was  the  temperature  of  the  coffee  when  it  was

poured?

b. When  will  the  coffee  be  cool  enough  to  drink  (say,

120°F)?

67. LENGTHS OF FISH The  length  (in  centimeters)  of  a  typical

Pacific halibut t years old is approximately

f1t2 ⫽ 20011 ⫺ 0.956e⫺0.18t2

Suppose a Pacific halibut caught by Mike measures 140 cm.
What is its approximate age?

68. ABSORPTION OF DRUGS The  concentration  of  a  drug  in  an
organ t seconds after it has been administered is given by

x1t2 ⫽ 0.0811 ⫺ e⫺0.02t2

where  x(t)  is  measured  in  grams  per  cubic  centimeter
(g/cm3).

in the organ to reach 0.02 g/cm3?

b. How long would it take for the concentration of the drug

in the organ to reach 0.04 g/cm3?

69. ABSORPTION OF DRUGS The  concentration  of  a  drug  in  an
organ t seconds after it has been administered is given by

x1t2 ⫽ 0.08 ⫹ 0.12e⫺0.02t

where  x(t)  is  measured  in  grams  per  cubic  centimeter
(g/cm3).
a. How long would it take for the concentration of the drug

in the organ to reach 0.18 g/cm3?

b. How long would it take for the concentration of the drug

in the organ to reach 0.16 g/cm3?

70. FORENSIC SCIENCE Forensic scientists use the following law
to determine the time of death of accident or murder vic-
tims. If T denotes the temperature of a body t hr after death,
then

T ⫽ T0 ⫹ 1T1 ⫺ T0210.972 t

where T0 is the air temperature and T1 is the body tempera-
ture at the time of death. John Doe was found murdered at
midnight in his house; the room temperature was 70°F, and
his body temperature was 80°F when he was found. When
was he killed? Assume that the normal body temperature is
98.6°F.

In Exercises 71 and 72, determine whether the statement is true
or  false.  If  it  is  true,  explain  why  it  is  true.  If  it  is  false,  give  an
example to show why it is false.
71.

1ln x2 3 ⫽ 3 ln x for all x in (0, ⬁).

72. ln  a ⫺ ln  b ⫽ ln(a ⫺ b)  for  all  positive  real  numbers  a

and b.

73. a. Given that 2 x ⫽ ekx (x Z 0), find k.

b. Show that, in general, if b is a positive real number, then
any equation of the form y ⫽ bx may be written in the
form y ⫽ e kx, for some real number k.

74. Use the definition of a logarithm to prove

a. logb mn ⫽ logb m ⫹ logb n
⫽ logb  m ⫺ logb  n
b.

logb 

m
n

Hint: Let logb m ⫽ p and logb n ⫽ q. Then, bp ⫽ m and bq ⫽ n.

75. Use the definition of a logarithm to prove

logb mn ⫽ n logb m

76. Use the definition of a logarithm to prove

a. logb 1 ⫽ 0
b. logb b ⫽ 1

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3.3 EXPONENTIAL FUNCTIONS AS MATHEMATICAL MODELS

175

2. 3e x⫹1 ⫺ 2 ⫽ 4
3e x⫹1 ⫽ 6
e x⫹1 ⫽ 2

ln e x⫹1 ⫽ ln 2
1x ⫹ 12 ln e ⫽ ln 2
x ⫹ 1 ⫽ ln 2

Take the logarithm of both sides.

Law 3

Law 5

x ⫽ ln 2 ⫺ 1 
⬇ ⫺0.3069

3.2 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. First, sketch the graph of y ⫽ 3x with the help of the fol-

lowing table of values:

x
y ⴝ 3x

⫺3
1
27

⫺2
1
9

⫺1
1
3

0
1

1
3

2
9

3
27

Next, take the mirror reflection of this graph with respect to
the line y ⫽ x to obtain the graph of y ⫽ log3 x.

y

y = 3x

y = x

6

4

2

y = log3 x

2

4

6

8

x

3.3

Exponential Functions as Mathematical Models

Q

Q0

Q = Q0ekt

FIGURE 10
Exponential growth

Exponential Growth
Many problems arising from practical situations can be described mathematically in
terms of exponential functions or functions closely related to the exponential function.
In this section, we look at some applications involving exponential functions from the
fields of the life and social sciences.

In Section 3.1, we saw that the exponential function f(x) ⫽ b x is an increasing
function when b ⬎ 1. In particular, the function f(x) ⫽ e x has this property. Suppose
that  Q(t)  represents  a  quantity  at  time  t;  then  one  may  deduce  that  the  function 
Q(t) ⫽ Q0ekt, where Q0 and k are positive constants, has the following properties:
1. Q(0) ⫽ Q0
2. Q(t) increases “rapidly” without bound as t increases without bound (Figure 10).

t

Property 1 follows from the computation

Q102 ⫽ Q0e0 ⫽ Q0

The exponential function

Q1t2 ⫽ Q0ekt

10 ⱕ t ⬍ ⬁2

(3)

provides us with a mathematical model of a quantity Q(t) that is initially present in the
amount of Q(0) ⫽ Q0 and whose rate of growth at any time t is directly proportional to
the amount of the quantity present at time t (see Example 5, Section 9.7). Such a quan-
tity is said to exhibit unrestricted exponential growth, and the constant k of propor-
tionality is called the growth constant. Interest earned on a fixed deposit when com-
pounded continuously exhibits exponential growth (see Chapter 4). Other examples of
unrestricted exponential growth follow.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

176

CHAPTER 3 EXPONENTIAL AND LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS

PORTFOLIO

Carol A. Reeb, Ph.D.

TITLE Research Associate
INSTITUTION Hopkins Marine Station, Stanford University

Historically, the world’s oceans

were thought to provide an unlim-
ited source of inexpensive
seafood. However, in a world in
which the human population now exceeds six billion peo-
ple, overfishing has pushed one third of all marine fishery
stocks toward a state of collapse.

As a fishery geneticist at Hopkins Marine Station, I study
commercially harvested marine populations and use expo-
nential models in my work. The equation for determining
the size of a population that grows or declines exponentially
is xt ⫽ x0ert, where x0 is the initial population, t is time, and r
is the growth or decay constant (positive for growth, nega-
tive for decay).

This equation can be used to estimate the population in
the past as well as in the future. We know that the demand
for seafood increased as the human population grew, even-
tually causing fish populations to decline. Because genetic

diversity is linked to population size, the exponential func-
tion is useful to model change in fishery populations and
their gene pools over time.

Interestingly, exponential functions can also be used to

model the increase in the market value of seafood in the
United States over the past 60 years. In general, the price of
seafood has increased exponentially, although the price did
stabilize briefly in 1995. 

Although exponential curves are important to my work,
they are not always the best fit. Exponential curves are best
applied across short time frames when environments or
markets are unlimited. Over longer
periods, the logistic growth function
is more suitable. In my research,
selecting the most accurate model
requires examining many 
possibilities.

© Joe Wible/Hopkins Marine Station; (inset) © Rich Carey/Shutterstock.com

APPLIED EXAMPLE 1 Growth of Bacteria Under ideal laboratory condi-
tions, the number of bacteria in a culture grows in accordance with the 

law Q(t) ⫽ Q0ekt, where Q0 denotes the number of bacteria initially present in the
culture, k is a constant determined by the strain of bacteria under consideration
and other factors, and t is the elapsed time measured in hours. Suppose 10,000
bacteria are present initially in the culture and 60,000 are present 2 hours later.
How many bacteria will there be in the culture at the end of 4 hours?

Solution We are given that Q(0) ⫽ Q0 ⫽ 10,000, so Q(t) ⫽ 10,000ekt. 
Next, the fact that 60,000 bacteria are present 2 hours later translates into 
Q(2) ⫽ 60,000. Thus,

60,000 ⫽ 10,000e 2k

e 2k ⫽ 6

Taking the natural logarithm on both sides of the equation, we obtain

Since ln e ⫽ 1

ln e 2k ⫽ ln 6
2k ⫽ ln 6
k ⫽ ln 6
2
k ⬇ 0.8959

Thus, the number of bacteria present at any time t is given by

Q1t2 ⬇ 10,000e0.8959t

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3.3 EXPONENTIAL FUNCTIONS AS MATHEMATICAL MODELS

177

In particular, the number of bacteria present in the culture at the end of 4 hours
is given by

Q142 ⬇ 10,000e0.8959(4)

⬇ 360,000

Q

Q = Q0e–kt

Q0

FIGURE 11
Exponential decay

t

Exponential Decay
In  contrast  to  exponential  growth,  a  quantity  exhibits  exponential  decay if  it
decreases  at  a  rate  that  is  directly  proportional  to  its  size.  Such  a  quantity  may  be
described by the exponential function

(4)
where the positive constant Q0 measures the amount present initially (t ⫽ 0) and k is
some suitable positive number, called the decay constant. The choice of this number
is determined by the nature of the substance under consideration and other factors. The
graph of this function is sketched in Figure 11.

Q1t2 ⫽ Q0e⫺kt

10 ⱕ t ⬍ ⬁2

APPLIED EXAMPLE 2 Radioactive Decay Radioactive substances decay
exponentially. For example, the amount of radium present at any time t
obeys the law Q(t) ⫽ Q0e⫺kt, where Q0 is the initial amount present and k is a
specific positive constant. The half-life of a radioactive substance is the time
required for a given amount to be reduced by one-half. Now, it is known that the
half-life of radium is approximately 1600 years. Suppose initially there are 
200 milligrams of pure radium. Find the amount left after t years. What is the
amount left after 800 years?

Solution The initial amount of radium present is 200 milligrams, so Q(0) ⫽
Q0 ⫽ 200. Thus, Q(t) ⫽ 200e⫺kt. Next, the datum concerning the half-life of
radium implies that Q(1600) ⫽ 100, and this gives
 100 ⫽ 200e⫺1600k

 e⫺1600k ⫽ 1
2

Taking the natural logarithm on both sides of this equation yields

 ⫺1600k ln e ⫽ ln 

 ⫺1600k ⫽ ln 

1
2
1
2

ln e ⫽ 1

 k ⫽ ⫺ 

1

1600

 ln a 1

2b ⬇ 0.0004332

Therefore, the amount of radium left after t years is

In particular, the amount of radium left after 800 years is

Q1t2 ⫽ 200e⫺0.0004332t

Q18002 ⫽ 200e⫺0.0004332(800) ⬇ 141.42

or approximately 141 milligrams.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

178

CHAPTER 3 EXPONENTIAL AND LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 3 Radioactive Decay Carbon 14, a radioactive isotope
of carbon, has a half-life of 5730 years. What is its decay constant?

Solution We have Q(t) ⫽ Q0e⫺kt. Since the half-life of the element is 5730
years, half of the substance is left at the end of that period; that is,

 Q 157302 ⫽ Q0e⫺5730k ⫽ 1
2  Q0
 e⫺5730k ⫽ 1
2

Taking the natural logarithm on both sides of this equation, we have

 ln e⫺5730k ⫽ ln 
 ⫺5730k ⬇ ⫺0.693147

1
2

 k ⬇ 0.000121

Carbon-14 dating is a well-known method used by anthropologists to establish the
age of animal and plant fossils. This method assumes that the proportion of carbon 14
(C-14) present in the atmosphere has remained constant over the past 50,000 years.
Professor Willard Libby, recipient of the Nobel Prize in chemistry in 1960, proposed
this theory.

The amount of C-14 in the tissues of a living plant or animal is constant. How-
ever,  when  an  organism  dies,  it  stops  absorbing  new  quantities  of  C-14,  and  the
amount of C-14 in the remains diminishes because of the natural decay of the radioac-
tive substance. Therefore, the approximate age of a plant or animal fossil can be deter-
mined by measuring the amount of C-14 present in the remains.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 4 Carbon-14 Dating A skull from an archeological site
has one tenth the amount of C-14 that it originally contained. Determine 

the approximate age of the skull.

Solution Here,

Q1t2 ⫽ Q0e⫺kt

⫽ Q0e⫺0.000121t

where Q0 is the amount of C-14 present originally and k, the decay constant, is
equal to 0.000121 (see Example 3). Since Q(t) ⫽ (1>10)Q0, we have

1
 
10

 Q0 ⫽ Q0e⫺0.000121t

 ln 

1
10

⫽ ⫺0.000121t

Take the natural logarithm 
on both sides.

ln  1
10

⫺0.000121

 t ⫽
 ⬇ 19,030

or approximately 19,030 years.

Learning Curves
The next example shows how the exponential function may be applied to describe cer-
tain types of learning processes. Consider the function

Q1t2 ⫽ C ⫺ Ae⫺kt

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

y

y = C

Q(t) = C – Ae–kt

C – A

FIGURE 12
A learning curve

3.3 EXPONENTIAL FUNCTIONS AS MATHEMATICAL MODELS

179

t

where C, A, and k are positive constants. The graph of the function Q is shown in Fig-
ure 12, where that part of the graph corresponding to the negative values of t is drawn
with a gray line since, in practice, one normally restricts the domain of the function to
the interval [0, ⬁). Observe that starting at t ⫽ 0, Q(t) increases rather rapidly but then
the rate of increase slows down considerably after a while. The value of Q(t)) never
exceeds C.

This behavior of the graph of the function Q closely resembles the learning pat-
tern experienced by workers engaged in highly repetitive work. For example, the
productivity of an assembly-line worker increases very rapidly in the early stages
of the training period. This productivity increase is a direct result of the worker’s
training  and  accumulated  experience.  But  the  rate  of  increase  of  productivity 
slows as time goes by, and the worker’s productivity level approaches some fixed
level due to the limitations of the worker and the machine. Because of this char-
acteristic, the graph of the function Q(t)  ⫽ C ⫺ Ae⫺kt is often called a learning
curve.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 5 Assembly Time The Camera Division of Eastman
Optical produces a compact digital camera. Eastman’s training department

determines that after completing the basic training program, a new, previously
inexperienced employee will be able to assemble

Q1t2 ⫽ 50 ⫺ 30e⫺0.5t

Model F cameras per day t months after the employee starts work on the assem-
bly line.

a. How many Model F cameras can a new employee assemble per day after basic

training?

b. How many Model F cameras can an employee with 1 month of experience

assemble per day? An employee with 2 months of experience? An employee
with 6 months of experience?

c. How many Model F cameras can the average experienced employee assemble

per day?

Solution

a. The number of Model F cameras a new employee can assemble is given by

Q102 ⫽ 50 ⫺ 30 ⫽ 20

b. The number of Model F cameras that an employee with 1 month of experi-
ence, 2 months of experience, and 6 months of experience can assemble per
day is given by

Q112 ⫽ 50 ⫺ 30e⫺0.5 ⬇ 31.80
Q122 ⫽ 50 ⫺ 30e⫺1 ⬇ 38.96
Q162 ⫽ 50 ⫺ 30e⫺3 ⬇ 48.51

or approximately 32, 39, and 49, respectively.

c. As t gets larger and larger, Q(t) approaches 50. Hence, the average experi-

enced employee can ultimately be expected to assemble 50 Model F cameras 
per day.

Other applications of the learning curve are found in models that describe the dis-
semination of information about a product or the velocity of an object dropped into a
viscous medium.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

180

CHAPTER 3 EXPONENTIAL AND LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS

y

A

1 + B

FIGURE 13
A logistic curve

y = A

A
y  =       

1 + Be–kt

t

Logistic Growth Functions
Our last example of an application of exponential functions to the description of nat-
ural phenomena involves the logistic (also called the S-shaped, or sigmoidal) curve,
which is the graph of the function

Q 1t2 ⫽

A

1 ⫹ Be⫺kt

where A, B, and k are positive constants. The function Q is called a logistic growth
function. The graph of the function Q is sketched in Figure 13.

Observe that Q(t) increases slowly at first but more rapidly as t increases. In fact,
for  small  positive  values  of  t,  the  logistic  curve  resembles  an  exponential  growth
curve. However, the rate of growth of Q(t) decreases quite rapidly as t increases and
Q(t) approaches the number A as t gets larger and larger, but Q(t) never exceeds A.

Thus, the logistic curve exhibits both the property of rapid growth of the expo-
nential  growth  curve  as  well  as  the  “saturation”  property  of  the  learning  curve.
Because of these characteristics, the logistic curve serves as a suitable mathematical
model for describing many natural phenomena. For example, if a small number of rab-
bits were introduced to a tiny island in the South Pacific, the rabbit population might
be expected to grow very rapidly at first, but the growth rate would decrease quickly
as  overcrowding,  scarcity  of  food,  and  other  environmental  factors  affected  it.  The
population  would  eventually  stabilize  at  a  level  compatible  with  the  life-support
capacity of the environment. This level, given by A, is called the carrying capacity of
the  environment.  Models  describing  the  spread  of  rumors  and  epidemics  are  other
examples of the application of the logistic curve.

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 6 Spread of Flu The number of soldiers at Fort
MacArthur who contracted influenza after t days during a flu epidemic is 

approximated by the exponential model

Q 1t2 ⫽

5000

1 ⫹ 1249e⫺k t

If 40 soldiers contracted the flu by day 7, find how many soldiers contracted the
flu by day 15.

Solution The given information implies that

Thus,

Q 172 ⫽

5000

1 ⫹ 1249e⫺7k

⫽ 40

 4011 ⫹ 1249e⫺7k2 ⫽ 5000
 1 ⫹ 1249e⫺7k ⫽ 5000
40
 e⫺7k ⫽ 124
1249

⫽ 125

 ⫺7k ⫽ ln 

124
1249
ln  124
1249
7

 k ⫽ ⫺

⬇ 0.33

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

3.3 EXPONENTIAL FUNCTIONS AS MATHEMATICAL MODELS

181

Therefore, the number of soldiers who contracted the flu after t days is given by

Q 1t2 ⫽

5000

1 ⫹ 1249e⫺0.33t

In particular, the number of soldiers who contracted the flu by day 15 is given by

 Q 1152 ⫽

 ⬇ 508

5000

1 ⫹ 1249e⫺1510.332

or approximately 508 soldiers.

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
Refer to Example 6.
1. Use a graphing utility to plot the graph of the function Q, using the viewing

window [0, 40] ⫻ [0, 5000].

2. How long will it take for the first 1000 soldiers to contract the flu?

Hint: Plot the graphs of y1 ⫽ Q(t) and y2 ⫽ 1000, and find the point of intersection of the two
graphs.

3.3 Self-Check Exercise

IMMIGRATION AND POPULATION GROWTH Suppose the population
(in millions) of a country grows in accordance with the rule

P ⫽ a P0 ⫹ I

kb  e 

k t ⫺ I
k

where P denotes the population (in millions) at any time t (in
years), k is a constant reflecting the natural growth rate of the
population, I is a constant giving the (constant) rate of immi-

3.3 Concept Questions

gration into the country, and P0 is the total population of the
country at time t ⫽ 0. The population of the United States in
1980  (t ⫽ 0)  was  226.5  million.  If  the  natural  growth  rate  is
0.8% annually (k ⫽ 0.008) and net immigration is allowed at
the rate of half a million people per year (I ⫽ 0.5), what was the
expected population of the United States in 2010?

The solution to Self-Check Exercise 3.3 can be found on 
page 184.

1. Give the model for unrestricted exponential growth and the
model for exponential decay. What effect does the magni-
tude  of  the  growth  (decay)  constant  have  on  the  growth
(decay) of a quantity?

2. What is the half-life of a radioactive substance?

3. What is the logistic growth function? What are its charac-

teristics?

3.3 Exercises

1. EXPONENTIAL GROWTH Given that a quantity Q(t) is described

by the exponential growth function

Q1t2 ⫽ 300e0.02t

where  t is  measured  in  minutes,  answer  the  following 
questions:

a. What is the growth constant?
b. What quantity is present initially?
c. Complete the following table of values:

0

10

20

100

1000

t
Q

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

182

CHAPTER 3 EXPONENTIAL AND LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS

2. EXPONENTIAL DECAY Given  that  a  quantity  Q(t)  exhibiting

exponential decay is described by the function

Q1t2 ⫽ 2000e⫺0.06t

where t is measured in years, answer the following ques-
tions:
a. What is the decay constant?
b. What quantity is present initially?
c. Complete the following table of values:

0

5

10

20

100

t
Q

3. GROWTH OF BACTERIA The  growth  rate  of  the  bacterium
Escherichia coli, a common bacterium found in the human
intestine, is proportional to its size. Under ideal laboratory
conditions,  when  this  bacterium  is  grown  in  a  nutrient
broth  medium,  the  number  of  cells  in  a  culture  doubles
approximately every 20 min.
a. If the initial cell population is 100, determine the func-
tion  Q(t) that expresses the exponential growth of the
number of cells of this bacterium as a function of time
t (in minutes).

b. How  long  will  it  take  for  a  colony  of  100  cells  to

increase to a population of 1 million?

c. If the initial cell population were 1000, how would this

alter our model?

4. WORLD POPULATION The world population at the beginning
of 1990 was 5.3 billion. Assume that the population con-
tinues  to  grow  at  the  rate  of  approximately  2%/year  and
find the function Q(t) that expresses the world population
(in billions) as a function of time t (in years), with t ⫽ 0
corresponding to the beginning of 1990. Using this func-
tion, complete the following table of values and sketch the
graph of the function Q.

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

Year
World
Population

Year
World
Population

5. WORLD POPULATION Refer to Exercise 4.

a. If  the  world  population  continues  to  grow  at  the  rate 
of  approximately  2%/year,  find  the  length  of  time  t0
required for the world population to triple in size.

b. Using the time  t0 given in Exercise 4, what would be
the world population if the growth rate were reduced to
1.8%/year?

6. RESALE VALUE Garland Mills purchased a certain piece of
machinery  3  years  ago  for  $500,000.  Its  present  resale
value  is  $320,000.  Assuming  that  the  machine’s  resale
value decreases exponentially, what will it be 4 years from
now?

7. ATMOSPHERIC PRESSURE If  the  temperature  is  constant,  then
the atmospheric pressure P (in pounds per square inch) varies
with the altitude above sea level h in accordance with the law

P ⫽ p0e⫺kh

where p0 is the atmospheric pressure at sea level and k is a
constant.  If  the  atmospheric  pressure  is  15  lb/in.2 at  sea
level and 12.5 lb/in.2 at 4000 ft, find the atmospheric pres-
sure at an altitude of 12,000 ft.

8. RADIOACTIVE DECAY The  radioactive  element  polonium

decays according to the law

Q1t2 ⫽ Q0 ⭈ 2⫺(t /140)

where Q0 is the initial amount in milligrams and the time t
is measured in days. If the amount of polonium left after
280 days is 20 mg, what was the initial amount present?

9. RADIOACTIVE DECAY Phosphorus 32 (P-32) has a half-life of
14.2  days.  If  100  g  of  this  substance  are  present  initially,
find the amount present after t days. What amount will be
left after 7.1 days?

10. NUCLEAR FALLOUT Strontium 90 (Sr-90), a radioactive iso-
tope  of  strontium,  is  present  in  the  fallout  resulting  from
nuclear  explosions.  It  is  especially  hazardous  to  animal
life, including humans, because, upon ingestion of contam-
inated food, it is absorbed into the bone structure. Its half-
life is 27 years. If the amount of Sr-90 in a certain area is
found to be four times the “safe” level, find how much time
must elapse before the safe level is reached.

11. CARBON-14  DATING Wood  deposits  recovered  from  an
archeological site contain 20% of the C-14 they originally
contained. How long ago did the tree from which the wood
was obtained die?

12. CARBON-14  DATING The  skeletal  remains  of  the  so-called
Pittsburgh Man, unearthed in Pennsylvania, had lost 82%
of  the  C-14  they  originally  contained.  Determine  the
approximate age of the bones.

13. LEARNING CURVES The American Court Reporting Institute
finds  that  the  average  student  taking  Advanced  Machine
Shorthand,  an 
intensive  20-week  course,  progresses
according to the function

Q1t2 ⫽ 12011 ⫺ e⫺0.05t2 ⫹ 60

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 202

where Q(t) measures the number of words (per minute) of
dictation  that  the  student  can  take  in  machine  shorthand
after t weeks in the course. Sketch the graph of the function
Q and answer the following questions:
a. What is the beginning shorthand speed for the average

student in this course?

b. What  shorthand  speed  does  the  average  student  attain

halfway through the course?

c. How  many  words  per  minute  can  the  average  student

take after completing this course?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14. PEOPLE LIVING WITH HIV On the basis of data compiled by
WHO,  the  number  of  people  living  with  HIV  (human
immunodeficiency  virus)  worldwide  from  1985  through
2006 is approximated by

N1t2 ⫽

39.88

1 ⫹ 18.94e⫺0.2957t        10 ⱕ t ⱕ 212

where  N(t)  is  measured  in  millions  and  t in  years,  with 
t ⫽ 0 corresponding to the beginning of 1985. 
a. How many people were living with HIV worldwide at

the beginning of 1985? At the beginning of 2005?

b. Assuming  that  the  trend  continued,  how  many  people
were  living  with  HIV  worldwide  at  the  beginning  of
2008?

Source: World Health Organization.

15. FEDERAL DEBT According to data obtained from the CBO,
the  total  federal  debt  (in  trillions  of  dollars)  from  2001
through 2006 is given by

f 1t2 ⫽ 5.37e0.078t        11 ⱕ t ⱕ 62

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 1 corresponding to
2001. What was the total federal debt in 2001? In 2006?
Source: Congressional Budget Office.

16. EFFECT OF ADVERTISING ON SALES Metro  Department  Store
found that t weeks after the end of a sales promotion the
volume of sales was given by

S1t2 ⫽ B ⫹ Ae⫺kt

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

where  B ⫽ 50,000  and  is  equal  to  the  average  weekly 
volume of sales before the promotion. The sales volumes at
the  end  of  the  first  and  third  weeks  were  $83,515  and
$65,055,  respectively.  Assume  that  the  sales  volume  is
decreasing exponentially.
a. Find the decay constant k.
b. Find the sales volume at the end of the fourth week.

17. DEMAND FOR TABLET COMPUTERS Universal  Instruments
found that the monthly demand for its new line of Galaxy
tablet computers t months after placing the line on the mar-
ket was given by

D1t2 ⫽ 2000 ⫺ 1500e⫺0.05t

1t ⬎ 02

Graph this function and answer the following questions:
a. What is the demand after 1 month? After 1 year? After

2 years? After 5 years?

b. At what level is the demand expected to stabilize?

18. RELIABILITY OF COMPUTER CHIPS The percentage of a certain
brand of computer chips that will fail after t years of use is
estimated to be

3.3 EXPONENTIAL FUNCTIONS AS MATHEMATICAL MODELS

183

20. SPREAD OF AN EPIDEMIC During a flu epidemic, the number
of children in the Woodbridge Community School System
who contracted influenza after t days was given by

Q 1t2 ⫽

1000

1 ⫹ 199e⫺0.8 t

a. How  many  children  were  stricken  by  the  flu  after  the

first day?

b. How many children had the flu after 10 days?

21. LAY TEACHERS AT ROMAN CATHOLIC SCHOOLS The  change
from religious to lay teachers at Roman Catholic schools
has been attributed partly to the decline in the number of
women and men entering religious orders. The percentage
of teachers who are lay teachers is given by

f  1t2 ⫽

98

1 ⫹ 2.77e⫺t

    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

where t is measured in decades, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding
to  the  beginning  of  1960.  What  percentage  of  teachers
were lay teachers at the beginning of 1990?
Sources: National Catholic Education Association and the U.S.
Department of Education.

22. GROWTH OF A FRUIT FLY POPULATION On  the  basis  of  data 
collected  during  an  experiment,  a  biologist  found  that 
the  growth  of  a  fruit  fly  population  (Drosophila)  with  a
limited food supply could be approximated by

N 1t2 ⫽

400

1 ⫹ 39e⫺0.16 t

where t denotes the number of days since the beginning of
the experiment.
a. What was the initial fruit fly population in the experi-

ment?

b. What was the population of the fruit fly colony on the

20th day?

23. DEMOGRAPHICS The number of citizens aged 45–64 years is

approximated by

P 1t2 ⫽

197.9

1 ⫹ 3.274e⫺0.0361t

    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 252

where  P(t)  is  measured  in  millions  and  t is  measured  in
years, with  t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 1990.  People belong-
ing to this age group are the targets of insurance companies
that  want  to  sell  them  annuities.  What  is  the  expected
population  of  citizens  aged  45–64  years  in  2010?  In
2015?
Source: K. G. Securities.

P1t2 ⫽ 10011 ⫺ e⫺0.1t2

24. POPULATION GROWTH IN THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY The U.S.

population is approximated by the function

What  percentage  of  this  brand  of  computer  chips  are  ex-
pected to be usable after 3 years?

19. LENGTHS OF FISH The  length  (in  centimeters)  of  a  typical

Pacific halibut t years old is approximately

f1t2 ⫽ 20011 ⫺ 0.956e⫺0.18t2

What is the length of a typical 6-year-old Pacific halibut?

P 1t2 ⫽

616.5

1 ⫹ 4.02e⫺0.5t

where P(t) is measured in millions of people and t is mea-
sured  in  30-year  intervals,  with  t ⫽ 0  corresponding  to
1930. What is the expected population of the United States
in 2020 (t ⫽ 3)?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

184

CHAPTER 3 EXPONENTIAL AND LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS

25. DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION Three  hundred  students
attended the dedication ceremony of a new building on a
college campus. The president of the traditionally female
college  announced  a  new  expansion  program,  which
included  plans  to  make  the  college  coeducational.  The
number of students who learned of the new program t hr
later is given by the function

f  1t2 ⫽ 3000
1 ⫹ Be⫺k t

If 600 students on campus had heard about the new pro-
gram  2  hr  after  the  ceremony,  how  many  students  had
heard about the policy after 4 hr?

26. RADIOACTIVE DECAY A  radioactive  substance  decays  ac-

cording to the formula

Q1t2 ⫽ Q0e⫺kt

where Q(t) denotes the amount of the substance present at
time t (measured in years), Q0 denotes the amount of the
substance present initially, and k (a positive constant) is the
decay constant.

3.3 Solution to Self-Check Exercise

We are given that P0 ⫽ 226.5, k ⫽ 0.008, and I ⫽ 0.5. So

 P ⫽ a 226.5 ⫹ 0.5

0.008b e0.008t ⫺ 0.5

0.008

 ⫽ 289e0.008t ⫺ 62.5

a. Show that half-life of the substance is 
b. Suppose a radioactive substance decays according to the

t ⫽

1ln 22>k.

formula

Q1t2 ⫽ 20e⫺0.0001238t

How long will it take for the substance to decay to half
the original amount?

27. LOGISTIC GROWTH FUNCTION Consider  the  logistic  growth

function 

Q1t2 ⫽

A

1 ⫹ Be⫺kt

Suppose  the  population  is  Q1 when  t ⫽ t1 and  Q2 when 
t ⫽ t2. Show that the value of k is

k ⫽ 1

t2 ⫺ t1

 ln c Q21A ⫺ Q12
Q11A ⫺ Q22 d

28. LOGISTIC GROWTH FUNCTION The  carrying  capacity  of  a
colony of fruit flies (Drosophila) is 600. The population of
fruit  flies  after  14  days  is  76,  and  the  population  after 
21 days is 167. What is the value of the growth constant k?
Hint: Use the result of Exercise 27.

Therefore, the expected population in 2010 is given by

P1302 ⫽ 289e0.24 ⫺ 62.5

⬇ 304.9
or approximately 304.9 million.

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Analyzing Mathematical Models
We can use a graphing utility to analyze the mathematical models encountered in this
section.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 1 Internet-Gaming Sales The estimated growth in
global Internet-gaming revenue (in billions of dollars), as predicted by 

industry analysts, is given in the following table:

Year

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Revenue

3.1

3.9

5.6

8.0

11.8

15.2

18.2

20.4

22.7

24.5

a. Use Logistic to find a regression model for the data. Let t ⫽ 0 correspond to

2001.

b. Plot the scatter diagram and the graph of the function f found in part (a) using

the viewing window [0, 9] ⫻ [0, 35].

Source: Christiansen Capital/Advisors.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3.3 EXPONENTIAL FUNCTIONS AS MATHEMATICAL MODELS

185

35

Solution

a. Using Logistic we find

f 1t2 ⫽

27.11

1 ⫹ 9.64e⫺0.49t        10 ⱕ t ⱕ 92

b. The scatter plot for the data, and the graph of f in the viewing window 

[0, 9] ⫻ [0, 35], are shown in Figure T1.

0
FIGURE T1
The graph of f in the viewing window 
[0, 9] ⫻ [0, 35]

9

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

1. ONLINE BANKING In a study prepared in 2000, the percent-
age  of  households  using  online  banking  was  projected 
to be

f1t2 ⫽ 1.5e0.78t

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
the beginning of 2000. Plot the graph of f, using the view-
ing window [0, 4] ⫻ [0, 40].
Source: Online Banking Report.

2. NEWTON’S LAW OF COOLING The  temperature  of  a  cup  of

coffee t min after it is poured is given by

T ⫽ 70 ⫹ 100e⫺0.0446t

where T is measured in degrees Fahrenheit.
a. Plot the graph of T, using the viewing window [0, 30] ⫻

[0, 200].

b. When will the coffee be cool enough to drink (say, 120°)?

Hint: Use the ISECT function.

3. AIR TRAVEL Air  travel  has  been  rising  dramatically  in  the
past 30 years. In a study conducted in 2000, the FAA pro-
jected  further  exponential  growth  for  air  travel  through
2010. The function

f1t2 ⫽ 666e0.0413t

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

gives the number of passengers (in millions) in year t, with 
t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 2000.
a. Plot the graph of f, using the viewing window [0, 10] ⫻

[0, 1000].

b. How  many  air  passengers  were  there  in  2000?  What

was the projected number of air passengers for 2010?

Source: Federal Aviation Administration.

4. COMPUTER GAME SALES The total number of Starr Commu-
nication’s newest game, Laser Beams, sold t months after
its release is given by

N1t2 ⫽ ⫺201t ⫹ 202 e⫺0.05t ⫹ 400

thousand units. Plot the graph of N, using the viewing win-
dow [0, 500] ⫻ [0, 500].

5. POPULATION GROWTH IN THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY The U.S.

population is approximated by the function

P 1t2 ⫽

616.5

1 ⫹ 4.02e⫺0.5t

where P(t) is measured in millions of people and t is mea-
sured  in  30-year  intervals,  with  t ⫽ 0  corresponding  to
1930.
a. Plot the graph of P, using the viewing window [0, 4] ⫻

[0, 650].

b. What is the expected population of the United States in

2020 (t ⫽ 3)?

Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

6. TIME RATE OF GROWTH OF A TUMOR The  rate  at  which  a

tumor grows, with respect to time, is given by

R ⫽ Ax ln 

B
x

    1for 0 ⬍ x ⬍ B2

where A and B are positive constants and x is the radius of
the tumor. Plot the graph of R for the case A ⫽ B ⫽ 10.

7. ABSORPTION OF DRUGS The  concentration  of  a  drug  in  an

organ at any time t (in seconds) is given by

C 1t2 ⫽ e 0.3t ⫺ 1811 ⫺ e⫺t /602
18e⫺t /60 ⫺ 12e⫺1t⫺202/60

if 0 ⱕ t ⱕ 20
if t ⬎ 20

where  C(t)  is  measured  in  grams  per  cubic  centimeter
(g/cm3).
a. Plot the graph of C, using the viewing window [0, 120] ⫻

[0, 1].

b. What  is  the  initial  concentration  of  the  drug  in  the

organ?

c. What is the concentration of the drug in the organ after

10 sec?

d. What is the concentration of the drug in the organ after 

30 sec?

(continued)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

186

CHAPTER 3 EXPONENTIAL AND LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS

8. MODELING WITH DATA The snowfall accumulation at Logan
Airport  (in  inches),  t hr  after  the  beginning  of  a  33-hr
snowstorm in Boston on a certain day, follows:

a. Use Logistic to find a regression model for the data. Let

t ⫽ 0 correspond to 2005.

b. Plot the graph of the function f found in part (a), using

the viewing window [0, 4] ⫻ [200, 300].

Hour

0

3

6

9

12

15

18

21

24

27

30

33

Source: International Data Corporation.

Inches 0.1 0.4 3.6 6.5 9.1 14.4 19.5 22 23.6 24.8 26.6 27

Here, t ⫽ 0 corresponds to noon of February 6.
a. Use Logistic to find a regression model for the data.
b. Plot the scatter diagram and the graph of the function f
found in part (a), using the viewing window [0, 33] ⫻
[0, 30].

Source: Boston Globe.

9. WORLDWIDE PC SHIPMENTS Estimated  worldwide  PC  ship-
ments  (in  millions  of  units)  from  2005  through  2009  are
given in the following table:

Year

PCs

2005

207.1

2006

226.2

2007

252.9

2008

283.3

2009 

302.4

10. FEDERAL DEBT According to data obtained from the CBO,
the  total  federal  debt  (in  trillions  of  dollars)  from  2001
through 2006 is given in the following table:

Year

Debt

2001

5.81

2002

6.23

2003

6.78

2004

7.40

2005

7.93

2006

8.51

a. Use  ExpReg to  find  a  regression  model  for  the  data.

Let t ⫽ 1 correspond to 2001.

b. Plot the graph of the function f found in part (a), using

the viewing window [1, 6] ⫻ [4, 10].

Source: Congressional Budget Office.

CHAPTER 3

Summary of Principal Formulas and Terms

FORMULAS

1. Exponential function with base b
2. The number e

3. Exponential function with base e
4. Logarithmic function with base b
5. Logarithmic function with base e
6. Inverse properties of ln x and ex

TERMS

common logarithm (166)
natural logarithm (166)
exponential growth (175)

y ⫽ bx, where b ⬎ 0 and b Z 1
e ⫽ 2.7182818p
y ⫽ e x
y ⫽ log b x
y ⫽ ln x
ln e x ⫽ x

(x ⬎ 0)
and

(x ⬎ 0)

eln x ⫽ x

growth constant (175)
exponential decay (177)
decay constant (177)

half-life of a radioactive substance 

(177)

logistic growth function (180)

CHAPTER 3

Concept Review Questions

Fill in the blanks.
1. The  function  f(x)  ⫽ x b (b,  a  real  number)  is  called  a/an
_____ function, whereas the function t(x) ⫽ bx, where b ⬎
_____ and b ⫽ _____, is called a/an _____ function.

2. a. The  domain  of  the  function  y ⫽ 3x is  _____,  and  its

range is _____.

b. The graph of the function y ⫽ 0.3x passes through the

point _____ and falls from _____ to _____.

3. a. If b ⬎ 0 and b ⫽ 1, then the logarithmic function y ⫽
logb x has  domain  _____  and  range  _____;  its  graph
passes through the point _____.

b. The  graph  of  y ⫽ logb x _____  from  left  to  right  if 

b ⬍ 1 and _____ from left to right if b ⬎ 1.

4. a. If x ⬎ 0, then eln x ⫽ _____.

b. If x is any real number, then ln ex ⫽ _____.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5. a. In  the  unrestricted  exponential  growth  model  Q ⫽
Q0ekt, Q0 represents the quantity present _____, and k is
called the _____ constant.

b. In the exponential decay model Q ⫽ Q0e⫺kt, k is called

the _____ constant.

c. The  half-life  of  a  radioactive  substance  is  the  _____
required for a substance to decay to _____ _____ of its
original amount.

REVIEW EXERCISES

187

6. a. The  model  Q(t)  ⫽ C ⫺ Ae⫺kt is  called  a/an  _____

_____. The value of Q(t) never exceeds _____.

b. The model

Q 1t2 ⫽

A

1 ⫹ Be⫺kt

, y ⫽ A, is called a/an _____ 

_____  _____  of  the  graph  of  Q.  If  the  quantity  Q(t)  is 
initially smaller than A, then Q(t) will eventually approach
_____  as  t increases;  the  number  A,  represents  the  life-
support  capacity  of  the  environment  and  is  called  the
_____ _____ of the environment.

CHAPTER 3

Review Exercises

In Exercises 1–4, sketch the graph of the function.

1. f x ⫽ 5x

3. f x ⫽ log4 x

1
1

2
2

2. y ⫽

5b x
a 1
4. y ⫽ log1/4 x

In Exercises 5–8, express each equation in logarithmic form.
5. 34 ⫽ 81

6. 91/2 ⫽ 3

7.

3b ⫺3
a 2

⫽

27
8

8. 16⫺3/4 ⫽ 0.125

In Exercises 9–12, given that ln 2 ⬇ 0.6931, ln 3 ⬇ 1.0986, and
ln 5 ⬇ 1.6094, find the value of the expression using the laws of
logarithms.
9. ln 30

10. ln 9

11. ln 3.6

12. ln 75

In Exercises 13–15, given that ln 2  ⴝ x, ln 3  ⴝ y, and ln 5  ⴝ z,
express  each  of  the  given  logarithmic  values  in  terms  of  x,  y, 
and z.
13. ln 30

14. ln 3.6

15. ln 75

In Exercises 16–21, solve for x without using a calculator.
16. 22 x⫺3 ⫽ 8

17. e x 2⫹x ⫽ e2
19. 2x 2⫹x ⫽ 4x 2⫺3

18. 3x⫺1 ⫽ 9 x⫹2

20. log 4 2x ⫹ 1 ⫽ 2
21. ln x ⫺ 1 ⫹ ln 4 ⫽ ln 2x ⫹ 4 ⫺ ln 2

1

2

1

1

2

2

In  Exercises  22–35,  solve  for  x,  giving  your  answer  accurate  to
four decimal places.
22. 4x ⫽ 5

23. 3⫺2x ⫽ 8

24. 3 ⭈ 2⫺x ⫽ 17

26. 0.2ex ⫽ 3.4

28. 53x⫹1 ⫽ 16
30. 2x 2 ⫽ 12
32. 4e⫺0.1x ⫺ 2 ⫽ 8

25. 2e⫺x ⫽ 7

27. e2x⫺1 ⫽ 14

29. 23x⫹1 ⫽ 32x⫺3 

3e2x

31.

⫽ 15

33. 8 ⫺ e0.2x ⫽ 2

34.

20

1 ⫹ 2e0.2x

⫽ 4

35.

30

1 ⫹ 2e⫺0.1x

⫽ 5

2
36. Sketch the graph of the function y ⫽ log2 x ⫹ 3 .
2
37. Sketch the graph of the function y ⫽ log 3 x ⫹ 1 .

1
1

38. GROWTH OF BACTERIA A  culture  of  bacteria  that  initially
contained  2000  bacteria  has  a  count  of  18,000  bacteria
after 2 hr.
a. Determine the function Q(t) that expresses the exponen-
tial growth of the number of cells of this bacterium as a
function of time t (in minutes).

b. Find the number of bacteria present after 4 hr.

39. RADIOACTIVE DECAY The radioactive element radium has a

half-life of 1600 years. What is its decay constant?

40. DEMAND FOR DVD PLAYERS VCA Television found that the
monthly demand for its new line of DVD players t months
after placing the players on the market is given by:

21
D t ⫽ 4000 ⫺ 3000e⫺0.06t

1

t ⱖ 0

2

Graph this function and answer the following questions:
a. What was the demand after 1 month? After 1 year? After

2 years?

b. At what level is the demand expected to stabilize?

41. FLU EPIDEMIC During  a  flu  epidemic,  the  number  of  stu-
dents at a certain university who contracted influenza after
t days could be approximated by the exponential model

Q t ⫽

21

3000

1 ⫹ 499e⫺kt

If 90 students contracted the flu by day 10, how many stu-
dents contracted the flu by day 20?

42. U.S. INFANT MORTALITY RATE The U.S. infant mortality rate

(per 1000 live births) is approximated by the function

21
N t ⫽ 12.5e⫺0.0294t

1

0 ⱕ t ⱕ 21

2

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
1980.  What  was  the  mortality  rate  in  1980?  In  1990?  In
2000?
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

188

CHAPTER 3 EXPONENTIAL AND LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS

43. ABSORPTION OF DRUGS The  concentration  of  a  drug  in  an

a. What  is  the  initial  concentration  of  the  drug  in  the

organ at any time t (in seconds) is given by

organ?

21
x t ⫽ 0.08 1 ⫺ e⫺0.02t

1

2

b. What is the concentration of the drug in the organ after

30 sec?

where x(t) is measured in grams/cubic centimeter (g/cm3).

CHAPTER 3

Before Moving On . . .

1. Simplify the expression  2x⫺2 2 9x⫺4 1/2.

1

2

1

2

2. Solve e2x ⫺ ex ⫺ 6 ⫽ 0 for x.

Hint: Let u ⫽ ex.

3. Solve log2 x2 ⫺ 8x ⫹ 1 ⫽ 0.

1

2

100

4. Solve the equation 

⫽ 40 for t.

1 ⫹ 2e0.3t

5. The temperature of a cup of coffee at time t (in minutes) is

21
T t ⫽ 70 ⫹ ce⫺kt

Initially,  the  temperature  of  the  coffee  was  200°F.  Three
minutes later, it was 180°. When will the temperature of
the coffee be 150°F?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4

MATHEMATICS 
OF FINANCE

wavebreakmedia ltd/Shutterstock.com

INTEREST THAT IS periodically added to the principal and

thereafter itself earns interest is called compound interest. We

begin this chapter by deriving the compound interest formula,

which gives the amount of money accumulated when an initial

amount of money is invested in an account for a fixed term and

earns compound interest.

An annuity is a sequence of payments made at regular intervals.

We derive formulas giving the future value of an annuity (what you

end up with) and the present value of an annuity (the lump sum

that, when invested now, will yield the same future value as that of

the annuity). Then, using these formulas, we answer questions

involving the amortization of certain types of installment loans and

questions involving sinking funds (funds that are set up to be used

for a specific purpose at a future date).

How much can the Jacksons afford to

borrow from the bank for the purchase

of a home? They have determined that

after making a down payment they can

afford a monthly payment of $2000. In

Example 4, page 223, we learn how to

determine the maximum amount they

can afford to borrow if they secure a 

30-year fixed mortgage at the current

rate.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

189

190

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

4.1 Compound Interest

Simple Interest
A natural application of linear functions to the business world is found in the compu-
tation  of  simple  interest—interest  that  is  computed  on  the  original  principal  only.
Thus, if I denotes the interest on a principal P (in dollars) at an interest rate of r per
year for t years, we have

I ⫽ Prt

A

The  accumulated  amount A,  the  sum  of  the  principal  and  interest  after  t years,  is
given by

A = P + Prt

P

t

FIGURE 1
The accumulated amount is a linear func-
tion of t .

A ⫽ P ⫹ I ⫽ P ⫹ Prt

 ⫽ P11 ⫹ rt2

and is a linear function of t (see Exercise 46). In business applications, we are nor-
mally interested only in the case in which t is positive, so only the part of the line that
lies in Quadrant I is of interest to us (Figure 1).

Simple Interest Formulas

Interest:
Accumulated amount:

I ⫽ Prt
A ⫽ P11 ⫹ rt2

(1a)
(1b)

EXAMPLE 1 A bank pays simple interest at the rate of 8% per year for certain
deposits. If a customer deposits $1000 and makes no withdrawals for 3 years, what
is the total amount on deposit at the end of 3 years? What is the interest earned in
that period of time?
Solution Using Formula (1b) with P ⫽ 1000, r ⫽ 0.08, and t ⫽ 3, we see that the
total amount on deposit at the end of 3 years is given by

A ⫽ P11 ⫹ rt2
 ⫽ 100031 ⫹ 10.0821324 ⫽ 1240

or $1240.

The interest earned over the 3-year period is given by

I ⫽ Prt

Use Formula (1a).

⫽ 100010.082132 ⫽ 240

or $240.

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
Refer  to  Example  1.  Use  a  graphing  utility  to  plot  the  graph  of  the  function 
A ⫽ 1000(1 ⫹ 0.08t), using the viewing window [0, 10] ⫻ [0, 2000].
1. What is the A-intercept of the straight line, and what does it represent?
2. What is the slope of the straight line, and what does it represent? (See Exer-

cise 46.)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

4.1 COMPOUND INTEREST

191

APPLIED EXAMPLE 2 Trust Funds An amount of $2000 is invested in a 
10-year trust fund that pays 6% annual simple interest. What is the 

total amount of the trust fund at the end of 10 years?

Solution The total amount of the trust fund at the end of 10 years is given by

A ⫽ P11 ⫹ rt2
 ⫽ 200031 ⫹ 10.06211024 ⫽ 3200

or $3200.

A  Treasury  Bill  (T-Bill)  is  a  short-term  debt  obligation  (less  than  or  equal  to 
1 year) backed by the U.S. government. Rather than paying fixed interest payments,
T-Bills  are  sold  at  a  discount  from  face  value.  The  appreciation  of  a  T-Bill  (face 
value minus purchase price) provides the investment return to the holder.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 3 T-Bills Suppose that Jane buys a 26-week T-Bill 
with a maturity value of $10,000. If she pays $9850 for the T-Bill, what 

will be the rate of return on her investment?

Solution We use Formula (1b) with 
obtain

A ⫽ 10,000, P ⫽ 9850, and t ⫽ 26
52

⫽ 1
2

. We

Solving for r, we find

 10,000 ⫽ 9850a 1 ⫹ 1

rb
2
 ⫽ 9850 ⫹ 4925r

 4925r ⫽ 150
 r ⫽ 150
4925

⬇ 0.0305

So Jane’s investment will earn simple interest at the rate of approximately 3.05%
per year.

Compound Interest
In contrast to simple interest, compound interest is earned interest that is periodically
added to the principal and thereafter itself earns interest at the same rate. To find a for-
mula for the accumulated amount, let’s consider a numerical example. Suppose $1000
(the principal) is deposited in a bank for a term of 3 years, earning interest at the rate
of  8%  per  year  (called  the  nominal, or  stated, rate)  compounded  annually.  Then,
using Formula (1b) with P ⫽ 1000, r ⫽ 0.08, and t ⫽ 1, we see that the accumulated
amount A1 at the end of the first year is

A1 ⫽ P11 ⫹ rt2
 ⫽ 100031 ⫹ 10.0821124 ⫽ 100011.082 ⫽ 1080

or $1080.

To find the accumulated amount A2 at the end of the second year, we use Formula
(1b) once again, this time with P ⫽ A1. (Remember, the principal and interest now
earn interest over the second year.) We obtain

A2 ⫽ P11 ⫹ rt2 ⫽ A111 ⫹ rt2
 ⫽ 100031 ⫹ 0.08112431 ⫹ 0.081124
 ⫽ 100031 ⫹ 0.084 2 ⫽ 100011.082 2 ⫽ 1166.40

or $1166.40.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

192

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

Finally, the accumulated amount A3 at the end of the third year is found using (1b)

with P ⫽ A2, giving

A3 ⫽ P11 ⫹ rt2 ⫽ A211 ⫹ rt2
 ⫽ 100031 ⫹ 0.081124 231 ⫹ 0.081124
 ⫽ 100031 ⫹ 0.084 3 ⫽ 100011.082 3 ⬇ 1259.71

or approximately $1259.71.

If you reexamine our calculations, you will see that the accumulated amounts at

the end of each year have the following form.

First year:
Second year:
Third year:

A1 ⫽ 100011 ⫹ 0.082, or A1 ⫽ P11 ⫹ r2
A2 ⫽ 100011 ⫹ 0.082 2, or A2 ⫽ P11 ⫹ r2 2
A3 ⫽ 100011 ⫹ 0.082 3, or A3 ⫽ P11 ⫹ r2 3

These observations suggest the following general result: If P dollars is invested over
a term of t years, earning interest at the rate of r per year compounded annually, then
the accumulated amount is

A ⫽ P11 ⫹ r2 t

(2)

Equation  (2)  was  derived  under  the  assumption  that  interest  was  compounded
annually. In practice, however, interest is usually compounded more than once a year.
The interval of time between successive interest calculations is called the conversion
period.

If interest at a nominal rate of r per year is compounded m times a year on a prin-

cipal of P dollars, then the simple interest rate per conversion period is 

i ⫽

r
m

Annual interest rate

Periods per year

For example, if the nominal interest rate is 8% per year (r ⫽ 0.08) and interest is com-
pounded quarterly (m ⫽ 4), then

i ⫽

r
m

⫽ 0.08
4

⫽ 0.02

or 2% per period.

To find a general formula for the accumulated amount when a principal of P dol-
lars is deposited in a bank for a term of t years and earns interest at the (nominal) rate
of r per year compounded m times per year, we proceed as before, using Formula (1b)
repeatedly with the interest rate i ⫽ . We see that the accumulated amount at the end
of each period is as follows:

r
m

First period:
Second period:
Third period:

o

nth period:

A1 ⫽ P11 ⫹ i2
A2 ⫽ A111 ⫹ i2  ⫽ 3P11 ⫹ i2411 ⫹ i2 ⫽ P11 ⫹ i2 2
A3 ⫽ A211 ⫹ i2  ⫽ 3P11 ⫹ i2 2411 ⫹ i2 ⫽ P11 ⫹ i2 3
An ⫽ An⫺111 ⫹ i2 ⫽ 3P11 ⫹ i2 n⫺1411 ⫹ i2 ⫽ P11 ⫹ i2 n

o

There  are  n ⫽ mt periods  in  t years  (number  of  conversion  periods  per  year 
times the term in years). Hence, the accumulated amount at the end of t years is
given by

A ⫽ P11 ⫹ i2 n

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Compound Interest Formula (Accumulated Amount)

A ⫽ P11 ⫹ i2 n

where 

i ⫽

r
m

, n ⫽ mt,

and

4.1 COMPOUND INTEREST

193

(3)

A ⫽ Accumulated amount at the end of n conversion periods
P ⫽ Principal
r ⫽ Nominal interest rate per year
m ⫽ Number of conversion periods per year
t ⫽ Term (number of years)

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
Let A1(t) denote the accumulated amount of $100 earning simple interest at the rate
of 6% per year over t years, and let A2(t) denote the accumulated amount of $100
earning interest at the rate of 6% per year compounded monthly over t years.
1. Find expressions for A1(t) and A2(t).
2. Use a graphing utility to plot the graphs of A1 and A2 on the same set of axes,

using the viewing window [0, 20] ⫻ [0, 400].

3. Comment on the growth of A1(t) and A2(t) by referring to the graphs of A1 and A2.

EXAMPLE 4 Find the accumulated amount after 3 years if $1000 is invested at 8%
per year compounded (a) annually, (b) semiannually, (c) quarterly, (d) monthly, and
(e) daily (assume a 365-day year).

Solution
a. Here, P ⫽ 1000, r ⫽ 0.08, and m ⫽ 1. Thus, i ⫽ r ⫽ 0.08 and n ⫽ 3, so 

Formula (3) gives

A ⫽ 100011 ⫹ 0.082 3
 ⬇ 1259.71

or $1259.71.

b. Here, P ⫽ 1000, r ⫽ 0.08, and m ⫽ 2. Thus, 

mula (3) gives

i ⫽ 0.08
2

and n ⫽ (3)(2) ⫽ 6, so For-

2 b 6
A ⫽ 1000a 1 ⫹ 0.08
 ⬇ 1265.32

or $1265.32.

c. In this case, P ⫽ 1000, r ⫽ 0.08, and m ⫽ 4. Thus, 

so Formula (3) gives

i ⫽ 0.08
4

and n ⫽ (3)(4) ⫽ 12,

A ⫽ 1000a 1 ⫹ 0.08
 ⬇ 1268.24

4 b 12

or $1268.24.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

194

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

d. Here, P ⫽ 1000, r ⫽ 0.08, and m ⫽ 12. Thus, 

so Formula (3) gives

i ⫽ 0.08
12

and n ⫽ (3)(12) ⫽ 36, 

A ⫽ 1000a 1 ⫹ 0.08
 ⬇ 1270.24

12 b 36

or $1270.24. 

e. Here, P ⫽ 1000, r ⫽ 0.08, m ⫽ 365, and t ⫽ 3. Thus, 

i ⫽ 0.08
365

and 

n ⫽ (3)(365) ⫽ 1095, so Formula (3) gives

A ⫽ 1000a 1 ⫹ 0.08
 ⬇ 1271.22

365 b 1095

or $1271.22. These results are summarized in Table 1.

TABLE 1

Nominal
Rate, r

8%
8
8
8
8

Conversion

Period

Interest Rate/

Initial

Conversion Period

Investment

Accumulated

Amount

Annually (m ⫽ 1)
Semiannually (m ⫽ 2)
Quarterly (m ⫽ 4)
Monthly (m ⫽ 12)
Daily (m ⫽ 365)

8%
4
2

2>3
8>365%

$1000
1000
1000
1000
1000

$1259.71
1265.32
1268.24
1270.24
1271.22

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
Investments that are allowed to grow over time can increase in value surprisingly
fast. Consider the potential growth of $10,000 if earnings are reinvested. More
specifically, suppose A1(t), A2(t), A3(t), A4(t), and A5(t) denote the accumulated
values of an investment of $10,000 over a term of t years and earning interest at
the rate of 4%, 6%, 8%, 10%, and 12% per year compounded annually.
1. Find expressions for A1(t), A2(t), . . . , A5(t).
2. Use a graphing utility to plot the graphs of A1, A2, . . . , A5 on the same set of

axes, using the viewing window [0, 20] ⫻ [0, 100,000].

3. Use TRACE to find A1(20), A2(20), . . . , A5(20) and then interpret your results.

Continuous Compounding of Interest
One question that arises naturally in the study of compound interest is: What happens
to the accumulated amount over a fixed period of time if the interest is computed more
and more frequently?

Intuition suggests that the more often interest is compounded, the larger the accu-
mulated  amount  will  be.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  results  of  Example  4,  where  we
found that the accumulated amounts did in fact increase when we increased the num-
ber of conversion periods per year.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.1 COMPOUND INTEREST

195

This leads us to another question: Does the accumulated amount keep growing
without bound, or does it approach a fixed number when the interest is computed more
and more frequently over a fixed period of time?

To answer this question, let’s look again at the compound interest formula:

A ⫽ P11 ⫹ i2 n ⫽ Pa 1 ⫹

r

mb mt

(4)

Recall that m is the number of conversion periods per year. So to find an answer to
our question, we should let m get larger and larger in Formula (4). If we let 
so
that m ⫽ ru, then (4) becomes

u ⫽ m
r

ub urt
A ⫽ Pa 1 ⫹ 1
ub ud rt
 ⫽ Pc a 1 ⫹ 1

r
m

⫽ 1
u

Since a xy ⫽ 1a x2 y

Now observe that u gets larger and larger as m gets larger and larger. But from

our work in Section 3.1, we know that (1 ⫹ 1>u)u approaches e as u gets larger and
larger. Using this result, we can see that, as m gets larger and larger, A approaches
P(e)rt ⫽ Pert. In this situation, we say that interest is compounded continuously. Let’s
summarize this important result.

Continuous Compound Interest Formula

A ⫽ Pert

(5)

where
P ⫽ Principal
r ⫽ Nominal interest rate compounded continuously
t ⫽ Time in years
A ⫽ Accumulated amount at the end of t years

EXAMPLE 5 Find the accumulated amount after 3 years if $1000 is invested at 8%
per year compounded (a) daily (assume a 365-day year) and (b) continuously.

Solution
a. Use Formula (3) with P ⫽ 1000, r ⫽ 0.08, m ⫽ 365, and t ⫽ 3. Thus, i ⫽

and n ⫽ (365)(3) ⫽ 1095, so

0.08
365

A ⫽ 1000a 1 ⫹ 0.08

365 b1095

⬇ 1271.22

or $1271.22.

b. Here, we use Formula (5) with P ⫽ 1000, r ⫽ 0.08, and t ⫽ 3, obtaining

A ⫽ 1000e10.082132
 ⬇ 1271.25

or $1271.25.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

196

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

Observe  that  the  accumulated  amounts  corresponding  to  interest  compounded
daily and interest compounded continuously differ by very little. The continuous com-
pound interest formula is a very important tool in theoretical work in financial analysis.

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
In the opening paragraph of Section 3.1, we pointed out that the accumulated
amount of an account earning interest compounded continuously will eventually
outgrow  by  far  the  accumulated  amount  of  an  account  earning  interest  at  the
same nominal rate but earning simple interest. Illustrate this fact using the fol-
lowing example.

Suppose you deposit $1000 in Account I, earning interest at the rate of 10%
per year compounded continuously so that the accumulated amount at the end
of t years is A1(t) ⫽ 1000e0.1t. Suppose you also deposit $1000 in Account II,
earning simple interest at the rate of 10% per year so that the accumulated
amount at the end of t years is A2(t) ⫽ 1000(1 ⫹ 0.1t). Use a graphing utility
to  sketch  the  graphs  of  the  functions  A1 and  A2 in  the  viewing  window 
[0, 20] ⫻ [0, 10,000] to see the accumulated amounts A1(t) and A2(t) over a
20-year period.

Effective Rate of Interest
Examples 4 and 5 showed that the interest actually earned on an investment depends
on the frequency with which the interest is compounded. Thus, the stated, or nominal,
rate of 8% per year does not reflect the actual rate at which interest is earned. This sug-
gests that we need to find a common basis for comparing interest rates. One such way
of comparing interest rates is provided by the use of the effective rate. The effective
rate is the simple interest rate that would produce the same accumulated amount in 
1 year as the nominal rate compounded m times a year. The effective rate is also called
the annual percentage yield, often abbreviated APY.

To derive a relationship between the nominal interest rate, r per year compounded
m times, and its corresponding effective rate, R per year, let’s assume an initial invest-
ment of P dollars. Then the accumulated amount after 1 year at a simple interest rate
of R per year is

A ⫽ P11 ⫹ R2

Also, the accumulated amount after 1 year at an interest rate of r per year compounded
m times a year is

A ⫽ P11 ⫹ i2 n ⫽ Pa 1 ⫹

r

mb m

Since 

i ⫽

r
m

and t ⫽ 1

Equating the two expressions gives

P11 ⫹ R2 ⫽ Pa 1 ⫹
 1 ⫹ R ⫽ a 1 ⫹

r

r

mb m
mb m

Divide both sides by P.

If we solve the preceding equation for R, we obtain the following formula for com-
puting the effective rate of interest.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.1 COMPOUND INTEREST

197

Effective Rate of Interest Formula

reff ⫽ a 1 ⫹ r

mb m

⫺ 1

(6)

where
reff ⫽ Effective rate of interest

r ⫽ Nominal interest rate per year
m ⫽ Number of conversion periods per year

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 6 Find the effective rate of interest corresponding to a nominal rate of
8% per year compounded (a) annually, (b) semiannually, (c) quarterly, (d) monthly,
and (e) daily.

Solution

a. The effective rate of interest corresponding to a nominal rate of 8% per year
compounded annually is, of course, given by 8% per year. This result is also 
confirmed by using Formula (6) with r ⫽ 0.08 and m ⫽ 1. Thus,

b. Let r ⫽ 0.08 and m ⫽ 2. Then Formula (6) yields

reff ⫽ 11 ⫹ 0.082 ⫺ 1 ⫽ 0.08

⫺ 1

2 b 2
reff ⫽ a 1 ⫹ 0.08
 ⫽ 11.042 2 ⫺ 1
 ⫽ 0.0816

so the effective rate is 8.16% per year.

c. Let r ⫽ 0.08 and m ⫽ 4. Then Formula (6) yields

⫺ 1

4 b 4
reff ⫽ a 1 ⫹ 0.08
 ⫽ 11.022 4 ⫺ 1
 ⬇ 0.08243

so the corresponding effective rate in this case is 8.243% per year.

d. Let r ⫽ 0.08 and m ⫽ 12. Then Formula (6) yields

reff ⫽ a 1 ⫹ 0.08
 ⬇ 0.08300

12 b 12

⫺ 1

so the corresponding effective rate in this case is 8.3% per year.

e. Let r ⫽ 0.08 and m ⫽ 365. Then Formula (6) yields

reff ⫽ a 1 ⫹ 0.08
 ⬇ 0.08328

365 b 365

⫺ 1

so the corresponding effective rate in this case is 8.328% per year.

Explore & Discuss
Recall the effective rate of inter-
est formula:

reff ⫽ a 1 ⫹

r

mb m

⫺ 1

1. Show that

r ⫽ m311  ⫹ reff21/m ⫺ 14

2. A certificate of deposit (CD)
is known to have an effective
rate of 5.3%. If interest is
compounded monthly, find
the nominal rate of interest
by using the result of part 1.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

198

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

If the effective rate of interest reff is known, then the accumulated amount after t
years on an investment of P dollars may be more readily computed by using the formula

A ⫽ P11 ⫹ reff2t

The 1968 Truth in Lending Act passed by Congress requires that the effective rate
of interest be disclosed in all contracts involving interest charges. The passage of this
act has benefited consumers because they now have a common basis for comparing
the  various  nominal  rates  quoted  by  different  financial  institutions.  Furthermore,
knowing the effective rate enables consumers to compute the actual charges involved
in  a  transaction.  Thus,  if  the  effective  rates  of  interest  found  in  Example  6  were
known, then the accumulated values of Example 4 could have been readily found (see
Table 2).

TABLE 2

Nominal
Rate, r

8%
8
8
8
8

Frequency of

Interest Payment

Annually
Semiannually
Quarterly
Monthly
Daily

Effective

Rate

8%
8.16
8.243
8.300
8.328

Initial

Investment

$1000
1000
1000
1000
1000

Accumulated Amount

after 3 Years

1000(1 ⫹ 0.08)3  ⬇ $1259.71
1000(1 ⫹ 0.0816)3 ⬇ 1265.32
1000(1 ⫹ 0.08243)3 ⬇ 1268.23
1000(1 ⫹ 0.08300)3 ⬇ 1270.24
1000(1 ⫹ 0.08328)3 ⬇ 1271.22

Present Value
Let’s return to the compound interest Formula (3), which expresses the accumulated
amount at the end of n periods when interest at the rate of r is compounded m times a
year. The principal P in (3) is often referred to as the present value, and the accumu-
lated value A is called the future value, since it is realized at a future date. In certain
instances,  an  investor  might  wish  to  determine  how  much  money  he  should  invest
now, at a fixed rate of interest, so that he will realize a certain sum at some future date.
This problem may be solved by expressing P in terms of A. Thus, from Formula (3), we
find

P ⫽ A11 ⫹ i2⫺n

Here, as before, i ⫽ , where m is the number of conversion periods per year.

r
m

Present Value Formula for Compound Interest

P ⫽ A11 ⫹ i2⫺n

(7)

EXAMPLE 7 How much money should be deposited in a bank paying interest at the
rate of 6% per year compounded monthly so that at the end of 3 years, the accumu-
lated amount will be $20,000?

Solution Here, r ⫽ 0.06 and m ⫽ 12, so 
the problem is to determine P given that A ⫽ 20,000. Using Formula (7), we obtain

and n ⫽ (3)(12) ⫽ 36. Thus, 

i ⫽ 0.06
12

P ⫽ 20,000a 1 ⫹ 0.06
 ⬇ 16,713

12 b ⫺36

or $16,713.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.1 COMPOUND INTEREST

199

EXAMPLE 8 Find the present value of $49,158.60 due in 5 years at an interest rate
of 10% per year compounded quarterly.

Solution Using Formula (7) with r ⫽ 0.1, m ⫽ 4, and t ⫽ 5 so that 
n ⫽ mt ⫽ (4)(5) ⫽ 20, and A ⫽ 49,158.6, we obtain

i ⫽ 0.1
4

, 

P ⫽ 149,158.62 a 1 ⫹ 0.1

4 b ⫺20

⬇ 30,000.07

or approximately $30,000.

If we solve Formula (5) for P, we have

P ⫽ Ae⫺rt

which gives the present value in terms of the future (accumulated) value for the case
of continuous compounding.

Present Value Formula for Continuous Compound Interest

P ⫽ Ae⫺rt

(8)

Using Logarithms to Solve Problems in Finance
The next two examples show how logarithms can be used to solve problems involv-
ing compound interest.

EXAMPLE 9 How long will it take $10,000 to grow to $15,000 if the investment
earns an interest rate of 12% per year compounded quarterly?

Solution Using Formula (3) with A ⫽ 15,000, P ⫽ 10,000, r ⫽ 0.12, and m ⫽ 4,
we obtain

15,000 ⫽ 10,000
11.0324t ⫽

15,000
10,000

a 1 ⫹ 0.12

4 b 4t

⫽ 1.5

Taking the logarithm on each side of the equation gives

ln(1.03)4t ⫽ ln 1.5
4t ln 1.03 ⫽ ln 1.5
ln 1.5
ln 1.03
ln 1.5

4t ⫽

t ⫽

4 ln 1.03

logb mn ⫽ n logb m

⬇ 3.43

So it will take approximately 3.4 years for the investment to grow from $10,000 to
$15,000.

EXAMPLE 10 Find the interest rate needed for an investment of $10,000 to grow to
an amount of $18,000 in 5 years if the interest is compounded monthly.

Solution Use Formula (3) with A ⫽ 18,000, P ⫽ 10,000, m ⫽ 12, and t ⫽ 5. 
Thus, i ⫽ and n ⫽ (12)(5) ⫽ 60, so

r
12

18,000 ⫽ 10,000 a 1 ⫹

r

12b 12152

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

200

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

Dividing both sides of the equation by 10,000 gives

or, upon simplification,

18,000
10,000

⫽

a 1 ⫹

r

12b 60

a 1 ⫹

r

12b 60

⫽ 1.8

Now we take the logarithm on each side of the equation, obtaining

ln

60 ln

ln

r

r

r

a 1 ⫹
a 1 ⫹
a 1 ⫹
a 1 ⫹

12b 60
12b
12b
12b

r

⫽ ln 1.8

⫽ ln 1.8

1
⫽ ᎏln
.8ᎏ ⬇ 0.009796
6
0

⬇ e0.009796

ln e x ⫽ x

⬇ 1.009844

and

r
12

⫽ 1.009844 ⫺ 1

r ⫽ 0.118128

or approximately 11.81% per year.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 11 Real Estate Investment Blakely Investment 
Company owns an office building located in the commercial district 
of a city. As a result of the continued success of an urban renewal program,
local business is enjoying a miniboom. The market value of Blakely’s 
property is

V1t2 ⫽ 300,000e1t/2

where V(t) is measured in dollars and t is the time in years from the present. If the
expected rate of appreciation is 9% per year compounded continuously for the next
10 years, find an expression for the present value P(t) of the market price of the
property that will be valid for the next 10 years. Compute P(7), P(8), and P(9),
and then interpret your results.

Solution Using Formula (8) with A ⫽ V(t) and r ⫽ 0.09, we find that the pres-
ent value of the market price of the property t years from now is

P1t2 ⫽ V1t2e⫺0.09t

 ⫽ 300,000e⫺0.09t⫹1t/2    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

Letting t ⫽ 7, 8, and 9, we find 

P172 ⫽ 300,000e⫺0.09172 ⫹17/2 ⬇ 599,837, or $599,837
P182 ⫽ 300,000e⫺0.09182 ⫹18/2 ⬇ 600,640, or $600,640
P192 ⫽ 300,000e⫺0.09192 ⫹19/2 ⬇ 598,115, or $598,115

respectively. From the results of these computations, we see that the present
value of the property’s market price seems to decrease after a certain period of

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.1 COMPOUND INTEREST

201

growth. This suggests that there is an optimal time for the owners to sell. Later
we will show that the highest present value of the property’s market value is
approximately $600,779 and that it occurs at time t ⬇ 7.72 years.

The  returns  on  certain  investments  such  as  zero  coupon  certificates  of  deposit
(CDs)  and  zero  coupon  bonds  are  compared  by  quoting  the  time  it  takes  for  each
investment to triple, or even quadruple. These calculations make use of the compound
interest Formula (3).

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 12 Investment Options Jane has narrowed her invest-
ment options down to two:

1. Purchase a CD that matures in 12 years and pays interest upon maturity at the

rate of 10% per year compounded daily (assume 365 days in a year).

2. Purchase a zero coupon CD that will triple her investment in the same period.

Which option will optimize Jane’s investment?

Solution Let’s compute the accumulated amount under option 1. Here,

r ⫽ 0.10

m ⫽ 365

t ⫽ 12

so n ⫽ 12(365) ⫽ 4380 and i ⫽ . The accumulated amount at the end of 
12 years (after 4380 conversion periods) is

0.10
365

A ⫽ Pa 1 ⫹ 0.10

365 b 4380

⬇ 3.32P

or $3.32P. If Jane chooses option 2, the accumulated amount of her investment
after 12 years will be $3P. Therefore, she should choose option 1.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 13 IRAs Moesha has an Individual Retirement
Account (IRA) with a brokerage firm. Her money is invested in a money
market mutual fund that pays interest on her investment. Over a 2-year period in
which no deposits or withdrawals were made, her account grew from $4500 to
$5268.24. Find the effective rate at which Moesha’s account was earning interest
over that period.

Solution Let reff denote the required effective rate of interest. We have

5268.24 ⫽ 450011 ⫹ reff22
11 ⫹ reff22 ⫽ 1.17072
1 ⫹ reff ⬇ 1.081998

Take the square root on both sides.

or reff ⬇ 0.081998. Therefore, the effective rate was 8.20% per year.

4.1 Self-Check Exercises

1. Find the present value of $20,000 due in 3 years at an inter-

est rate of 5.4%/year compounded monthly.

2. Paul is a retiree living on Social Security and the income
from his investment. Currently, his $100,000 investment in
a 1-year CD is yielding 4.6% interest compounded daily. If
he reinvests the principal ($100,000) on the due date of the

CD  in  another  1-year  CD  paying  3.2%  interest  com-
pounded daily, find the net decrease in his yearly income
from his investment. (Use a 365-day year.)

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 4.1 can be found on 
page 205.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

202

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

4.1 Concept Questions

1. Explain  the  difference  between  simple  interest  and  com-

3. What is the effective rate of interest?

pound interest.

2. What  is  the  difference  between  the  accumulated  amount

(future value) and the present value of an investment?

4.1 Exercises

1. Find  the  simple  interest  on  a  $500  investment  made  for 
2 years at an interest rate of 8%/year. What is the accumu-
lated amount?

2. Find the simple interest on a $1000 investment made for 
3 years at an interest rate of 5%/year. What is the accumu-
lated amount?

3. Find the accumulated amount at the end of 9 months on an
$800 deposit in a bank paying simple interest at a rate of
6%/year.

4. Find the accumulated amount at the end of 8 months on a
$1200  bank  deposit  paying  simple  interest  at  a  rate  of
7%/year.

5. If the accumulated amount is $1160 at the end of 2 years 
and  the  simple  rate  of  interest  is  8%/year,  what  is  the 
principal?

6. A bank deposit paying simple interest at the rate of 5%/year

grew to a sum of $3100 in 10 months. Find the principal.

7. How many days will it take for a sum of $1000 to earn $20
interest if it is deposited in a bank paying ordinary simple
interest at the rate of 3%/year? (Use a 365-day year.)

8. How many days will it take for a sum of $1500 to earn $25
interest if it is deposited in a bank paying 5%/year? (Use a
365-day year.)

9. A bank deposit paying simple interest grew from an initial
sum  of  $1000  to  a  sum  of  $1075  in  9  months.  Find  the
interest rate.

10. Determine  the  simple  interest  rate  at  which  $1200  will

grow to $1250 in 8 months.

In Exercises 11–20, find the accumulated amount A if the prin-
cipal P is invested at the interest rate of r/year for t years.
11. P ⫽ $1000, r ⫽ 7%, t ⫽ 8, compounded annually

12. P ⫽ $1000, r ⫽ %, t ⫽ 6, compounded annually

1
8 
2

13. P ⫽ $2500, r ⫽ 7%, t ⫽ 10, compounded semiannually

14. P ⫽ $2500, r ⫽ 9%, t ⫽

10  

15. P ⫽ $12,000, r ⫽ 8%, t ⫽

1
2,
10 

compounded semiannually

1
2,

compounded quarterly

16. P ⫽ $42,000, r ⫽ %, t ⫽ 8, compounded quarterly

7 

3
4

17. P ⫽ $150,000, r ⫽ 14%, t ⫽ 4, compounded monthly

18. P ⫽ $180,000, r ⫽ 9%, t ⫽ , compounded monthly
19. P ⫽ $150,000, r ⫽ 12%, t ⫽ 3, compounded daily
20. P ⫽ $200,000, r ⫽ 8%, t ⫽ 4, compounded daily

61
4

In Exercises 21–24, find the effective rate corresponding to the
given nominal rate.
21. 10%/year compounded semiannually

22. 9%/year compounded quarterly

23. 8%/year compounded monthly

24. 8%/year compounded daily

In  Exercises  25–28,  find  the  present  value  of  $40,000  due  in 
4 years at the given rate of interest.
25. 6%/year compounded semiannually

26. 8%/year compounded quarterly

27. 7%/year compounded monthly

28. 9%/year compounded daily

29. Find  the  accumulated  amount  after  4  years  if  $5000  is

invested at 8%/year compounded continuously.

30. Find  the  accumulated  amount  after  6  years  if  $6500  is

invested at 7%/year compounded continuously.

In Exercises 31–38, use logarithms to solve each problem.
31. How long will it take $5000 to grow to $6500 if the invest-
ment  earns  interest  at  the  rate  of  12%/year  compounded
monthly?

32. How  long  will  it  take  $12,000  to  grow  to  $15,000  if  the
investment  earns  interest  at  the  rate  of  8%/year  com-
pounded monthly?

33. How long will it take an investment of $2000 to double if
the investment earns interest at the rate of 9%/year com-
pounded monthly?

34. How long will it take an investment of $5000 to triple if the
investment  earns  interest  at  the  rate  of  8%/year  com-
pounded daily?

35. Find the interest rate needed for an investment of $5000 to
grow to an amount of $6000 in 3 years if interest is com-
pounded continuously.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

36. Find the interest rate needed for an investment of $4000 to
double in 5 years if interest is compounded continuously.

37. How  long  will  it  take  an  investment  of  $6000  to  grow 
to  $7000  if  the  investment  earns  interest  at  the  rate  of 
71
2

%/year compounded continuously?

38. How long will it take an investment of $8000 to double if
the investment earns interest at the rate of 8%/year com-
pounded continuously?

39. CONSUMER DECISIONS Mitchell has been given the option of
either paying his $300 bill now or settling it for $306 after
1 month (30 days). If he chooses to pay after 1 month, find
the simple interest rate at which he would be charged.

40. COURT JUDGMENT Jennifer  was  awarded  damages  of
$150,000  in a successful lawsuit she brought against her
employer 5 years ago. Interest (simple) on the judgment
accrues at the rate of 12%/year from the date of filing. If the
case were settled today, how much would Jennifer receive in
the final judgment?

41. BRIDGE LOANS To  help  finance  the  purchase  of  a  new
house,  the  Abdullahs  have  decided  to  apply  for  a  short-
term loan (a bridge loan) in the amount of $120,000 for a
term of 3 months. If the bank charges simple interest at the
rate  of  10%/year,  how  much  will  the  Abdullahs  owe  the
bank at the end of the term?

42. CORPORATE BONDS David  owns  $20,000  worth  of  10-year
bonds of Ace Corporation. These bonds pay interest every
6 months  at  the  rate  of  7%/year  (simple  interest).  How
much  income  will  David  receive  from  this  investment
every  6 months?  How  much  interest  will  David  receive
over the life of the bonds?

43. MUNICIPAL BONDS Maya  paid  $10,000  for  a  7-year  bond
issued by a city. She received interest amounting to $3500
over the life of the bonds. What rate of (simple) interest did
the bond pay?

44. TREASURY BILLS Isabella  purchased  $20,000  worth  of 
13-week  T-Bills  for  $19,875.  What  will  be  the  rate  of
return on her investment?

45. TREASURY BILLS Maxwell  purchased  $15,000  worth  of 
52-week  T-Bills  for  $14,650.  What  will  be  the  rate  of
return on his investment?

46. Write Equation (1b) in the slope-intercept form, and inter-
pret the meaning of the slope and the A-intercept in terms
of r and P.
Hint: Refer to Figure 1.

47. HOSPITAL COSTS If the cost of a semiprivate room in a hos-
pital was $580/day 5 years ago and it has risen at the rate
of 8%/year since that time, what rate would you expect to
pay for a semiprivate room today?

48. FAMILY FOOD EXPENDITURE Today  a  typical  family  of  four
spends $880/month for food. If inflation occurs at the rate of
3%/year over the next 6 years, how much should the typical
family of four expect to spend for food 6 years from now?

4.1 COMPOUND INTEREST

203

49. HOUSING APPRECIATION The  Kwans  are  planning  to  buy  a
house 4 years from now. Housing experts in their area have
estimated that the cost of a home will increase at a rate of
5%/year  during  that  period.  If  this  economic  prediction
holds true, how much can the Kwans expect to pay for a
house that currently costs $210,000?

50. ELECTRICITY CONSUMPTION A utility company in a western city
of the United States expects the consumption of electricity to
increase by 8%/year during the next decade, owing mainly to
the expected increase in population. If consumption does in-
crease at this rate, find the amount by which the utility com-
pany will have to increase its generating capacity in order to
meet the needs of the area at the end of the decade.

51. PENSION FUNDS The managers of a pension fund have in-
vested $1.5 million in U.S. government certificates of de-
posit that pay interest at the rate of 5.5%/year compounded
semiannually over a period of 10 years. At the end of this
period, how much will the investment be worth?

52. RETIREMENT FUNDS Five  and  a  half  years  ago,  Chris  in-
vested $10,000 in a retirement fund that grew at the rate of
10.82%/year  compounded  quarterly.  What  is  his  account
worth today?

53. MUTUAL FUNDS Jodie  invested  $15,000  in  a  mutual  fund
4 years ago. If the fund grew at the rate of 9.8%/year com-
pounded  monthly,  what  would  Jodie’s  account  be  worth
today?

54. TRUST FUNDS A  young  man  is  the  beneficiary  of  a  trust
fund  established  for  him  21  years ago  at  his  birth.  If  the
original amount  placed  in  trust  was  $10,000,  how  much
will he receive if the money has earned interest at the rate
of  8%/year compounded  annually?  Compounded  quar-
terly? Compounded monthly?

55. INVESTMENT PLANNING Find  how  much  money  should  be
deposited in a bank paying interest at the rate of 8.5%/year
compounded quarterly so that at the end of 5 years, the ac-
cumulated amount will be $40,000.

56. PROMISSORY NOTES An  individual  purchased  a  4-year,
$10,000 promissory note with an interest rate of 8.5%/year
compounded semiannually. How much did the note cost?

57. FINANCING A COLLEGE EDUCATION The parents of a child have
just come into a large inheritance and wish to establish a trust
fund for her college education. If they estimate that they will
need $100,000 in 13 years, how much should they set aside
in the trust now if they can invest the money at %/year com-
pounded (a) annually, (b) semiannually, and (c) quarterly?

81
2

58. INVESTMENTS Anthony invested a sum of money 5 years ago
in a savings account that has since paid interest at the rate
of 8%/year  compounded  quarterly.  His  investment  is  now
worth $22,289.22. How much did he originally invest?

59. RATE COMPARISONS In the last 5 years, Bendix Mutual Fund
grew  at  the  rate  of  10.4%/year  compounded  quarterly.
Over the same period, Acme Mutual Fund grew at the rate
of  10.6%/year  compounded  semiannually.  Which  mutual
fund has a better rate of return?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

204

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

60. RATE COMPARISONS Fleet Street Savings Bank pays interest
at the rate of 4.25%/year compounded weekly in a savings
account, whereas Washington Bank pays interest at the rate
of 4.125%/year  compounded  daily  (assume  a  365-day
year). Which bank offers a better rate of interest?

61. LOAN CONSOLIDATION The  proprietors  of  The  Coachmen
Inn secured two loans from Union Bank: one for $8000 due
in 3 years and one for $15,000 due in 6 years, both at an
interest rate of 10%/year compounded semiannually. The
bank has agreed to allow the two loans to be consolidated
into one loan payable in 5 years at the same interest rate.
What amount will the proprietors of the inn be required to
pay the bank at the end of 5 years?
Hint: Find the present value of the first two loans.

62. EFFECTIVE RATE OF INTEREST Find the effective rate of inter-
est  corresponding  to  a  nominal  rate  of  9%/year  com-
pounded annually, semiannually, quarterly, and monthly.

63. ZERO COUPON BONDS Juan is contemplating buying a zero
coupon bond that matures in 10 years and has a face value
of $10,000. If the bond yields a return of 5.25%/year com-
pounded annually, how much should Juan pay for the bond?

64. REVENUE GROWTH OF A HOME THEATER BUSINESS Maxwell
started a home theater business in 2008. The revenue of his
company for that year was $240,000. The revenue grew by
20% in 2009 and by 30% in 2010. Maxwell projected that
the revenue growth for his company in the next 3 years will
be at least 25%/year. How much did Maxwell expect his
minimum revenue to be for 2013?

65. ONLINE RETAIL SALES Online retail sales stood at $141.4 bil-
lion for the year 2004. For the next 2 years, they grew by
24.3%  and  14.0%  per  year,  respectively.  For  the  next 
3  years,  online  retail  sales  were  projected  to  grow  at
30.5%,  17.6%,  and  10.5%  per  year,  respectively.  What
were the projected online sales for 2009?
Source: Jupiter Research.

66. PURCHASING POWER The  U.S.  inflation  rates  for  2003
through  2006  are  1.6%,  2.3%,  2.7%,  and  3.4%,  re-
spectively. What was the purchasing power of a dollar at
the beginning of 2007 compared to that at the beginning of
2003?
Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

67. INVESTMENT OPTIONS Investment  A offers  a  10%  return
compounded  semiannually,  and  Investment  B offers  a
9.75%  return  compounded  continuously.  Which  invest-
ment has a higher rate of return over a 4-year period?

68. EFFECT OF INFLATION ON SALARIES Leonard’s current annual
salary is $45,000. Ten years from now, how much will he
need to earn to retain his present purchasing power if the
rate of inflation over that period is 3%/year compounded
continuously?

69. SAVING FOR COLLEGE Having  received  a  large  inheritance,
Jing-mei’s parents wish to establish a trust for her college

education.  If  7  years  from  now  they  need  an  estimated
$70,000, how much should they set aside in trust now, if
they  invest  the  money  at  10.5%/year  compounded  quar-
terly? Continuously?

70. PENSIONS Maria, who is now 50 years old, is employed by
a firm that guarantees her a pension of $40,000/year at age
65. What is the present value of her first year’s pension if
the inflation rate over the next 15 years is 6%/year com-
pounded  continuously?  8%/year  compounded  continu-
ously? 12%/year compounded continuously?

71. REAL ESTATE INVESTMENTS An investor purchased a piece of
waterfront  property.  Because  of  the  development  of  a
marina in the vicinity, the market value of the property is
expected to increase according to the rule

V1t2 ⫽ 80,000e1t/2

where V(t) is measured in dollars and t is the time (in years)
from the present. If the rate of appreciation is expected to
be 9%/year compounded continuously for the next 8 years,
find an expression for the present value P(t) of the prop-
erty’s market price valid for the next 8 years. What is P(t)
expected to be in 4 years?

72. The simple interest formula A ⫽ P(1 ⫹ rt) [Equation (1b)]
can  be  written  in  the  form  A ⫽ Prt ⫹ P,  which  is  the 
slope-intercept  form  of  a  straight  line  with  slope  Pr and 
A-intercept P.
a. Describe the family of straight lines obtained by keep-
ing the value of r fixed and allowing the value of P to
vary. Interpret your results.

b. Describe the family of straight lines obtained by keep-
ing the value of P fixed and allowing the value of r to
vary. Interpret your results.

73. EFFECTIVE RATE OF INTEREST Suppose  an  initial  investment
of  $P grows  to  an  accumulated  amount  of  $A in  t years.
Show that the effective rate (annual effective yield) is 

reff ⫽ (A>P)1/t ⫺ 1

Use  the  formula  given  in  Exercise  73  to  solve  Exercises
74–78.

74. EFFECTIVE RATE OF INTEREST Martha  invested  $40,000  in  a
boutique  5  years  ago.  Her  investment  is  worth  $70,000
today. What is the effective rate (annual effective yield) of
her investment?

75. HOUSING APPRECIATION Georgia purchased a house in January
2000 for $200,000. In January 2006, she sold the house and
made a net profit of $56,000. Find the effective annual rate of
return on her investment over the 6-year period.

76. COMMON STOCK TRANSACTION Steven purchased 1000 shares
of a certain stock for $25,250 (including commissions). He
sold  the  shares  2  years  later  and  received  $32,100  after
deducting  commissions.  Find  the  effective  annual  rate  of
return on his investment over the 2-year period.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

77. ZERO COUPON BONDS Nina purchased a zero coupon bond
for $6724.53. The bond matures in 7 years and has a face
value of $10,000. Find the effective annual rate of interest
for the bond.
Hint: Assume  that  the  purchase  price  of  the  bond  is  the  initial
investment and that the face value of the bond is the accumulated
amount.

78. MONEY MARKET MUTUAL FUNDS Carlos invested $5000 in a
money  market  mutual  fund  that  pays  interest  on  a  daily
basis. The balance in his account at the end of 8 months 
(245 days) was $5170.42. Find the effective rate at which
Carlos’s account earned interest over this period (assume a
365-day year).

4.1 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. Using Formula (7) with A ⫽ 20,000, r ⫽ 0.054, m ⫽ 12,
and n ⫽ (3)(12) ⫽ 36,

and t ⫽ 3 so that i ⫽
we find the required present value to be

⫽ 0.0045

0.054

12

P ⫽ 20,00011 ⫹ 0.00452 ⫺36 ⬇ 17,015.01

or $17,015.01.

2. The  accumulated  amount  of  Paul’s  current  investment  is
found by using Formula (3) with P ⫽ 100,000, r ⫽ 0.046,
and m ⫽ 365. Thus, i ⫽
and n ⫽ 365, so the required
accumulated amount is given by

0.046
365

4.1 COMPOUND INTEREST

205

In Exercises 79–82, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
79. When simple interest is used, the accumulated amount is a

linear function of t.

80. If interest is compounded annually, then the accumulated
amount after t years is the same as the accumulated amount
under simple interest over t years.

81. If interest is compounded annually, then the effective rate

is the same as the nominal rate.

82. Susan’s salary increased from $50,000/year to $60,000/year
over a 4-year period. Therefore, Susan received annual in-
creases of 5% over that period.

A1 ⫽ 100,000a 1 ⫹ 0.046

365 b 365

⬇ 104,707.14

or $104,707.14. Next, we compute the accumulated amount
of  Paul’s  reinvestment.  Using  (3)  with  P ⫽ 100,000, 
r ⫽ 0.032, and m ⫽ 365 so that i ⫽
and n ⫽ 365, we find
the required accumulated amount in this case to be

0.032
365

A2 ⫽ 100,000a 1 ⫹ 0.032

365 b 365

⬇ 103,251.61

or approximately $103,251.61. Therefore, Paul can expect
to experience a net decrease in yearly income of approxi-
mately 104,707.14 ⫺ 103,251.61, or $1455.53.

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Finding the Accumulated Amount of an Investment, 
the Effective Rate of Interest, and the Present Value 
of an Investment

Graphing Utility
Some graphing utilities have built-in routines for solving problems involving the math-
ematics of finance. For example, the TI-83/84 TVM SOLVER function incorporates sev-
eral functions that can be used to solve the problems that are encountered in Sections
4.1–4.3. To access the TVM SOLVER on the TI-83, press 
, and
.  To  access  the  TVM  Solver  on  the  TI-83  plus  and  the 
then  select 
TI-84, press 
. Step-by-step
1: Finance
procedures for using these functions can be found on CourseMate.

1: TVM Solver
, press 
APPS

, and then select 

1: TVM Solver

FINANCE

, press 

2nd

EXAMPLE 1 Finding the Accumulated Amount of an Investment Find the accumu-
lated amount after 10 years if $5000 is invested at a rate of 10% per year com-
pounded monthly.

Note: Boldfaced words/characters enclosed in a box (for example, 
required. Words/characters printed blue (for example, Chart sub-type:) indicate words/characters appearing on the screen. 

) indicate that an action (click, select, or press) is

Enter

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(continued)

206

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

N=120
I%=10
PV=-5000
PMT=0
FV=13535.20745
P/Y=12
C/Y=12
PMT:END BEGIN

FIGURE T1
The TI-83/84 screen showing the future
value (FV) of an investment 

Solution Using the TI-83/84 TVM SOLVER with the following inputs,

N ⫽ 120
I% ⫽ 10
PV ⫽ ⫺5000

(10)(12)

Recall that an investment is an outflow.

PMT ⫽ 0
FV ⫽ 0
P/Y ⫽ 12
C/Y ⫽ 12
PMT:END BEGIN

The number of payments each year

The number of conversion periods each year

we obtain the display shown in Figure T1. We conclude that the required accumu-
lated amount is $13,535.21.

Eff(10,4)

10.38128906

EXAMPLE 2 Finding the Effective Rate of Interest Find the effective rate of interest
corresponding to a nominal rate of 10% per year compounded quarterly.

FIGURE T2
The TI-83/84 screen showing the effective
rate of interest (Eff)

Solution Here we use the Eff function of the TI-83/84 calculator to obtain the
result shown in Figure T2. The required effective rate is approximately 10.38% per
year.

EXAMPLE 3 Finding the Present Value of an Investment Find the present value of
$20,000 due in 5 years if the interest rate is 7.5% per year compounded daily.

Solution Using the TI-83/84 TVM SOLVER with the following inputs,

N ⫽ 1825

(5)(365)

I% ⫽ 7.5
PV ⫽ 0
PMT ⫽ 0

N=1825
I%=7.5
PV=-13746.3151
PMT=0
FV=20000
P/Y=365
C/Y=365
PMT:END BEGIN

FV ⫽ 20000
P/Y ⫽ 365
C/Y ⫽ 365
PMT:END BEGIN

The number of payments each year

The number of conversions each year

FIGURE T3
The TI-83/84 screen showing the present
value (PV) of an investment

we obtain the display shown in Figure T3. We see that the required present value is
approximately $13,746.32. Note that PV is negative because an investment is an out-
flow (money is paid out).

Excel
Excel has many built-in functions for solving problems involving the mathematics of
finance. Here we illustrate the use of the FV (future value), EFFECT (effective rate),
and PV (present value) functions to solve problems of the type that we have encoun-
tered in Section 4.1.

EXAMPLE 4 Finding the Accumulated Amount of an Investment Find the accumu-
lated amount after 10 years if $5000 is invested at a rate of 10% per year com-
pounded monthly.

Solution Here we are computing the future value of a lump-sum investment, so we
use the FV (future value) function. Click 
the Formulas tab and select 
(see Figure T4). In our example, the mouse cursor is in the edit box headed by Type,

from the Function Library on
. The Function Arguments dialog box will appear

Financial

FV

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

FIGURE T4
Excel’s dialog box for computing the
future value (FV) of an investment

so a definition of that term appears near the bottom of the box. Figure T4 shows the
entries for each edit box in our example.

4.1 COMPOUND INTEREST

207

Edit box

Deﬁnition of

function

Deﬁnition of

term

Note that the entry for Nper is given by the total number of periods for which

the investment earns interest. The Pmt box is left blank, since no money is added to
the original investment. The Pv entry is 5000. The entry for Type is a 1 because the
lump-sum payment is made at the beginning of the investment period. The answer,
⫺$13,535.21, is shown at the bottom of the dialog box. It is negative because an
investment is considered to be an outflow of money (money is paid out). (Click
OK

, and the answer will also appear on your spreadsheet.)

EXAMPLE 5 Finding the Effective Rate of Interest Find the effective rate of interest
corresponding to a nominal rate of 10% per year compounded quarterly.

Solution Here we use the EFFECT function to compute the effective rate of inter-
est. Accessing this function from the Financial function library subgroup and mak-
ing the required entries, we obtain the Function Arguments dialog box shown in Fig-
ure T5. The required effective rate is approximately 10.38% per year.

FIGURE T5
Excel’s dialog box for the effective rate of
interest function (EFFECT)

EXAMPLE 6 Finding the Present Value of an Investment Find the present value of
$20,000 due in 5 years if the interest rate is 7.5% per year compounded daily.

Solution We use the PV function to compute the present value of a lump-sum invest-
ment. Accessing this function as above and making the required entries, we obtain the
PV dialog box shown in Figure T6 (see next page). Once again, the Pmt edit box is left
blank, since no additional money is added to the original investment. The Fv entry is
20000. The answer is negative because an investment is considered to be an outflow 
of money (money is paid out). We deduce that the required amount is $13,746.32.

(continued)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

208

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

FIGURE T6
Excel dialog box for the present value
function (PV)

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

1. Find the accumulated amount A if $5000 is invested at the
interest rate of  %/year compounded monthly for 3 years.

5 

3
8

2. Find the accumulated amount A if $2850 is invested at the
interest rate of  %/year compounded monthly for 4 years.

6 

5
8

7. Find the effective rate corresponding to  %/year 

compounded monthly.

8. Find the effective rate corresponding to  %/year 

compounded quarterly.

3
9 
4

3
4 
8

3. Find the accumulated amount A if $327.35 is invested at

the interest rate of  %/year compounded daily for 7 years.

5 

9. Find the present value of $38,000 due in 3 years at 

%/year compounded quarterly.

4. Find the accumulated amount A if $327.35 is invested at

10. Find the present value of $150,000 due in 5 years at 

the interest rate of  %/year compounded daily for 8 years.

6 

%/year compounded monthly.

5. Find the effective rate corresponding to  %/year com-

8 

11. Find the present value of $67,456 due in 3 years at 

8 

1
4

9 

3
8

7 

7
8

1
3

7
8

pounded quarterly.

pounded monthly.

4.2 Annuities

6. Find the effective rate corresponding to  %/year com-

10 

2
3

5
8

%/year compounded monthly.

12. Find the present value of $111,000 due in 5 years at 

11 

5
8

%/year compounded monthly.

Future Value of an Annuity
An annuity is a sequence of payments made at regular time intervals. The time period
in which these payments are made is called the term of the annuity. Depending on
whether the term is given by a fixed time interval, a time interval that begins at a def-
inite date but extends indefinitely, or one that is not fixed in advance, an annuity is
called an annuity certain, a perpetuity, or a contingent annuity, respectively. In gen-
eral, the payments in an annuity need not be equal, but in many important applications
they are equal. In this section, we assume that annuity payments are equal. Examples
of annuities are regular deposits to a savings account, monthly home mortgage pay-
ments, and monthly insurance payments.

Annuities are also classified by payment dates. An annuity in which the payments
are made at the end of each payment period is called an ordinary annuity, whereas an
annuity in which the payments are made at the beginning of each period is called an

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

4.2 ANNUITIES

209

annuity due. Furthermore, an annuity in which the payment period coincides with the
interest conversion period is called a simple annuity, whereas an annuity in which the
payment period differs from the interest conversion period is called a complex annuity.
In this section, we consider ordinary annuities that are certain and simple, with
periodic payments that are equal in size. In other words, we study annuities that are
subject to the following conditions:
1. The terms are given by fixed time intervals.
2. The periodic payments are equal in size.
3. The payments are made at the end of the payment periods.
4. The payment periods coincide with the interest conversion periods.

To find a formula for the accumulated amount S of an annuity, suppose a sum of
$100 is paid into an account at the end of each quarter over a period of 3 years. Fur-
thermore, suppose the account earns interest on the deposit at the rate of 8% per year,
compounded quarterly. Then the first payment of $100 made at the end of the first
quarter  earns  interest  at  the  rate  of  8%  per  year  compounded  four  times  a  year  (or 
8/4 ⫽ 2% per quarter) over the remaining 11 quarters and therefore, by the compound
interest formula, has an accumulated amount of

100a 1 ⫹ 0.08

4 b 11

  or  10011 ⫹ 0.022 11

dollars at the end of the term of the annuity (Figure 2).

Payments

$100

$100

$100

$100

$100

$100

$100

Periods 0

1

2

3

9

10 

11 

12

Quarters

Accumulated
amounts
100
100 (1 + 0.02)
100 (1 + 0.02)2

(cid:129)
(cid:129)
(cid:129)

100 (1 + 0.02)9
100 (1 + 0.02)10
100 (1 + 0.02)11

FIGURE 2
The sum of the accumulated amounts is
the amount of the annuity.

The second payment of $100 made at the end of the second quarter earns interest
at  the  same  rate  over  the  remaining  10  quarters  and  therefore  has  an  accumulated
amount of 

10011 ⫹ 0.022 10

dollars at the end of the term of the annuity, and so on. The last payment earns no
interest because it is due at the end of the term. The amount of the annuity is obtained
by adding all the terms in Figure 2. Thus,

S ⫽ 100 ⫹ 100(1 ⫹ 0.02) ⫹ 100(1 ⫹ 0.02)2 ⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⫹100(1  ⫹ 0.02)11

The sum on the right is the sum of the first n terms of a geometric progression with
first term 100 and common ratio (1 ⫹ 0.02). We show in Section 4.4 that the sum S
can be written in the more compact form

S ⫽ 100c 11 ⫹ 0.022 12 ⫺ 1

0.02

 ⬇ 1341.21

d

or approximately $1341.21.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

210

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

To find a general formula for the accumulated amount S of an annuity, suppose
that a sum of $R is paid into an account at the end of each period for n periods and
that the account earns interest at the rate of i per period. Then, proceeding as we did
with the numerical example, we obtain

⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⫹

R11 ⫹ i2 n⫺1

 S ⫽ R ⫹ R11 ⫹ i2 ⫹  R11 ⫹ i2 2
 ⫽ Rc 11 ⫹ i2 n ⫺ 1

d

i

(9)

(read  “s angle  n
The  expression  inside  the  brackets  is  commonly  denoted  by 
at  i”)  and  is  called  the  compound-amount  factor. Extensive  tables  have  been 
constructed that give values of 
for different values of i and n (see, for example,
Table 1 on the CourseMate site). In terms of the compound-amount factor,

sn|i

sn|i

(10)
The  quantity  S in  Equations  (9)  and  (10)  is  realizable  at  some  future  date  and  is
accordingly called the future value of an annuity.

S ⫽ Rsn|i

Future Value of an Annuity
The future value S of an annuity of n payments of R dollars each, paid at the
end of each investment period into an account that earns interest at the rate of i
per period, is

S ⫽ Rc 11 ⫹ i2 n ⫺ 1

i

d

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 1 Find the amount of an ordinary annuity consisting of 12 monthly pay-
ments of $100 that earn interest at 12% per year compounded monthly.

Solution Since i is the interest rate per period and since interest is compounded
. Using Formula (9) with R ⫽ 100, 
monthly in this case, we have 
n ⫽ 12, and i ⫽ 0.01, we have

i ⫽ 0.12
12

⫽ 0.01

S ⫽ 100c 11.012 12 ⫺ 1

0.01

d

 ⬇ 1268.25

Use a calculator.

or $1268.25. The same result is obtained by observing that

S ⫽ 100s 12|0.01
 ⫽ 100112.68252
 ⫽ 1268.25

Use Table 1 from CourseMate.

Explore & Discuss
Future Value S of an Annuity Due
1. Consider an annuity satisfying conditions 1, 2, and 4 on page 209 but with condition 3
replaced by the condition that payments are made at the beginning of the payment peri-
ods. By using an argument similar to that used to establish Formula (9), show that the
future value S of an annuity due of n payments of R dollars each, paid at the beginning
of each investment into an account that earns interest at the rate of i per period, is

S ⫽ R11 ⫹ i2 c 11 ⫹ i2 n ⫺ 1

i

d

2. Use the result of part 1 to see how large your nest egg will be at age 65 if you start sav-
ing $4000 annually at age 30, assuming a 10% average annual return; if you start saving
at 35; if you start saving at 40. [Moral of the story: It is never too early to start saving!]

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.2 ANNUITIES

211

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
Refer to the preceding Explore & Discuss problem.
1. Show that if R ⫽ 4000 and i ⫽ 0.1, then S ⫽ 44,000[(1.1)n ⫺ 1]. Using a
graphing utility, plot the graph of f(x) ⫽ 44,000[(1.1)x ⫺ 1], using the view-
ing window [0, 40] ⫻ [0, 1,200,000].

2. Verify  the  results  of  part  1  by  evaluating  f(35),  f(30),  and  f(25)  using  the

EVAL function.

Present Value of an Annuity
In certain instances, you may want to determine the current value P of a sequence of
equal periodic payments that will be made over a certain period of time. After each
payment is made, the new balance continues to earn interest at some nominal rate. The
amount P is referred to as the present value of an annuity.

To derive a formula for determining the present value P of an annuity, we may
argue as follows. The amount P invested now and earning interest at the rate of i per
period will have an accumulated value of P(1 ⫹ i )n at the end of n periods. But this
must be equal to the future value of the annuity S given by Formula (9). Therefore,
equating the two expressions, we have

d
Multiplying both sides of this equation by (1 ⫹ i )⫺n gives

P11 ⫹ i2 n ⫽ Rc 11 ⫹ i2 n ⫺ 1

i

i

d

P ⫽ R11 ⫹ i2 ⫺nc 11 ⫹ i2 n ⫺ 1
 ⫽ Rc 11 ⫹ i2 n11 ⫹ i2 ⫺n ⫺ 11 ⫹ i2 ⫺n
 ⫽ Rc 1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ i2 ⫺n

d

i

i

d

11 ⫹ i2 n11 ⫹ i2 ⫺n ⫽ 1

 ⫽ Ran|i
(read “a angle n at i”) represents the expression inside the brack-
for different val-

where the factor 
ets. Extensive tables have also been constructed giving values of 
ues of i and n (see Table 1 on the CourseMate site).

an|i

an|i

Present Value of an Annuity
The present value P of an annuity consisting of n payments of R dollars each,
paid at the end of each investment period into an account that earns interest at
the rate of i per period, is

P ⫽ Rc 1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ i2 ⫺n

i

d

(11)

EXAMPLE 2 Find the present value of an ordinary annuity consisting of 
24 monthly payments of $100 each and earning interest at 9% per year com-
pounded monthly.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

212

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

Solution Here, R ⫽ 100,
we have

i ⫽ r
m

⫽ 0.09
12

⫽ 0.0075

, and n ⫽ 24, so by Formula (11),

P ⫽ 100c 1 ⫺ 11.00752 ⫺24

0.0075

 ⬇ 2188.91

d

or $2188.91. The same result may be obtained by using Table 1 from the CourseMate
site. Thus,

P ⫽ 100a 24|0.0075
 ⫽ 100121.88912
 ⫽ 2188.91

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 3 Saving for a College Education As a savings program
toward Alberto’s college education, his parents decide to deposit $100 at 
the end of every month into a bank account paying interest at the rate of 6% per
year compounded monthly. If the savings program began when Alberto was 
6 years old, how much money would have accumulated by the time he turns 18?

Solution By the time the child turns 18, the parents would have made 144 de-
posits into the account. Thus, n ⫽ 144. Furthermore, we have R ⫽ 100, r ⫽ 0.06,
and m ⫽ 12, so i ⫽
money that would have accumulated is given by

⫽ 0.005. Using Formula (9), we find that the amount of

0.06
12

S ⫽ 100c 11.0052 144 ⫺ 1

0.005

or $21,015.

 ⬇ 21,015

d

APPLIED EXAMPLE 4 Financing a Car After making a down payment of 
$6000 for an automobile, Murphy paid $600 per month for 36 months 

with interest charged at 6% per year compounded monthly on the unpaid balance.
What was the original cost of the car? What portion of Murphy’s total car pay-
ments went toward interest charges?

Solution The loan taken up by Murphy is given by the present value of the
annuity

P ⫽ 600c 1 ⫺ 11.0052 ⫺36

0.005

 ⬇ 19,723

d ⫽ 600a  36| 0.005

or $19,723. Therefore, the original cost of the automobile is $25,723 ($19,723
plus the $6000 down payment). The interest charges paid by Murphy are given
by (36)(600) ⫺ 19,723 ⫽ 1877, or $1877.

One important application of annuities arises in the area of tax planning. During
the  1980s,  Congress  created  many  tax-sheltered  retirement  savings  plans,  such  as 
Individual  Retirement  Accounts  (IRAs),  Keogh  plans,  and  Simplified  Employee 
Pension (SEP) plans. These plans are examples of annuities in which the individual is
allowed to make contributions (which are often tax deductible) to an investment ac-
count.  The  amount  of  the  contribution  is  limited  by  congressional  legislation.  The
taxes  on  the  contributions  and/or  the  interest  accumulated  in  these  accounts  are

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.2 ANNUITIES

213

deferred until the money is withdrawn—ideally during retirement, when tax brackets
should be lower. In the interim period, the individual has the benefit of tax-free growth
on his or her investment.

Suppose, for example, you are eligible to make a fully deductible contribution to
an  IRA  and  you  are  in  a  marginal  tax  bracket  of  28%.  Additionally,  suppose  you
receive a year-end bonus of $2000 from your employer and have the option of deposit-
ing the $2000 into either an IRA or a regular savings account, where both accounts
earn interest at an effective annual rate of 8% per year. If you choose to invest your
bonus in a regular savings account, you will first have to pay taxes on the $2000, leav-
ing $1440 to invest. At the end of 1 year, you will also have to pay taxes on the inter-
est earned, leaving you with

Accumulated

amount

⫺

Tax on
interest

⫽

Net

amount

1555.20 ⫺ 32.26 ⫽ 1522.94

or $1522.94.

On the other hand, if you put the money into the IRA, the entire sum will earn
interest,  and  at  the  end  of  1  year  you  will  have  (1.08)($2000),  or  $2160,  in  your
account. Of course, you will still have to pay taxes on this money when you withdraw
it, but you will have gained the advantage of tax-free growth of the larger principal
over  the  years.  The  disadvantage  of  this  option  is  that  if  you  withdraw  the  money
before you reach the age of 
, you will be liable for taxes on both your contributions
and the interest earned, and you will also have to pay a 10% penalty.

59 

1
2

Note In practice, the size of the contributions an individual might make to the vari-
ous retirement plans might vary from year to year. Also, he or she might make the con-
tributions at different payment periods. To simplify our discussion, we will consider
examples in which fixed payments are made at regular intervals.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 5 IRAs Caroline is planning to make a contribution of
$2000 on January 31 of each year into a traditional IRA earning interest at 

an effective rate of 5% per year. 
a. After she makes her 25th payment on January 31 of the year following her

retirement at age 65, how much will she have in her IRA?

b. Suppose that Caroline withdraws all of her money from her traditional IRA
after she makes her 25th payment in the year following her retirement at age
65 and that her investment is subjected to a tax of 28% at that time. How
much money will she end up with after taxes?

Solution

a. The amount of money Caroline will have after her 25th payment into her

account is found by using Formula (9) with R ⫽ 2000, r ⫽ 0.05, m ⫽ 1, and 
t ⫽ 25, so that i ⫽ ⫽ 0.05 and n ⫽ mt ⫽ 25. The required amount is given by

r
m

S ⫽ 2000c 11.052 25 ⫺ 1

0.05

d

 ⬇ 95,454.20

or $95,454.20.

b. If she withdraws the entire amount from her account, she will end up with 

11 ⫺ 0.282195,454.202 ⬇ 68,727.02

that is, she will have approximately $68,727.02  after paying taxes.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

214

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

After-tax-deferred annuities are another type of investment vehicle that allows an
individual  to  build  assets  for  retirement,  college  funds,  or  other  future  needs.  The
advantage gained in this type of investment is that the tax on the accumulated interest
is deferred to a later date. Note that in this type of investment, the contributions them-
selves are not tax deductible. At first glance, the advantage thus gained may seem to
be relatively inconsequential, but its true effect is illustrated by the next example.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 6 Investment Analysis Both Clark and Colby are
salaried individuals, 45 years of age, who are saving for their retirement

20 years from now. Both Clark and Colby are also in the 28% marginal tax
bracket. Clark makes a $1000 contribution annually on December 31 into a sav-
ings account earning an effective rate of 8% per year. At the same time, Colby
makes a $1000 annual payment to an insurance company for an after-tax-deferred
annuity. The annuity also earns interest at an effective rate of 8% per year.
(Assume that both men remain in the same tax bracket throughout this period,
and disregard state income taxes.)
a. Calculate how much each man will have in his investment account at the end

of 20 years.

b. Compute the interest earned on each account.
c. Show that even if the interest on Colby’s investment were subjected to a tax of
28% upon withdrawal of his investment at the end of 20 years, the net accumu-
lated amount of his investment would still be greater than that of Clark’s.

Solution

a. Because Clark is in the 28% marginal tax bracket, the net yield for his invest-

ment is (0.72)(8), or 5.76%, per year.

Using Formula (9) with R ⫽ 1000, r ⫽ 0.0576, m ⫽ 1, and t ⫽ 20, so that

i ⫽ 0.0576 and n ⫽ mt ⫽ 20, we see that Clark’s investment will be worth

S ⫽ 1000c 11 ⫹ 0.05762 20 ⫺ 1

0.0576

 ⬇ 35,850.49

d

or $35,850.49 at his retirement.

Colby has a tax-sheltered investment with an effective yield of 8% per

year. Using Formula (9) with R ⫽ 1000, r ⫽ 0.08, m ⫽ 1, and t ⫽ 20, so that
i ⫽ 0.08 and n ⫽ mt ⫽ 20, we see that Colby’s investment will be worth

S ⫽ 1000c 11 ⫹ 0.082 20 ⫺ 1

0.08

 ⬇ 45,761.96

d

or $45,761.96 at his retirement.

b. Each man will have paid 20(1000), or $20,000, into his account. Therefore,
the total interest earned in Clark’s account will be (35,850.49 ⫺ 20,000), or
$15,850.49, whereas the total interest earned in Colby’s account will be
(45,761.96 ⫺ 20,000), or $25,761.96.

c. From part (b) we see that the total interest earned in Colby’s account will be

$25,761.96. If it were taxed at 28%, he would still end up with (0.72)(25,761.96),
or $18,548.61. This is larger than the total interest of $15,850.49 earned by
Clark.

In  1997,  another  type  of  tax-sheltered  retirement  savings  plan  was  created  by
Congress: the Roth IRA. In contrast to traditional IRAs, contributions to Roth IRAs
are not tax-deferrable.  However, direct contributions to Roth IRAs (but not rollovers)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.2 ANNUITIES

215

may be withdrawn tax-free at any time. Also, holders of a Roth IRA are not required
to take minimum distributions after age 

70 

.

1
2

APPLIED EXAMPLE 7 Roth IRAs Refer to Example 5. Suppose that 
Caroline decides to invest her money in a Roth IRA instead of a traditional 
IRA. Also, suppose that she is in the 28% tax bracket and remains in that bracket
for the next 25 years until her retirement at age 65. If she pays taxes on $2000
and then invests the remaining $1440 into a Roth IRA earning interest at a rate of
5%/year, compounded annually, how much will she have in her Roth IRA after
her 25th payment on January 31 of the year following her retirement? (Disregard
state and city taxes.) How does this compare with the amount of money she
would have if she had stayed with a traditional IRA and withdrawn all of her
money from that account at that time? (See Example 5b.)

Solution We use Formula (9) with R ⫽ 1440, r ⫽ 0.05, and n ⫽ 25, obtaining

 S ⫽ 1440c 11.052 25 ⫺ 1

0.05

d

 ⬇ 68,727.02

that is, she will have approximately $68,727.02 in her account. This is the same
as the amount she ended up with in her traditional IRA after paying taxes (see
Example 5b).

4.2 Self-Check Exercises

1. Phyliss opened an IRA on January 31, 1996, with a contri-
bution of $2000. She plans to make a contribution of $2000
thereafter on January 31 of each year until her retirement
in the year 2015 (20 payments). If the account earns inter-
est at the rate of 8%/year compounded yearly, how much
will Phyliss have in her account when she retires?

assigns  its  royalty  income  of  $4800/month  for  the  next 
3 years from certain oil properties to the bank, with the first
payment  due  at  the  end  of  the  first  month.  If  the  bank
charges  interest  at  the  rate  of  9%/year  compounded
monthly,  what  is  the  amount  of  the  loan  negotiated
between the parties?

2. Denver Wildcatting Company has an immediate need for a
loan. In an agreement worked out with its banker, Denver

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 4.2 can be found on 
page 217.

4.2 Concept Questions

1. In an ordinary annuity, is the term fixed or variable? Are
the periodic payments all of the same size, or do they vary
in size? Are the payments made at the beginning or the end
of the payment period? Do the payment periods coincide
with the interest conversion periods?

2. What is the difference between an ordinary annuity and an

annuity due?

3. What is the future value of an annuity? Give an example.

4. What is the present value of an annuity? Give an example.

4.2 Exercises

In Exercises 1–8, find the amount (future value) of each ordinary
annuity.
1. $1000/year for 10 years at 10%/year compounded annually

2. $1500/semiannual  period  for  8  years  at  9%/year  com-

pounded semiannually

3. $1800/quarter for 6 years at 8%/year compounded quarterly

4. $500/semiannual  period  for  12  years  at  11%/year  com-

pounded semiannually

5. $600/quarter for 9 years at 12%/year compounded quarterly

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

216

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

6. $150/month for 15 years at 10%/year compounded monthly

7. $200/month for 

8. $100/week for 

20 
1
7 
2

years at 9%/year compounded monthly

1
4
years at 7.5%/year compounded weekly

In Exercises 9–14, find the present value of each ordinary annuity.
9. $5000/year for 8 years at 6%/year compounded annually

10. $1200/semiannual  period  for  6  years at  10%/year  com-

pounded semiannually

11. $4000/year for 5 years at 9%/year compounded yearly

12. $3000/semiannual  period  for  6  years at  11%/year  com-

pounded semiannually

13. $800/quarter for 7 years at 12%/year compounded quarterly

14. $150/month for 10 years at 8%/year compounded monthly

15. IRAS If a merchant deposits $1500 at the end of each tax
year in an IRA paying interest at the rate of 8%/year com-
pounded annually, how much will she have in her account
at the end of 20 years?

16. SAVINGS ACCOUNTS If Jackson deposits $100 at the end of
each month in a savings account earning interest at the rate
of 8%/year compounded monthly, how much will he have
on  deposit  in  his  savings  account  at  the  end  of  6  years,
assuming that he makes no withdrawals during that period?

17. SAVINGS ACCOUNTS Linda  has  joined  a  Christmas  Fund
Club  at  her  bank.  At  the  end  of  every  month,  December
through October inclusive, she will make a deposit of $40
in  her  fund.  If  the  money  earns  interest  at  the  rate  of
7%/year compounded monthly, how much will she have in
her account on December 1 of the following year?

18. KEOGH ACCOUNTS Robin,  who  is  self-employed,  con-
tributes $5000/year into a Keogh account. How much will
he have in the account after 25 years if the account earns
interest at the rate of 8.5%/year compounded yearly?

19. RETIREMENT PLANNING As  a  fringe  benefit  for  the  past 
12 years, Colin’s employer has contributed $100 at the end
of each  month  into  an  employee  retirement  account  for
Colin that pays interest at the rate of 7%/year compounded
monthly.  Colin  has  also  contributed  $2000  at  the  end  of
each of the last 8 years into an IRA that pays interest at the
rate of 9%/year compounded yearly. How much does Colin
have in his retirement fund at this time?

20. SAVINGS ACCOUNTS The Pirerras are planning to go to Europe
3 years from now and have agreed to set aside $150/month
for their trip. If they deposit this money at the end of each
month into a savings account paying interest at the rate of
8%/year compounded monthly, how much money will be in
their travel fund at the end of the third year?

21. INVESTMENT ANALYSIS Karen  has  been  depositing  $150  at
the  end  of  each  month  in  a  tax-free  retirement  account
since  she  was  25.  Matt,  who  is  the  same  age  as  Karen,
started depositing $250 at the end of each month in a tax-
free  retirement  account  when  he  was  35.  Assuming  that
both accounts have been and will be earning interest at the

rate  of  5%/year  compounded  monthly,  who  will  end  up
with the larger retirement account at the age of 65?

22. INVESTMENT ANALYSIS Luis  has  $150,000  in  his  retirement
account at his present company. Because he is assuming a
position  with  another  company,  Luis  is  planning  to  “roll
over”  his  assets  to  a  new  account.  Luis  also  plans  to  put
$3000/quarter  into  the  new  account  until  his  retirement 
20 years from now. If the new account earns interest at the
rate  of  8%/year  compounded  quarterly,  how  much  will
Luis have in his account at the time of his retirement?
Hint: Use the compound interest formula and the annuity formula.

23. AUTO LEASING The Betzes have leased an auto for 2 years
at  $450/month. If money is worth 9%/year compounded
monthly,  what  is  the  equivalent  cash  payment  (present
value) of this annuity?

24. AUTO FINANCING Lupé  made  a  down  payment  of  $8000
toward the purchase of a new car. To pay the balance of the
purchase price, she has secured a loan from her bank at the
rate of 12%/year compounded monthly. Under the terms of
her finance agreement, she is required to make payments of
$420/month for 36 months. What is the cash price of the car?

25. INSTALLMENT PLANS Mike’s Sporting Goods sells elliptical
trainers  under  two  payment  plans:  cash  or  installment.
Under the installment plan, the customer pays $22/month
over 3 years with interest charged on the balance at a rate
of 18%/year compounded monthly. Find the cash price for
an elliptical trainer if it is equivalent to the price paid by a
customer using the installment plan.

26. LOTTERY PAYOUTS A  state  lottery  commission  pays  the  win-
ner of  the  Million  Dollar  lottery  20  installments  of
$50,000/year.  The  commission  makes  the  first  payment  of
$50,000 immediately and the other n ⫽ 19 payments at the
end of each of the next 19 years. Determine how much money
the commission should have in the bank initially to guarantee
the payments, assuming that the balance on deposit with the
bank earns interest at the rate of 8%/year compounded yearly.
Hint: Find the present value of an annuity.

27. PURCHASING A HOME The Johnsons have accumulated a nest
egg of $40,000 that they intend to use as a down payment
toward the purchase of a new house. They have decided to
invest a minimum of $2400/month in monthly payments (to
take  advantage  of  tax  deductions)  toward  the  purchase  of
their house. However, because of other financial obligations,
their  monthly  payments  should  not  exceed  $3000.  If  local
mortgage  rates  are  7.5%/year  compounded  monthly  for  a
conventional  30-year  mortgage,  what  is  the  price  range  of
houses that they should consider?

28. PURCHASING A HOME Refer to Exercise 27. If local mortgage
rates fell to 7%/year compounded monthly, how would this
affect the price range of houses that the Johnsons should
consider?

29. PURCHASING A HOME Refer  to  Exercise  27.  If  the  Johnsons
decide  to  secure  a  15-year  mortgage  instead  of  a  30-year
mortgage, what is the price range of houses they should con-
sider when the local mortgage rate for this type of loan is 7%?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

30. SAVINGS PLAN Lauren  plans  to  deposit  $5000  into  a  bank
account  at  the  beginning  of  next  month  and  $200/month
into the same account at the end of that month and at the
end of each subsequent month for the next 5 years. If her
bank  pays  interest  at  the  rate  of  6%/year  compounded
monthly, how much will Lauren have in her account at the
end  of  5  years?  (Assume  that  she  makes  no  withdrawals
during the 5-year period.)

31. FINANCIAL PLANNING Joe plans to deposit $200 at the end of
each month into a bank account for a period of 2 years, after
which he plans to deposit $300 at the end of each month into
the same account for another 3 years. If the bank pays inter-
est at the rate of 6%/year compounded monthly, how much
will Joe have in his account by the end of 5 years? (Assume
that no withdrawals are made during the 5-year period.)

32. INVESTMENT ANALYSIS From  age  25  to  age  40,  Jessica  de-
posited $200 at the end of each month into a tax-free retire-
ment account. She made no withdrawals or further contri-
butions until age 65. Alex made deposits of $300 into his
tax-free retirement account from age 40 to age 65. If both
accounts  earned  interest  at  the  rate  of  5%/year  com-
pounded  monthly,  who  ends  up  with  a  bigger  nest  egg
upon reaching the age of 65?
Hint: Use  both  the  annuity  formula  and  the  compound  interest
formula.

33. ROTH IRAS Suppose  that  Jacob  deposits  $3000/year  for 
10  years  into  a  Roth  IRA  earning  interest  at  the  rate  of
6%/year, compounded annually. During the next 10 years,
he makes no withdrawals and no further contributions, but

4.2 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. The  amount  Phyliss  will  have  in  her  account  when  she
retires may be found by using Formula (9) with R ⫽ 2000,
r ⫽ 0.08, m ⫽ 1, and t ⫽ 20, so that i ⫽ r ⫽ 0.08 and n ⫽
mt ⫽ 20. Thus,

S ⫽ 2000c 11.082 20 ⫺ 1

0.08

d

 ⬇ 91,523.93

or $91,523.93.

4.2 ANNUITIES

217

the account continues to earn interest at the same rate. How
much will Jacob have in his retirement account at the end
of the 20-year period?

34. RETIREMENT PLANNING Suppose  that  Ramos  contributes
$5000/year  into  a  traditional  IRA  earning  interest  at  the
rate of 4%/year compounded annually, every year after age
35 until his retirement at age 65. At the same time, his wife
Vanessa  deposits  $3600/year  into  a  Roth  IRA  earning
interest  at  the  same  rate  as  that  of  Ramos  and  also  for  a
period of 30 years. Suppose that both Ramos and Vanessa
wish  to  withdraw  all  of  the  money  in  their  IRAs  at  the
time  of  their  retirement,  and  that  Ramos’s  investment  is
subjected to a tax of 30% at that time.
(a) After all due taxes are paid, who will have the larger

amount?

(b) How much larger will that amount be?

In Exercises 35 and 36, determine whether the statement is true
or  false.  If  it  is  true,  explain  why  it  is  true.  If  it  is  false,  give  an
example to show why it is false.
35. The  future  value  of  an  annuity  can  be  found  by  adding

together all the payments that are paid into the account.

36. If the future value of an annuity consisting of n payments
of  R dollars  each—paid  at  the  end  of  each  investment
period into an account that earns interest at the rate of i per
period—is S dollars, then

R ⫽

iS

11 ⫹ i2 n ⫺ 1

2. We want to find the present value of an ordinary annuity
consisting  of  36  monthly  payments  of  $4800  each  and
earning  interest  at  9%/year  compounded  monthly.  Using 
Formula (11) with R ⫽ 4800, m ⫽ 12, and t ⫽ 3, so that 
i ⫽ ⫽

⫽ 0.0075 and n ⫽ (12)(3) ⫽ 36, we find

r
m

0.09
12

P ⫽ 4800c 1 ⫺ 11.00752 ⫺36

0.0075

d ⬇ 150,944.67

or $150,944.67, the amount of the loan negotiated.

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Finding the Amount of an Annuity

Graphing Utility
As was mentioned in Using Technology, Section 4.1, the TI-83/84 can facilitate the
solution of problems in finance. We continue to exploit its versatility in this section.

EXAMPLE 1 Finding the Future Value of an Annuity Find the amount of an ordinary
annuity of 36 quarterly payments of $220 each that earn interest at the rate of 10%
per year compounded quarterly.

(continued)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

218

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

Solution We use the TI-83/84 TVM SOLVER with the following inputs:

N ⫽ 36
I% ⫽ 10
PV ⫽ 0

PMT ⫽ ⫺220

Recall that a payment is an outflow.

FV ⫽ 0
P/Y ⫽ 4
C/Y ⫽ 4
PMT:END BEGIN

The number of payments each year

The number of conversion periods each year

The result is displayed in Figure T1. We deduce that the desired amount is $12,606.31.

FIGURE T1
The TI-83/84 screen showing the future
value (FV) of an annuity

N=36
I%=10
PV=0
PMT=-220
FV=12606.31078
P/Y=4
C/Y=4
PMT:END BEGIN

EXAMPLE 2 Finding the Present Value of an Annuity Find the present value of an
ordinary annuity consisting of 48 monthly payments of $300 each and earning inter-
est at the rate of 9% per year compounded monthly.

Solution We use the TI-83/84 TVM SOLVER with the following inputs:

N ⫽ 48
I% ⫽ 9
PV ⫽ 0

PMT ⫽ ⫺300

A payment is an outflow.

FV ⫽ 0
P/Y ⫽ 12
C/Y ⫽ 12
PMT:END BEGIN

The number of payments each year

The number of conversion periods each year

The output is displayed in Figure T2. We see that the required present value of the
annuity is $12,055.43.

FIGURE T2
The TI-83/84 screen showing the present
value (PV) of an ordinary annuity

N=48
I%=9
PV=12055.43457
PMT=-300
FV=0
P/Y=12
C/Y=12
PMT:END BEGIN

Excel
Now we show how Excel can be used to solve financial problems involving annuities.

EXAMPLE 3 Finding the Future Value of an Annuity Find the amount of an ordinary
annuity of 36 quarterly payments of $220 each that earn interest at the rate of 10%
per year compounded quarterly.

Solution Here, we are computing the future value of a series of equal payments,
so we use the FV (future value) function. As before, we choose this function from

Note: Words/characters printed blue (for example, Chart sub-type:) indicate words/characters that appear on the screen.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

the Financial function library to obtain the Function Arguments dialog box. After
making each of the required entries, we obtain the dialog box shown in Figure T3.

4.2 ANNUITIES

219

FIGURE T3
Excel’s dialog box for the future value (FV)
of an annuity

Note that a 0 is entered in the Type edit box because payments are made at the end
of each payment period. Once again, the answer is negative because cash is paid out.
We deduce that the desired amount is $12,606.31.

EXAMPLE 4 Finding the Present Value of an Annuity Find the present value of an
ordinary annuity consisting of 48 monthly payments of $300 each and earning inter-
est at the rate of 9% per year compounded monthly.

Solution Here, we use the PV function to compute the present value of an annuity.
Accessing the PV (present value) function from the Financial function library and
making the required entries, we obtain the PV dialog box shown in Figure T4. We
see that the required present value of the annuity is $12,055.43.

FIGURE T4
Excel’s dialog box for computing the 
present value (PV) of an annuity

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

1. Find the amount of an ordinary annuity of 20 payments of

4. Find the amount of an ordinary annuity of $225/month for

$2500/quarter at  %/year compounded quarterly.

7 

6 years at  %/year compounded monthly.

7 

5
8

1
4

3
4

2. Find the amount of an ordinary annuity of 24 payments of

$1790/quarter at  %/year compounded quarterly.

8 

3. Find the amount of an ordinary annuity of $120/month for

5 years at  %/year compounded monthly.

6 

3
8

5. Find  the  present  value  of  an  ordinary  annuity  of
$4500/semiannual  period  for  5  years  earning  interest  at
9%/year compounded semiannually.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(continued)

220

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

6. Find  the  present  value  of  an  ordinary  annuity  of
$2100/quarter  for  7  years  earning  interest  at  %/year
compounded quarterly.

7 

1
8

7. Find the present value of an ordinary annuity of $245/month
for  6  years earning  interest  at  %/year  compounded
monthly.

8 

3
8

8. Find the present value of an ordinary annuity of $185/month
for  12  years earning  interest  at  %/year  compounded
monthly.

6 

5
8

9. ANNUITIES At  the  time  of  retirement,  Christine  expects  to
have a sum of $500,000 in her retirement account. Assum-

4.3 Amortization and Sinking Funds

ing  that  the  account  pays  interest  at  the  rate  of  5%/year
compounded  continuously,  her  accountant  pointed  out  to
her that if she made withdrawals amounting to x dollars per
year  (x ⬎ 25,000),  then  the  time  required  to  deplete  her
savings would be T years, where

T ⫽ f  1x2 ⫽ 20 lna

x

x ⫺ 25,000b     1x ⬎ 25,0002

a. Plot  the  graph  of  f,  using  the  viewing  window 

[25,000, 50,000] ⫻ [0, 100].

b. How much should Christine plan to withdraw from her
retirement account each year if she wants it to last for 
25 years?

Amortization of Loans
The annuity formulas derived in Section 4.2 may be used to answer questions involv-
ing the amortization of certain types of installment loans. For example, in a typical
housing  loan,  the  mortgagor  makes  periodic  payments  toward  reducing  his  or  her
indebtedness to the lender, who charges interest at a fixed rate on the unpaid portion
of the debt. In practice, the borrower is required to repay the lender in periodic install-
ments, usually of the same size and over a fixed term, so that the loan (principal plus
interest charges) is amortized at the end of the term.

By thinking of the monthly loan repayments R as the payments in an annuity, we
see that the original amount of the loan is given by P, the present value of the annu-
ity. From Equation (11), Section 4.2, we have

P ⫽ Rc 1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ i2 ⫺n

i

d ⫽ Ran|i

(12)

A question a financier might ask is: How much should the monthly installment be so
that a loan will be amortized at the end of the term of the loan? To answer this ques-
tion, we simply solve Equation (12) for R in terms of P, obtaining

R ⫽

Pi

1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ i2 ⫺n

⫽

P
an|i

Amortization Formula
The periodic payment R on a loan of P dollars to be amortized over n periods
with interest charged at the rate of i per period is

R ⫽

Pi

1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ i2 ⫺n

(13)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.3 AMORTIZATION AND SINKING FUNDS

221

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 1 Amortization Schedule A sum of $50,000 is to be
repaid over a 5-year period through equal installments made at the end of 
each year. If an interest rate of 8% per year is charged on the unpaid balance and
interest calculations are made at the end of each year, determine the size of each
installment so that the loan (principal plus interest charges) is amortized at the
end of 5 years. Verify the result by displaying the amortization schedule.

Solution Substituting P ⫽ 50,000, i ⫽ r ⫽ 0.08 (here, m ⫽ 1), and n ⫽ 5 into
Formula (13), we obtain

R ⫽ 150,000210.082
1 ⫺ 11.082 ⫺5

⬇ 12,522.82

giving the required yearly installment as $12,522.82.

The amortization schedule is presented in Table 3. The outstanding principal

at the end of 5 years is, of course, zero. (The figure of $0.01 in Table 3 is the
result of round-off errors.) Observe that initially the larger portion of the repay-
ment goes toward payment of interest charges, but as time goes by, more and
more of the payment goes toward repayment of the principal.

TABLE 3
An Amortization Schedule

End of
Period

0
1
2
3
4
5

Interest
Charged

—

$4,000.00
3,318.17
2,581.80
1,786.52
927.62

Financing a Home

Repayment

Made

—

$12,522.82
12,522.82
12,522.82
12,522.82
12,522.82

Payment
Toward
Principal

—

$ 8,522.82
9,204.65
9,941.02
10,736.30
11,595.20

Outstanding

Principal

$50,000.00
41,477.18
32,272.53
22,331.51
11,595.21
0.01

APPLIED EXAMPLE 2 Home Mortgage Payments The Blakelys borrowed
$120,000 from a bank to help finance the purchase of a house. The bank 

charges interest at a rate of 5.4% per year on the unpaid balance, with interest
computations made at the end of each month. The Blakelys have agreed to repay
the loan in equal monthly installments over 30 years. How much should each
payment be if the loan is to be amortized at the end of the term?

Solution Here, P ⫽ 120,000, 
, and n ⫽ (30)(12) ⫽ 360.
Using Formula (13), we find that the size of each monthly installment required is
given by

⫽ 0.0045

i ⫽ r
m

⫽ 0.054
12

R ⫽ 1120,000210.00452
1 ⫺ 11.00452 ⫺360
 ⬇ 673.84

or $673.84.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

222

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

APPLIED EXAMPLE 3 Home Equity Teresa and Raul purchased a house 
10 years ago for $200,000. They made a down payment of 20% of the 
purchase price and secured a 30-year conventional home mortgage at 6% per 
year compounded monthly on the unpaid balance. The house is now worth
$380,000. How much equity do Teresa and Raul have in their house now (after
making 120 monthly payments)?

Solution Since the down payment was 20%, we know that they secured a 
loan of 80% of $200,000, or $160,000. Furthermore, using Formula (13) with 
P ⫽ 160,000, 
and n ⫽ (30)(12) ⫽ 360, we determine that
their monthly installment is

⫽ 0.005

⫽ 0.06
12

i ⫽ r
m

R ⫽ 1160,000210.0052
1 ⫺ 11.0052 ⫺360
 ⬇ 959.28

or $959.28.

After 120 monthly payments have been made, the outstanding principal 
is given by the sum of the present values of the remaining installments (that 
is, 360 ⫺ 120 ⫽ 240 installments). But this sum is just the present value of 
an annuity with n ⫽ 240, R ⫽ 959.28, and i ⫽ 0.005. Using Formula (11), 
we find

P ⫽ 959.28c 1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ 0.0052 ⫺240

0.005

d

 ⬇ 133,897.04

or approximately $133,897. Therefore, Teresa and Raul have an equity of 
380,000 ⫺ 133,897, that is, $246,103.

Explore & Discuss and Exploring with Technology
1. Consider the amortization Formula (13):

R ⫽

Pi

1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ i2 ⫺n

Suppose you know the values of R, P, and n and you wish to determine i. Explain why
you can accomplish this task by finding the point of intersection of the graphs of the
functions

y1 ⫽ R  and  y2 ⫽

Pi

1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ i2 ⫺n

2. Thalia knows that her monthly repayment on her 30-year conventional home loan of

$150,000 is $1100.65 per month. Help Thalia determine the interest rate for her loan by
verifying or executing the following steps:
a. Plot the graphs of

y1 ⫽ 1100.65  and  y2 ⫽

150,000x

1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ x2 ⫺360

using the viewing window [0, 0.01] ⫻ [0, 1200].

b. Use the ISECT (intersection) function of the graphing utility to find the point of inter-

section of the graphs of part (a). Explain why this gives the value of i.

c. Compute r from the relationship r ⫽ 12i.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.3 AMORTIZATION AND SINKING FUNDS

223

Explore & Discuss and Exploring with Technology
1. Suppose you secure a home mortgage loan of $P with an interest rate of r per year to be

amortized over t years through monthly installments of $R. Show that after N install-
ments, your outstanding principal is given by

B1N2 ⫽ Pc 11 ⫹ i2 n ⫺ 11 ⫹ i2 N
11 ⫹ i2 n ⫺ 1
d

B1N2 ⫽ Rc 1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ i2 ⫺n⫹N

i

d

10 ⱕ N ⱕ n2

Hint:

. To see this, study Example 3, page 222. Replace R using 

Formula (13).

2. Refer to Example 3, page 222. Using the result of part 1, show that Teresa and Raul’s

outstanding balance after making N payments is

E1N2 ⫽ 160,000c 1.005360 ⫺ 1.005N

1.005360 ⫺ 1

d

10 ⱕ N ⱕ 3602

3. Using a graphing utility, plot the graph of

E1x2 ⫽ 160,000c 1.005360 ⫺ 1.005x

1.005360 ⫺ 1

d

using the viewing window [0, 360] ⫻ [0, 160,000].

4. Referring to the graph in part 3, observe that the outstanding principal drops off slowly

in the early years and accelerates quickly to zero toward the end of the loan. Can you
explain why?

5. How long does it take Teresa and Raul to repay half of the loan of $160,000?

Hint: See the previous Explore & Discuss and Exploring with Technology box.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 4 Home Affordability The Jacksons have determined
that, after making a down payment, they could afford at most $2000 for a 
monthly house payment. The bank charges interest at the rate of 6% per year on
the unpaid balance, with interest computations made at the end of each month. 
If the loan is to be amortized in equal monthly installments over 30 years, what is
the maximum amount that the Jacksons can borrow from the bank?

Solution Here, 
are required to find P. From Formula (12), we have

⫽ 0.005

⫽ 0.06
12

i ⫽ r
m

, n ⫽ (30)(12) ⫽ 360, and R ⫽ 2000; we

P ⫽ R c 1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ i2 ⫺n

i

d

Substituting the numerical values for R, n, and i into this expression for P, we
obtain

P ⫽ 2000c 1 ⫺ 11.0052 ⫺360

0.005

d ⬇ 333,583.23

Therefore, the Jacksons can borrow at most $333,583.

An adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM) is a home loan in which the interest rate is

changed periodically based on a financial index. For example, a 5>1 ARM is one that

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

224

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

has  an  initial  rate  for  the  first  5  years  and  thereafter  is  adjusted  every  year  for  the

remaining term of the loan. Similarly, a 7>1 ARM is one that has an initial rate for the

first 7 years and thereafter is adjusted every year for the remaining term of the loan.
During  the  housing  boom  of  2000–2006,  lenders  aggressively  promoted
another type of loan—the interest-only mortgage loan—to help prospective buyers
qualify for larger mortgages. With an interest-only loan, the homeowner pays only
the interest on the mortgage for a fixed term, usually 5 to 7 years. At the end of that
period, the borrower usually has an option to convert the loan to one that will be
amortized.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 5 Home Affordability Refer to Example 4. Suppose

that the bank has also offered the Jacksons (a) a 7>1 ARM with a term of 

30 years and an interest rate of 5.70%/year compounded monthly for the first 
7 years and (b) an interest-only loan for a term of 30 years and an interest rate of
5.94%/year for the first 7 years. If the Jacksons limit their monthly payment to
$2000/month, what is the maximum amount they can borrow with each of these
mortgages?

Solution

a. Here, 

i ⫽ r
m

⫽ 0.057
12

⫽ 0.00475

, 

want to find P. From Formula (12), we have

n ⫽ 13021122 ⫽ 360

, and R ⫽ 2000, and we

 P ⫽ R c 1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ i2 ⫺n
 ⫽ 2000c 1 ⫺ 11.004752 ⫺360

0.00475

d

i

d

 ⬇ 344,589.68

Therefore, if the Jacksons choose the 7>1 ARM, they can borrow at most

$344,590.

b. If P denotes the maximum amount that the Jacksons can borrow, then the

interest per year on their loan is 0.0594P dollars. But this is equal to their pay-
ments for the year, which are 

dollars. So we have

or

1122120002

 0.0594P ⫽ 1122120002

 P ⫽ 1122120002

0.0594

⬇ 404,040.40

So if the Jacksons choose the 7-year interest-only loan, they can borrow at
most $404,040.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 6 Adjustable Rate Mortgages Five years ago, the

Campbells secured a 5>1 ARM to help finance the purchase of their home.

The amount of the original loan was $350,000 for a term of 30 years, with interest
at the rate of 5.76% per year, compounded monthly for the first 5 years. The
Campbells’ mortgage is due to reset next month, and the new interest rate will be
6.96% per year, compounded monthly.

a. What was the Campbells’ monthly mortgage payment for the first 5 years?
b. What will the Campbells’ new monthly mortgage payment be (after the reset)?

By how much will the monthly payment increase?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solution

4.3 AMORTIZATION AND SINKING FUNDS

225

a. First, we find the Campbells’ monthly payment on the original loan amount.

Using Formula (13) with P ⫽ 350,000, 
(12)(30) ⫽ 360, we find that the monthly payment was

i ⫽ r
m

⫽ 0.0576

12

⫽ 0.0048

, and n ⫽ mt ⫽

R ⫽

350,00010.00482
1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ 0.00482 ⫺360

⬇ 2044.729

or $2044.73 for the first 5 years.

b. To find the amount of the Campbells’ new mortgage payment, we first need to

find their outstanding principal. This is given by the present value of their
remaining mortgage payments. Using Formula (11), with R ⫽ 2044.729,
i ⫽ r
⫽ 0.0048
m
outstanding principal is

, and n ⫽ mt ⫽ 360 ⫺ 5(12) ⫽ 300, we find that their

⫽ 0.0576

12

P ⫽ 2044.729c 1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ 0.00482 ⫺300

0.0048

d ⬇ 324,709.194

or $324,709.19.

Next, we compute the amount of their new mortgage payment for the
remaining term (300 months). Using Formula (13) with P ⫽ 324,709.194,
i ⫽ r
12
m
payment is

, and n ⫽ mt ⫽ 300, we find that the monthly 

⫽ 0.0058

⫽ 0.0696

R ⫽

324,709.19410.00582
1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ 0.00582 ⫺300

⬇ 2286.698

or $2286.70—an increase of $241.97.

Sinking Funds
Sinking funds are another important application of the annuity formulas. Simply stated, a
sinking fund is an account that is set up for a specific purpose at some future date. For
example, an individual might establish a sinking fund for the purpose of discharging a
debt at a future date. A corporation might establish a sinking fund in order to accumulate
sufficient capital to replace equipment that is expected to be obsolete at some future date.
By thinking of the amount to be accumulated by a specific date in the future as
the future value of an annuity [Formula (9), Section 4.2], we can answer questions
about a large class of sinking fund problems.

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 7 Sinking Fund The proprietor of Carson Hardware 
has decided to set up a sinking fund for the purpose of purchasing a truck 
in 2 years’ time. It is expected that the truck will cost $30,000. If the fund earns
10% interest per year compounded quarterly, determine the size of each (equal)
quarterly installment the proprietor should pay into the fund. Verify the result by
displaying the schedule.

Solution The problem at hand is to find the size of each quarterly payment R
of an annuity, given that its future value is S ⫽ 30,000, the interest earned per
conversion period is 
n ⫽ (2)(4) ⫽ 8. The formula for an annuity,

, and the number of payments is 

⫽ 0.025

i ⫽ r
m

⫽ 0.1
4

S ⫽ Rc 11 ⫹ i2 n ⫺ 1

i

d

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

226

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

when solved for R yields

or, equivalently,

R ⫽

iS

11 ⫹ i2 n ⫺ 1

R ⫽

S
sn|i

(14)

Substituting the appropriate numerical values for i, S, and n into Equation (14), we
obtain the desired quarterly payment

R ⫽ 10.0252130,0002
11.0252 8 ⫺ 1

⬇ 3434.02

or $3434.02. Table 4 shows the required schedule.

TABLE 4
A Sinking Fund Schedule
End of
Period

Deposit
Made

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

$3,434.02
3,434.02
3,434.02
3,434.02
3,434.02
3,434.02
3,434.02
3,434.02

Interest
Earned

0
$ 85.85
173.85
264.04
356.50
451.26
548.39
647.95

Addition
to Fund

$3,434.02
3,519.87
3,607.87
3,698.06
3,790.52
3,885.28
3,982.41
4,081.97

Accumulated

Amount in Fund

$ 3,434.02
6,953.89
10,561.76
14,259.82
18,050.34
21,935.62
25,918.03
30,000.00

The formula derived in this last example is restated as follows.

Sinking Fund Payment
The periodic payment R required to accumulate a sum of S dollars over n peri-
ods with interest charged at the rate of i per period is

R ⫽

iS

11 ⫹ i2 n ⫺ 1

(15)

APPLIED EXAMPLE 8 Retirement Planning Jason is the owner of a 
computer consulting firm. He is currently planning to retire in 25 years and
wishes to withdraw $8000/month from his retirement account for 25 years starting
at that time. How much must he contribute each month into a retirement account
earning interest at the rate of 6%/year compounded monthly to meet his retirement
goal?

Solution In this case, we work backwards. We first calculate the amount of the
sinking fund that Jason needs to accumulate to fund his retirement needs. Using
Formula (11) with R = 8000, 

, and n ⫽ 300, we have

⫽ 0.005

i ⫽ r
m

⫽ 0.06
12

 P ⫽ 8000c 1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ 0.0052 ⫺300

0.005

d

 ⬇ 1,241,654.91

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.3 AMORTIZATION AND SINKING FUNDS

227

Next, we calculate how much Jason should deposit into his retirement account each 
month to accumulate $1,241,654.91 in 25 years. Here, we use Formula (15) with
S ⫽ 1,241,654.91
, 

, and n ⫽ 300. We have

⫽ 0.06
12

i ⫽ r
⫽ 0.005
m
 R ⫽ 1,241,654.91c
 ⬇ 1791.73

0.005

11 ⫹ 0.0052 300 ⫺ 1d

or approximately $1791.73/month.

Here is a summary of the formulas developed thus far in this chapter:

1. Simple and compound interest; annuities

One deposit

Periodic deposits

Simple interest

Compound interest

Future value of

Present value of

an annuity

S ⫽ Rc 11 ⫹ i2 n ⫺ 1

i

d

an annuity

P ⫽ Rc 1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ i2 ⫺n

i

d

A ⫽ P11 ⫹ rt2

I ⫽ Prt

A ⫽ P11 ⫹ i2 n
P ⫽ A11 ⫹ i2 ⫺n
A ⫽ Pe rt
P ⫽ Ae⫺rt

Continuous compounding

Continuous compounding

2. Effective rate of interest

reff ⫽ a 1 ⫹

r

mb m

⫺ 1

3. Amortization

4. Sinking fund

Pi

R ⫽

1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ i2 ⫺n
P ⫽ Rc 1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ i2 ⫺n

i

Periodic payment

d

Amount amortized

R ⫽

iS

11 ⫹ i2 n ⫺ 1

Periodic payment taken out

4.3 Self-Check Exercises

1. The Mendozas wish to borrow $300,000 from a bank to help
finance the purchase of a house. Their banker has offered the
following plans for their consideration. In Plan I, the Men-
dozas have 30 years to repay the loan in monthly installments
with  interest  on  the  unpaid  balance  charged  at  6.09%/year
compounded monthly. In Plan II, the loan is to be repaid in
monthly  installments  over  15  years  with  interest  on  the
unpaid balance charged at 5.76%/year compounded monthly.
a. Find the monthly repayment for each plan.
b. What  is  the  difference  in  total  payments  made  under

each plan?

2. Harris, a self-employed individual who is 46 years old, is
setting up a defined-benefit retirement plan. If he wishes to
have $250,000 in this retirement account by age 65, what
is the size of each yearly installment he will be required to
make into a savings account earning interest at  %/year?

81
4

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 4.3 can be found on 
page 231.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

228

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

4.3 Concept Questions

1. Write the amortization formula.

a. If P and i are fixed and n is allowed to increase, what

will happen to R?

b. Interpret the result of part (a).

2. Using the formula for computing a sinking fund payment,
show that if the number of payments into a sinking fund
increases,  then  the  size  of  the  periodic  payment  into  the
sinking fund decreases.

4.3 Exercises

In Exercises 1–8, find the periodic payment R required to amortize
a loan of P dollars over t years with interest charged at the rate of
r %/year compounded m times a year.
1. P ⫽ 100,000, r ⫽ 8, t ⫽ 10, m ⫽ 1

2. P ⫽ 40,000, r ⫽ 3, t ⫽ 15, m ⫽ 2

3. P ⫽ 5000, r ⫽ 4, t ⫽ 3, m ⫽ 4

4. P ⫽ 16,000, r ⫽ 9, t ⫽ 4, m ⫽ 12

5. P ⫽ 25,000, r ⫽ 3, t ⫽ 12, m ⫽ 4

6. P ⫽ 80,000, r ⫽ 10.5, t ⫽ 15, m ⫽ 12

7. P ⫽ 80,000, r ⫽ 10.5, t ⫽ 20, m ⫽ 12

8. P ⫽ 100,000, r ⫽ 10.5, t ⫽ 25, m ⫽ 12

In Exercises 9–14, find the periodic payment R required to accumu-
late a sum of S dollars over t years with interest earned at the rate
of r %/year compounded m times a year.
9. S ⫽ 20,000, r ⫽ 4, t ⫽ 6, m ⫽ 2

10. S ⫽ 40,000, r ⫽ 4, t ⫽ 9, m ⫽ 4

11. S ⫽ 100,000, r ⫽ 4.5, t ⫽ 20, m ⫽ 6

12. S ⫽ 120,000, r ⫽ 4.5, t ⫽ 30, m ⫽ 6

13. S ⫽ 250,000, r ⫽ 10.5, t ⫽ 25, m ⫽ 12

14. S ⫽ 350,000, r ⫽ 7.5, t ⫽ 10, m ⫽ 12

15. Suppose  payments  were  made  at  the  end  of  each  quarter
into  an  ordinary  annuity  earning  interest  at  the  rate  of
10%/year compounded quarterly. If the future value of the
annuity after 5 years is $60,000, what was the size of each
payment?

16. Suppose  payments  were  made  at  the  end  of  each  month
into  an  ordinary  annuity  earning  interest  at  the  rate  of
9%/year  compounded  monthly.  If  the  future  value  of  the
annuity after 10 years is $60,000, what was the size of each
payment?

17. Suppose payments will be made for 

years at the end of
each  semiannual  period  into  an  ordinary  annuity  earning
interest  at  the  rate  of  7.5%/year  compounded  semiannu-
ally.  If  the  present  value  of  the  annuity  is  $35,000,  what
should be the size of each payment?

61
2

18. Suppose payments will be made for 

years at the end of
each month into an ordinary annuity earning interest at the
rate  of  6.25%/year  compounded  monthly.  If  the  present
value of the annuity is $42,000, what should be the size of
each payment?

91
4

19. LOAN AMORTIZATION A  sum  of  $100,000  is  to  be  repaid
over a 10-year period through equal installments made at
the  end  of  each  year.  If  an  interest  rate  of  10%/year  is
charged on the unpaid balance and interest calculations are
made at the end of each year, determine the size of each
installment so that the loan (principal plus interest charges)
is amortized at the end of 10 years.

20. LOAN AMORTIZATION What monthly payment is required to
amortize a loan of $30,000 over 10 years if interest at the
rate  of  12%/year  is  charged  on  the  unpaid  balance  and
interest calculations are made at the end of each month?

21. HOME MORTGAGES Complete the following table, which
shows the monthly payments on a $100,000, 30-year mort-
gage  at  the  interest  rates  shown.  Use  this  information  to
answer the following questions.

Amount of
Mortgage, $
100,000
100,000
100,000
100,000
100,000
100,000

Interest
Rate, %

5
6
7
8
9
10

Monthly
Payment, $

536.82

⭈ ⭈ ⭈

⭈ ⭈ ⭈

⭈ ⭈ ⭈

⭈ ⭈ ⭈

877.57

a. What is the difference in monthly payments between a
$100,000, 30-year mortgage secured at 7%/year and one
secured at 10%/year?

b. Use  the  table  to  calculate  the  monthly  mortgage  pay-
ments on a $150,000 mortgage at 10%/year over 30 years
and a $50,000 mortgage at 10%/year over 30 years.

22. FINANCING A HOME The  Flemings  secured  a  bank  loan  of
$288,000 to help finance the purchase of a house. The bank
charges interest at a rate of 9%/year on the unpaid balance,
and  interest  computations  are  made  at  the  end  of  each
month.  The  Flemings  have  agreed  to  repay  the  loan  in
equal monthly installments over 25 years. What should be
the size of each repayment if the loan is to be amortized at
the end of the term?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

23. FINANCING A CAR The  price  of  a  new  car  is  $20,000.
Assume that an individual makes a down payment of 25%
toward the purchase of the car and secures financing for the
balance at the rate of 6%/year compounded monthly.
a. What monthly payment will she be required to make if
the car is financed over a period of 36 months? Over a
period of 48 months?

b. What  will  the  interest  charges  be  if  she  elects  the 

36-month plan? The 48-month plan?

24. FINANCIAL ANALYSIS A group of private investors purchased
a condominium complex for $2 million. They made an ini-
tial down payment of 10% and obtained financing for the
balance. If the loan is to be amortized over 15 years at an
interest rate of 6.6%/year compounded quarterly, find the
required quarterly payment.

25. FINANCING A HOME The Taylors have purchased a $270,000
house. They made an initial down payment of $30,000 and
secured  a  mortgage  with  interest  charged  at  the  rate  of
6%/year  on  the  unpaid  balance.  Interest  computations  are
made at the end of each month. If the loan is to be amortized
over  30  years,  what  monthly  payment  will  the  Taylors  be
required to make? What is their equity (disregarding appre-
ciation) after 5 years? After 10 years? After 20 years?

26. FINANCIAL PLANNING Jessica  wants  to  accumulate  $10,000
by the end of 5 years in a special bank account, which she
had opened for this purpose. To achieve this goal, Jessica
plans to deposit a fixed sum of money into the account at
the end of each month over the 5-year period. If the bank
pays interest at the rate of 5%/year compounded monthly,
how  much  does  she  have  to  deposit  each  month  into  her
account?

27. SINKING FUNDS A  city  has  $2.5  million  worth  of  school
bonds that are due in 20 years and has established a sink-
ing fund to retire this debt. If the fund earns interest at the
rate of 7%/year compounded annually, what amount must
be deposited annually in this fund?

28. TRUST FUNDS Carl is the beneficiary of a $20,000 trust fund
set up for him by his grandparents. Under the terms of the
trust,  he  is  to  receive  the  money  over  a  5-year  period  in
equal installments at the end of each year. If the fund earns
interest at the rate of 5%/year compounded annually, what
amount will he receive each year?

29. SINKING FUNDS Lowell  Corporation  wishes  to  establish 
a  sinking  fund  to  retire  a  $200,000  debt  that  is  due  in 
10 years. If the investment will earn interest at the rate of
9%/year compounded quarterly, find the amount of the
quarterly deposit that must be made in order to accumulate
the required sum.

30. SINKING FUNDS The  management  of  Gibraltar  Brokerage
Services  anticipates  a  capital  expenditure  of  $20,000  in
3 years for the purchase of new computers and has decided
to set up a sinking fund to finance this purchase. If the fund
earns interest at the rate of 5%/year compounded quarterly,
determine  the  size  of  each  (equal)  quarterly  installment
that should be deposited in the fund.

4.3 AMORTIZATION AND SINKING FUNDS

229

31. RETIREMENT ACCOUNTS Andrea, a self-employed individual,
wishes to accumulate a retirement fund of $250,000. How
much  should  she  deposit  each  month  into  her  retirement
account, which pays interest at the rate of 6.6%/year com-
pounded  monthly,  to  reach  her  goal  upon  retirement 
25 years from now?

32. STUDENT LOANS Joe secured a loan of $12,000 3 years ago
from a bank for use toward his college expenses. The bank
charged interest at the rate of 4%/year compounded monthly
on  his  loan.  Now  that  he  has  graduated  from  college,  Joe
wishes to repay the loan by amortizing it through monthly
payments over 10 years at the same interest rate. Find the
size of the monthly payments he will be required to make.

33. RETIREMENT ACCOUNTS Robin wishes to accumulate a sum
of  $450,000  in  a  retirement  account  by  the  time  of  her
retirement  30  years  from  now.  If  she  wishes  to  do  this
through monthly payments into the account that earn inter-
est  at  the  rate of 6%/year compounded monthly, what
should be the size of each payment?

34. FINANCING COLLEGE EXPENSES Yumi’s grandparents presented
her with a gift of $20,000 when she was 10 years old to be
used for her college education. Over the next 7 years, until
she turned 17, Yumi’s parents had invested this money in a
tax-free  account  that  had  yielded  interest  at  the  rate  of
5.5%/year  compounded monthly. Upon turning 17, Yumi
now plans to withdraw  her  funds  in  equal  annual  install-
ments over the next 4 years, starting at age 18. If the college
fund is expected to earn interest at the rate of 6%/year, com-
pounded annually, what will be the size of each installment?

35. IRAS Martin has deposited $375 in his IRA at the end of
each  quarter  for  the  past  20  years.  His  investment  has
earned  interest  at  the  rate  of  6%/year  compounded  quar-
terly  over  this  period.  Now,  at  age  60,  he  is  considering
retirement.  What  quarterly  payment  will  he  receive  over
the  next  15  years?  (Assume  that  the  money  continues  to
earn interest at the same rate and that payments are made
at  the  end  of  each  quarter.)  If  he  continues  working  and
makes quarterly payments of the same amount in his IRA
until age 65, what quarterly payment will he receive from
his fund upon retirement over the following 10 years?

36. RETIREMENT PLANNING Jennifer  is  the  owner  of  a  video
game  and  entertainment  software  retail  store.  She  is  cur-
rently planning to retire in 30 years and wishes to withdraw
$10,000/month  for  20  years  from  her  retirement  account
starting at that time. How much must she contribute each
month for 30 years into a retirement account earning inter-
est at the rate of 5%/year compounded monthly to meet her
retirement goal?

37. EFFECT OF DELAYING RETIREMENT ON RETIREMENT FUNDS Refer
to  Example  8.    Suppose  that  Jason  delays  his  retirement
plans and decides to continue working and contributing to
his retirement fund for an additional 5 years. By delaying
his retirement, he will need to withdraw only  $8000/month
for  20  years.  In  this  case,  how  much  must  he  contribute
each month for 30 years into a retirement account earning

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

230

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

interest  at  the  rate  of  6%/year  compounded  monthly  to
meet his retirement goal?

38. FINANCING A CAR Darla purchased a new car during a spe-
cial  sales  promotion  by  the  manufacturer.  She  secured  a
loan from the manufacturer in the amount of $16,000 at a
rate of 7.9%/year compounded monthly. Her bank is now
charging  11.5%/year  compounded  monthly  for  new  car
loans.  Assuming  that  each  loan  would  be  amortized  by 
36  equal  monthly  installments,  determine  the  amount  of
interest she would have paid at the end of 3 years for each
loan.  How  much  less  will  she  have  paid  in  interest  pay-
ments over the life of the loan by borrowing from the man-
ufacturer instead of her bank?

39. AUTO FINANCING Dan is contemplating trading in his car for
a  new  one.  He  can  afford  a  monthly  payment  of  at  most
$400.  If  the  prevailing  interest  rate  is  7.2%/year  com-
pounded  monthly  for  a  48-month  loan,  what  is  the  most
expensive  car  that  Dan  can  afford,  assuming  that  he  will
receive $8000 for the trade-in?

40. AUTO FINANCING Paula is considering the purchase of a new
car. She has narrowed her search to two cars that are equally
appealing  to  her.  Car  A costs  $28,000,  and  Car  B costs
$28,200. The manufacturer of Car A is offering 0% financing
for 48 months with zero down, while the manufacturer of Car
B is offering a rebate of $2000 at the time of purchase plus
financing at the rate of 3%/year compounded monthly over
48 months with zero down. If Paula has decided to buy the
car with the lower net cost to her, which car should she pur-
chase?

41. FINANCING A HOME The  Sandersons  are  planning  to  refi-
nance their home. The outstanding principal on their orig-
inal loan is $100,000 and was to be amortized in 240 equal
monthly installments at an interest rate of 10%/year com-
pounded monthly. The new loan they expect to secure is to
be  amortized  over  the  same  period  at  an  interest  rate  of
7.8%/year compounded monthly. How much less can they
expect to pay over the life of the loan in interest payments
by refinancing the loan at this time?

42. INVESTMENT ANALYSIS Since  he  was  22  years  old,  Ben  has
been depositing $200 at the end of each month into a tax-free
retirement account earning interest at the rate of 6.5%/year
compounded  monthly.  Larry,  who  is  the  same  age  as  Ben,
decided  to  open  a  tax-free  retirement  account  5  years  after
Ben opened his. If Larry’s account earns interest at the same
rate as Ben’s, determine how much Larry should deposit each
month into his account so that both men will have the same
amount of money in their accounts at age 65.

43. PERSONAL LOANS Two  years  ago,  Paul  borrowed  $10,000
from his sister Gerri to start a business. Paul agreed to pay
Gerri  interest  for  the  loan  at  the  rate  of  6%/year,  com-
pounded  continuously.  Paul  will  now  begin  repaying  the
amount he owes by amortizing the loan (plus the interest
that  has  accrued  over  the  past  2  years)  through  monthly
payments  over  the  next  5  years at  an  interest  rate  of
5%/year  compounded  monthly.  Find  the  size  of  the
monthly payments Paul will be required to make.

44. REFINANCING A HOME Josh  purchased  a  condominium 
5  years ago  for  $180,000.  He  made  a  down  payment  of
20% and financed the balance with a 30-year conventional
mortgage to be amortized through monthly payments with
an  interest  rate  of  7%/year  compounded  monthly  on  the
unpaid  balance.  The  condominium  is  now  appraised  at
$250,000. Josh plans to start his own business and wishes
to  tap  into  the  equity  that  he  has  in  the  condominium.  If
Josh  can  secure  a  new  mortgage  to  refinance  his  condo-
minium  based  on  a  loan  of  80%  of  the  appraised  value,
how much cash can Josh muster for his business? (Disre-
gard taxes.)

45. FINANCING A HOME Eight  years  ago,  Kim  secured  a  bank
loan of $180,000 to help finance the purchase of a house.
The mortgage was for a term of 30 years, with an interest
rate of 9.5%/year compounded monthly on the unpaid bal-
ance to be amortized through monthly payments. What is
the outstanding principal on Kim’s house now?

46. BALLOON PAYMENT MORTGAGES Olivia  plans  to  secure  a 
5-year balloon mortgage of $200,000 toward the purchase
of a condominium. Her monthly payment for the 5 years is
calculated on the basis of a 30-year conventional mortgage
at the rate of 6%/year compounded monthly. At the end of
the 5 years, Olivia is required to pay the balance owed (the
“balloon”  payment).  What  will  be  her  monthly  payment,
and what will be her balloon payment?

47. BALLOON PAYMENT MORTGAGES Emilio is securing a 7-year
Fannie  Mae  “balloon”  mortgage  for  $280,000  to  finance
the purchase of his first home. The monthly payments are
based on a 30-year amortization. If the prevailing interest
rate  is  7.5%/year  compounded  monthly,  what  will  be
Emilio’s  monthly  payment?  What  will  be  his  “balloon”
payment at the end of 7 years?

48. FINANCING A HOME Sarah secured a bank loan of $200,000
for the purchase of a house. The mortgage is to be amor-
tized  through  monthly  payments  for  a  term  of  15  years,
with an interest rate of 6%/year compounded monthly on
the unpaid balance. She plans to sell her house in 5 years.
How much will Sarah still owe on her house?

49. HOME REFINANCING Four years ago, Emily secured a bank
loan  of  $200,000  to  help  finance  the  purchase  of  an
apartment  in  Boston.  The  term  of  the  mortgage  is 
30 years, and the interest rate is 9.5%/year compounded
monthly.  Because  the  interest  rate  for  a  conventional 
30-year home mortgage has now dropped to 6.75%/year
compounded  monthly,  Emily  is  thinking  of  refinancing
her property.
a. What is Emily’s current monthly mortgage payment?
b. What is Emily’s current outstanding principal?
c. If Emily decides to refinance her property by securing a
30-year home mortgage loan in the amount of the cur-
rent outstanding principal at the prevailing interest rate
of 6.75%/year compounded monthly, what will be her
monthly mortgage payment?

d. How much less would Emily’s monthly mortgage pay-

ment be if she refinances?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

50. HOME REFINANCING Five  years  ago,  Diane  secured  a  bank
loan of $300,000 to help finance the purchase of a loft in
the San Francisco Bay area. The term of the mortgage was
30  years,  and  the  interest  rate  was  9%/year  compounded
monthly  on  the  unpaid  balance.  Because  the  interest  rate
for  a  conventional  30-year  home  mortgage  has  now
dropped to 7%/year compounded monthly, Diane is think-
ing of refinancing her property.
a. What is Diane’s current monthly mortgage payment?
b. What is Diane’s current outstanding principal?
c. If Diane decides to refinance her property by securing a
30-year home mortgage loan in the amount of the current
outstanding  principal  at  the  prevailing  interest  rate  of
7%/year compounded monthly, what will be her monthly
mortgage payment?

d. How much less would Diane’s monthly mortgage pay-

ment be if she refinances?

51. ADJUSTABLE-RATE MORTGAGES Three  years  ago,  Samantha
secured an adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM) loan to help fi-
nance the purchase of a house. The amount of the original
loan was $150,000 for a term of 30 years, with interest at
the  rate  of  7.5%/year  compounded  monthly.  Currently 
the  interest  rate is 7%/year compounded monthly, and
Samantha’s monthly payments are due to be recalculated.
What will be her new monthly payment?
Hint: Calculate her current outstanding principal. Then, to amor-
tize the loan in the next 27 years, determine the monthly payment
based on the current interest rate.

52. ADJUSTABLE-RATE MORTGAGES George secured an adjustable-
rate mortgage (ARM) loan to help finance the purchase of his
home 5 years ago. The amount of the loan was $300,000 for
a term of 30 years, with interest at the rate of 8%/year com-
pounded monthly. Currently, the interest rate for his ARM is
6.5%/year compounded monthly, and George’s monthly pay-
ments  are  due  to  be  reset.  What  will  be  the  new  monthly 
payment?

53. FINANCING A HOME After  making  a  down  payment  of
$25,000,  the  Meyers  need  to  secure  a  loan  of  $280,000  to
purchase  a  certain  house.  Their  bank’s  current  rate  for  25-
year  home  loans  is  5.5%/year  compounded  monthly.  The

4.3 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

4.3 AMORTIZATION AND SINKING FUNDS

231

owner  has  offered  to  finance  the  loan  at  4.9%/year  com-
pounded monthly. Assuming that both loans would be amor-
tized  over  a  25-year  period  by  300  equal  monthly  install-
ments, determine the difference in the amount of interest the
Meyers would pay by choosing the seller’s financing rather
than their bank’s.

54. REFINANCING A HOME The Martinezes are planning to refi-
nance their home. The outstanding balance on their origi-
nal  loan  is  $150,000.  Their  finance  company  has  offered
them two options:

Option A: A fixed-rate mortgage at an interest rate of
7.5%/year compounded monthly, payable over a 30-year
period in 360 equal monthly installments.
Option B: A fixed-rate mortgage at an interest rate of
7.25%/year compounded monthly, payable over a 15-year
period in 180 equal monthly installments.

a. Find the monthly payment required to amortize each of

these loans over the life of the loan.

b. How much interest would the Martinezes save if they chose

the 15-year mortgage instead of the 30-year mortgage?

55. HOME AFFORDABILITY Suppose  that  the  Carlsons  have
decided that they can afford a maximum of $3000/month
for a monthly house payment. The bank has offered them

(a)  a  5>1  ARM  for  a  term  of  30  years  with  interest  at 

the rate of 5.40%/year compounded monthly for the first 
5 years and (b) an interest-only loan for a term of 30 years
at the rate of 5.62%/year for the first 5 years. What is the
maximum amount that they can borrow with each of these
mortgages if they keep to their budget?

56. COMPARING MORTGAGES Refer to Example 5. Suppose that

the Jacksons choose the 7>1 ARM and borrow the maxi-

mum amount of $344,589.68. 
a. By how much will the principal of their loan be reduced

at the end of 7 years?  

Hint: See Example 3. 
b. If  they  choose  the  7-year  interest-only  mortgage,  by
how  much  will  the  principal  of  their  loan  be  reduced
after 7 years?

1. a. We use Formula (13) in each instance. Under Plan I,

Under Plan II,

P ⫽ 300,000    i ⫽
n ⫽ 13021122 ⫽ 360

r
m

⫽ 0.0609

12

⫽ 0.005075

P ⫽ 300,000    i ⫽
n ⫽ 11521122 ⫽ 180

r
m

⫽ 0.0576

12

⫽ 0.0048

Therefore,  the  size  of  each  monthly  repayment  under
Plan I is

R ⫽

300,00010.0050752
1 ⫺ 11.0050752 ⫺360

 ⬇ 1816.05

Therefore,  the  size  of  each  monthly  repayment  under
Plan II is

R ⫽

300,00010.00482
1 ⫺ 11.00482 ⫺180

 ⬇ 2492.84

or $1816.05.

or $2492.84.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

232

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

b. Under Plan I, the total amount of repayments will be

2. We use Formula (15) with

1360211816.052 ⫽ 653,778

Number of payments 
ⴢ the size of each installment

or $653,778. Under Plan II, the total amount of repay-
ments will be

1180212492.842 ⫽ 448,711.20

or $448,711.20. Therefore, the difference in payments
is

653,778 ⫺ 448,711.20 ⫽ 205,066.80

or $205,066.80.

S ⫽ 250,000
i ⫽ r ⫽ 0.0825
n ⫽ 20

Since m ⫽ 1

giving the required size of each installment as

R ⫽ 10.082521250,0002
11.08252 20 ⫺ 1
 ⬇ 5313.59

or $5313.59.

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Amortizing a Loan

Graphing Utility
Here we use the TI-83/84 TVM SOLVER function to help us solve problems involving
amortization and sinking funds.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 1 Finding the Payment to Amortize a Loan The Wongs
are considering obtaining a preapproved 30-year loan of $120,000 to help 

finance the purchase of a house. The mortgage company charges interest at the rate
of 8% per year on the unpaid balance, with interest computations made at the end of
each month. What will be the monthly installments if the loan is amortized?

Solution We use the TI-83/84 TVM SOLVER with the following inputs:

(30)(12)

N ⫽ 360
I% ⫽ 8
PV ⫽ 120000

PMT ⫽ 0
FV ⫽ 0
P/Y ⫽ 12
C/Y ⫽ 12
PMT:END BEGIN

The number of payments each year

The number of conversion periods each year

From the output shown in Figure T1, we see that the required payment is $880.52.

FIGURE T1
The TI-83/84 screen showing the monthly
installment, PMT

N=360
I%=8
PV=120000
PMT=-880.51748...
FV=0
P/Y=12
C/Y=12
PMT:END BEGIN

APPLIED EXAMPLE 2 Finding the Payment in a Sinking Fund Heidi wishes
to establish a retirement account that will be worth $500,000 in 20 years’
time. She expects that the account will earn interest at the rate of 11% per year
compounded monthly. What should be the monthly contribution into her account
each month?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

N=240
I%=11
PV=0
PMT=-577.60862...
FV=500000
P/Y=12
C/Y=12
PMT:END BEGIN

FIGURE T2
The TI-83/84 screen showing the monthly
payment, PMT

Solution We use the TI-83/84 TVM SOLVER with the following inputs:

4.3 AMORTIZATION AND SINKING FUNDS

233

(20)(12)

N ⫽ 240
I% ⫽ 11
PV ⫽ 0
PMT ⫽ 0

FV ⫽ 500000
P/Y ⫽ 12
C/Y ⫽ 12
PMT:END BEGIN

The number of payments each year

The number of conversion periods each year

The result is displayed in Figure T2. We see that Heidi’s monthly contribution
should be $577.61. (Note: The display for PMT is negative because it is an out-
flow.)

Excel
Here we use Excel to help us solve problems involving amortization and sinking funds.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 3 Finding the Payment to Amortize a Loan The Wongs
are considering a preapproved 30-year loan of $120,000 to help finance the 
purchase of a house. The mortgage company charges interest at the rate of 8% per
year on the unpaid balance, with interest computations made at the end of each
month. What will be the monthly installments if the loan is amortized at the end
of the term?

Solution We use the PMT function to solve this problem. Accessing this function
from the Financial function library subgroup and making the required entries, we
obtain the Function Arguments dialog box shown in Figure T3. We see that the
desired result is $880.52. (Recall that cash you pay out is represented by a negative
number.)

FIGURE T3
Excel’s dialog box giving the payment
function, PMT

APPLIED EXAMPLE 4 Finding the Payment in a Sinking Fund Heidi wishes
to establish a retirement account that will be worth $500,000 in 20 years’
time. She expects that the account will earn interest at the rate of 11% per year
compounded monthly. What should be the monthly contribution into her account
each month?

Note: Words/characters printed blue (for example, Chart sub-type:) indicate words/characters on the screen.

(continued)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

234

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

Solution As in Example 3, we use the PMT function, but this time, we are
given the future value of the investment. Accessing the PMT function as before
and making the required entries, we obtain the Function Arguments dialog box
shown in Figure T4. We see that Heidi’s monthly contribution should be $577.61.
(Note that the value for PMT is negative because it is an outflow.)

FIGURE T4
Excel’s dialog box giving the payment
function, PMT

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

1. Find the periodic payment required to amortize a loan of
$55,000 over 120 months with interest charged at the rate
of 

year compounded monthly.

6 

5
8%/

2. Find the periodic payment required to amortize a loan of
$178,000 over 180 months with interest charged at the rate
of  %/year compounded monthly.

7 

1
8

3. Find the periodic payment required to amortize a loan of
$227,000 over 360 months with interest charged at the rate
of  %/year compounded monthly.

8 

1
8

4. Find the periodic payment required to amortize a loan of
$150,000 over 360 months with interest charged at the rate
of  %/year compounded monthly.

7 

3
8

5. Find the periodic payment required to accumulate $25,000
over 12 quarters with interest earned at the rate of  %/year
compounded quarterly.

4 

3
8

6. Find the periodic payment required to accumulate $50,000
over 36 quarters with interest earned at the rate of  %/year
compounded quarterly.

3 

7
8

7. Find the periodic payment required to accumulate $137,000
over 120 months with interest earned at the rate of  %/year
compounded monthly.

4 

3
4

8. Find the periodic payment required to accumulate $144,000
over 120 months with interest earned at the rate of  %/year
compounded monthly.

4 

5
8

9. A loan of $120,000 is to be repaid over a 10-year period
through equal installments made at the end of each year. If
an interest rate of 8.5%/year is charged on the unpaid bal-
ance and interest calculations are made at the end of each
year, determine the size of each installment such that the
loan is amortized at the end of 10 years. Verify the result
by displaying the amortization schedule.

10. A loan of $265,000 is to be repaid over an 8-year period
through equal installments made at the end of each year. If
an interest rate of 7.4%/year is charged on the unpaid bal-
ance and interest calculations are made at the end of each
year, determine the size of each installment so that the loan
is amortized at the end of 8 years. Verify the result by dis-
playing the amortization schedule.

4.4 Arithmetic and Geometric Progressions

Arithmetic Progressions
An arithmetic progression is a sequence of numbers in which each term after the first
is obtained by adding a constant d to the preceding term. The constant d is called the
common difference. For example, the sequence

is an arithmetic progression with common difference equal to 3.

2, 5, 8, 11, . . .

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

4.4 ARITHMETIC AND GEOMETRIC PROGRESSIONS

235

Observe that an arithmetic progression is completely determined if the first term

and the common difference are known. In fact, if

a1, a2, a3, . . . , an, . . .

is  an  arithmetic  progression  with  the  first  term  given  by  a and  common  difference
given by d, then by definition we have

 

  a1 ⫽ a
a2 ⫽ a1 ⫹ d ⫽ a ⫹ d
 a3 ⫽ a2 ⫹ d ⫽ 1a ⫹ d2 ⫹ d ⫽ a ⫹ 2d
 a4 ⫽ a3 ⫹ d ⫽ 1a ⫹ 2d2 ⫹ d ⫽ a ⫹ 3d
 an ⫽ an⫺1 ⫹ d ⫽ a ⫹ 1n ⫺ 22d ⫹ d ⫽ a ⫹ 1n ⫺ 12d

o

Thus, we have the following formula for finding the nth term of an arithmetic pro-
gression with first term a and common difference:

nth Term of an Arithmetic Progression
The nth term of an arithmetic progression with first term a and common differ-
ence d is given by

an ⫽ a ⫹ 1n ⫺ 12 d

(16)

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 1 Find the twelfth term of the arithmetic progression

2, 7, 12, 17, 22, . . .

Solution The first term of the arithmetic progression is a1 ⫽ a ⫽ 2, and the com-
mon difference is d ⫽ 5; so upon setting n ⫽ 12 in Equation (16), we find

a12 ⫽ 2 ⫹ 12 ⫺ 1 5 ⫽ 57

1

2

EXAMPLE 2 Write the first five terms of an arithmetic progression whose third and
eleventh terms are 21 and 85, respectively.

Solution Using Equation (16), we obtain

a3 ⫽ a ⫹ 2d ⫽ 21
a11 ⫽ a ⫹ 10d ⫽ 85

Subtracting the first equation from the second gives 8d ⫽ 64, or d ⫽ 8. Substituting
this value of d into the first equation yields a ⫹ 16 ⫽ 21, or a ⫽ 5. Thus, the
required arithmetic progression is given by the sequence

5, 13, 21, 29, 37, . . .

Let Sn denote the sum of the first n terms of an arithmetic progression with first term
a1 ⫽ a and common difference d. Then

2
Sn ⫽ a ⫹ a ⫹ d ⫹ a ⫹ 2d ⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⫹ a ⫹ n ⫺ 1 d

2

1

3

Rewriting the expression for Sn with the terms in reverse order gives

1

1

4

2

(17)

(18)

Sn ⫽ a ⫹ n ⫺ 1 d ⫹ a ⫹ n ⫺ 2 d ⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⫹ a ⫹ d ⫹ a

3

1

1

2

4

2
4

2

1
3

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

236

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

Adding Equations (17) and (18), we obtain

2Sn ⫽ 32a ⫹ 1n ⫺ 12d4 ⫹ 32a ⫹ 1n ⫺ 12d4

  ⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⫹ 32a ⫹ 1n ⫺ 12d4
 ⫽ n32a ⫹ 1n ⫺ 12d4
2  32a ⫹ 1n ⫺ 12d4
Sn ⫽

n

Sum of Terms in an Arithmetic Progression
The sum of the first n terms of an arithmetic progression with first term a and
common difference d is given by

Sn ⫽

n

2  32a ⫹ 1n ⫺ 12d4

(19)

EXAMPLE 3 Find the sum of the first 20 terms of the arithmetic progression of
Example 1.

Solution Letting a ⫽ 2, d ⫽ 5, and n ⫽ 20 in Equation (19), we obtain

S20 ⫽ 20

2  32 # 2 ⫹ 19 # 54 ⫽ 990

APPLIED EXAMPLE 4 Company Sales Madison Electric Company had
sales of $200,000 in its first year of operation. If the sales increased 

by $30,000 per year thereafter, find Madison’s sales in the fifth year and its total
sales over the first 5 years of operation.

Solution Madison’s yearly sales follow an arithmetic progression, with the first
term given by a ⫽ 200,000 and the common difference given by d ⫽ 30,000. The
sales in the fifth year are found by using Equation (16) with n ⫽ 5. Thus,

a5 ⫽ 200,000 ⫹ 15 ⫺ 1230,000 ⫽ 320,000

or $320,000.

Madison’s total sales over the first 5 years of operation are found by using

Equation (19) with n ⫽ 5. Thus,

2  321200,0002 ⫹ 15 ⫺ 1230,0004

S5 ⫽ 5
 ⫽ 1,300,000

or $1,300,000.

Geometric Progressions
A geometric progression is a sequence of numbers in which each term after the first
is obtained by multiplying the preceding term by a constant r. The constant r is called
the common ratio.

A geometric progression is completely determined if the first term and the com-

mon ratio are known. Thus, if

a1, a2, a3, . . . , an, . . .

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.4 ARITHMETIC AND GEOMETRIC PROGRESSIONS

237

is a geometric progression with the first term given by a and common ratio given by
r, then by definition we have

a1 ⫽ a
a2 ⫽ a1r ⫽ ar
a3 ⫽ a2r ⫽ ar2
a4 ⫽ a3r ⫽ ar3

o

an ⫽ an⫺1r ⫽ arn⫺1

This gives the following:

nth Term of a Geometric Progression
The nth term of a geometric progression with first term a and common ratio r is
given by

an ⫽ ar n⫺1

(20)

EXAMPLE 5 Find the eighth term of a geometric progression whose first five terms
are 162, 54, 18, 6, and 2.

Solution The common ratio is found by taking the ratio of any term other than the
first to the preceding term. Taking the ratio of the fourth term to the third term, for
example, gives 
Equation (20) with a ⫽ 162, 

. To find the eighth term of the geometric progression, use 

, and n ⫽ 8, obtaining

r ⫽ 6
18

⫽ 1
3

r ⫽ 1
3

3b 7
a8 ⫽ 162a 1
 ⫽ 2
27

EXAMPLE 6 Find the tenth term of a geometric progression with positive terms and
third term equal to 16 and seventh term equal to 1.

Solution Using Equation (20) with n ⫽ 3 and n ⫽ 7, respectively, yields

a3 ⫽ ar2 ⫽ 16
a7 ⫽ ar6 ⫽ 1

Dividing 

a7

by a3 gives

⫽ 1
16

ar6
ar2
. Substituting this value of r into the expres-

r4 ⫽ 1

16, or r ⫽ 1
2

from which we obtain 
sion for a3, we obtain

2b 2
aa 1

⫽ 16  or  a ⫽ 64

Finally, using Equation (20) once again with a ⫽ 64, 

r ⫽ 1
2

, and n ⫽ 10 gives

2b 9
a10 ⫽ 64a 1

⫽ 1
8

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

238

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

To  find  the  sum  of  the  first  n terms  of  a  geometric  progression  with  the  first  term 
a1 ⫽ a and common ratio r, denote the required sum by Sn. Then
Sn ⫽ a ⫹ ar ⫹ ar2 ⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⫹ar n⫺2 ⫹ ar n⫺1

(21)

Upon multiplying (21) by r, we obtain

rSn ⫽ ar ⫹ ar2 ⫹ ar 3 ⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⫹ar n⫺1 ⫹ ar n

(22)

Subtracting Equation (22) from (21) gives

If r ⫽ 1, we may divide both sides of the last equation by (1 ⫺ r), obtaining

Sn ⫺ rSn ⫽ a ⫺ arn
11 ⫺ r2Sn ⫽ a11 ⫺ rn2

a11 ⫺ rn2
1 ⫺ r

Sn ⫽

If r ⫽ 1, then (21) gives

Thus,

Sn ⫽ a ⫹ a ⫹ a ⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⫹a

n terms

⫽ na

a11 ⫺ rn2
1 ⫺ r

na

Sn ⫽ •

if r ⫽ 1

if r ⫽ 1

Sum of Terms in a Geometric Progression
The sum of the first n terms of a geometric progression with first term a and
common ratio r is given by

a11 ⫺ rn2
1 ⫺ r

na

Sn ⫽ •

if r ⫽ 1

if r ⫽ 1

(23)

EXAMPLE 7 Find the sum of the first six terms of the following geometric progression:

Solution Here, a ⫽ 3, 

r ⫽ 6
3

3, 6, 12, 24, . . .

⫽ 2, and n ⫽ 6, so Equation (23) gives

311 ⫺ 262
1 ⫺ 2

S6 ⫽

⫽ 189

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 8 Company Sales Michaelson Land Development
Company had sales of $1 million in its first year of operation. If sales 

increased by 10% per year thereafter, find Michaelson’s sales in the fifth year and
its total sales over the first 5 years of operation.

Solution Michaelson’s yearly sales follow a geometric progression, with the
first term given by a ⫽ 1,000,000 and the common ratio given by r ⫽ 1.1. The
sales in the fifth year are found by using Formula (20) with n ⫽ 5. Thus,

a5 ⫽ 1,000,00011.124 ⫽ 1,464,100

or $1,464,100.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.4 ARITHMETIC AND GEOMETRIC PROGRESSIONS

239

Michaelson’s total sales over the first 5 years of operation are found by using

Equation (23) with n ⫽ 5. Thus,

1,000,00031 ⫺ 11.12 54

1 ⫺ 1.1

S5 ⫽

 ⫽ 6,105,100

or $6,105,100.

Double Declining–Balance Method of Depreciation
In  Section  2.5,  we  discussed  the  straight-line,  or  linear,  method  of  depreciating  an
asset. Linear depreciation assumes that the asset depreciates at a constant rate. For cer-
tain assets (such as machines) whose market values drop rapidly in the early years of
usage and thereafter less rapidly, another method of depreciation called the double
declining–balance  method is  often  used.  In  practice,  a  business  firm  normally
employs the double declining–balance method for depreciating such assets for a cer-
tain number of years and then switches over to the linear method.

To  derive  an  expression  for  the  book  value  of  an  asset  being  depreciated  by 
the  double  declining–balance  method,  let  C (in  dollars)  denote  the  original  cost 
of the asset and let the asset be depreciated over N years. When this method is used,
the amount depreciated each year is 
times the value of the asset at the beginning
of that year. Thus, the amount by which the asset is depreciated in its first year of
use is given by 
, so if V(1) denotes the book value of the asset at the end of the
first year, then

2C
N

2
N

V112 ⫽ C ⫺ 2C

N

⫽ Ca 1 ⫺ 2
Nb

Next, if V(2) denotes the book value of the asset at the end of the second year, then a
similar argument leads to

Nb 2

N

V122 ⫽ Ca 1 ⫺ 2
Nb ⫺ Ca 1 ⫺ 2
Nb a 1 ⫺ 2
 ⫽ Ca 1 ⫺ 2
Nb
Nb 2
 ⫽ Ca 1 ⫺ 2

Continuing,  we  find  that  if  V(n)  denotes  the  book  value  of  the  asset  at  the  end  of 
n years, then the terms C, V(1), V(2), . . . , V(N) form a geometric progression with
. Consequently, the nth term, V(n), is given by
first term C and common ratio 

11 ⫺ 2
N2
Nb n
V1n2 ⫽ Ca 1 ⫺ 2

11 ⱕ n ⱕ N2

(24)

Also, if D(n) denotes the amount by which the asset has been depreciated by the end
of the nth year, then

Nb n
D1n2 ⫽ C ⫺ Ca 1 ⫺ 2
Nb nd
 ⫽ Cc 1 ⫺ a 1 ⫺ 2

(25)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

240

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

APPLIED EXAMPLE 9 Depreciation of Equipment A tractor purchased at 
a cost of $60,000 is to be depreciated by the double declining–balance 

method over 10 years. What is the book value of the tractor at the end of 
5 years? By what amount has the tractor been depreciated by the end of the fifth
year?

Solution We have C ⫽ 60,000 and N ⫽ 10. Thus, using Equation (24) with 
n ⫽ 5 gives the book value of the tractor at the end of 5 years as

10b 5

V152 ⫽ 60,000a 1 ⫺ 2
5b 5
 ⫽ 60,000a 4

⫽ 19,660.80

or $19,660.80.

The amount by which the tractor has been depreciated by the end of the fifth

year is given by

60,000 ⫺ 19,660.80 ⫽ 40,339.20

or $40,339.20. You may verify the last result by using Equation (25) directly.

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
A tractor purchased at a cost of $60,000 is to be depreciated over 10 years with
a residual value of $0. When the double declining–balance method is used, its
value at the end of n years is V1(n) ⫽ 60,000(0.8)n dollars. When straight-line
depreciation is used, its value at the end of n years is V2(n) ⫽ 60,000 ⫺ 6000n.
Use a graphing utility to sketch the graphs of V1 and V2 in the viewing window
[0,  10]  ⫻ [0,  70,000].  Comment  on  the  relative  merits  of  each  method  of 
depreciation.

4.4 Self-Check Exercises

1. Find the sum of the first five terms of the geometric pro-

3. Derive the formula for the future value of an annuity [For-

gression with first term ⫺24 and common ratio 

.

mula (9), Section 4.2].

⫺1
2

2. Office equipment purchased for $75,000 is to be depreci-
ated by the double declining-balance method over 5 years.
Find the book value at the end of 3 years.

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 4.4 can be found on 
page 242.

4.4 Concept Questions

1. Suppose  an  arithmetic  progression  has  first  term  a and

2. Suppose a geometric progression has first term a and com-

common difference d.
a. What is the formula for the nth term of this progression?
b. What is the formula for the sum of the first n terms of

mon ratio r.
a. What is the formula for the nth term of this progression?
b. What is the formula for the sum of the first n terms of

this progression?

this progression?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.4 Exercises

In Exercises 1–4, find the nth term of the arithmetic progression
that has the given values of a, d, and n.
1. a ⫽ 6, d ⫽ 3, n ⫽ 9

2. a ⫽ ⫺5, d ⫽ 3, n ⫽ 7

3.

a ⫽ ⫺15, d ⫽ 3
2

, n ⫽ 8

4. a ⫽ 1.2, d ⫽ 0.4, n ⫽ 98

5. Find the first five terms of the arithmetic progression whose

fourth and eleventh terms are 30 and 107, respectively.

6. Find  the  first  five  terms  of  the  arithmetic  progression
whose  seventh  and  twenty-third  terms  are  ⫺5  and  ⫺29,
respectively.

7. Find the seventh term of the arithmetic progression x, x ⫹ y,

x ⫹ 2y, . . . .

8. Find the eleventh term of the arithmetic progression a ⫹ b,

2a, 3a ⫺ b, . . . .

9. Find  the  sum  of  the  first  15  terms  of  the  arithmetic  pro-

gression 4, 11, 18, . . . .

10. Find  the  sum  of  the  first  20  terms  of  the  arithmetic  pro-

gression 5, ⫺1, ⫺7, . . . .

11. Find the sum of the odd integers between 14 and 58.

12. Find the sum of the even integers between 21 and 99.
13. Find f(1) ⫹ f(2) ⫹ f(3) ⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⫹f (22), given that 

14. Find t(1) ⫹ t(2) ⫹ t(3) ⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⫹t(50), given that 

f(x) ⫽ 3x ⫺ 4.

t(x) ⫽ 12 ⫺ 4x.

15. Show that Equation (19) can be written as 

Sn ⫽

n

2  1a ⫹ an2

where an represents the last term of an arithmetic progres-
sion. Use this formula to find:
a. The  sum  of  the  first  11  terms  of  the  arithmetic  pro-
gression  whose  first  and  eleventh  terms  are  3  and  47,
respectively.

b. The sum of the first 20 terms of the arithmetic progres-
sion  whose  first  and  twentieth  terms  are  5  and  ⫺33,
respectively.

16. SALES GROWTH Moderne Furniture Company had sales of
$1,500,000  during  its  first  year  of  operation.  If  the  sales
increased  by  $160,000/year  thereafter,  find  Moderne’s
sales in the fifth year and its total sales over the first 5 years
of operation.

17. EXERCISE PROGRAM As  part  of  her  fitness  program,  Karen
has  taken  up  jogging.  If  she  jogs  1  mi  the  first  day  and
1
increases her daily run by  mi every week, when will she
4
reach her goal of 10 mi/day?

18. COST OF DRILLING A 100-ft oil well is to be drilled. The cost
of drilling the first foot is $10.00, and the cost of drilling

4.4 ARITHMETIC AND GEOMETRIC PROGRESSIONS

241

each additional foot is $4.50 more than that of the preced-
ing foot. Find the cost of drilling the entire 100 ft.

19. CONSUMER DECISIONS Kunwoo  wishes  to  go  from  the  air-
port  to  his  hotel,  which  is  25  mi  away.  The  taxi  rate  is
$2.00 for the first mile and $1.20 for each additional mile.
The airport limousine also goes to his hotel and charges a
flat rate of $15.00. How much money will he save by tak-
ing the airport limousine?

20. SALARY COMPARISONS Markeeta, a recent college graduate,
received two job offers. Company A offered her an initial
salary  of  $48,800  with  guaranteed  annual  increases  of
$2000/year for the first 5 years. Company B offered an ini-
tial salary of $50,400 with guaranteed annual increases of
$1500/year for the first 5 years.
a. Which company is offering a higher salary for the fifth

year of employment?

b. Which  company  is  offering  more  money  for  the  first

5 years of employment?

21. SUM-OF-THE-YEARS’-DIGITS METHOD OF DEPRECIATION One of
the methods that the Internal Revenue Service allows for
computing depreciation of certain business property is the
sum-of-the-years’-digits method. If a property valued at C
dollars has an estimated useful life of N years and a salvage
value  of  S dollars,  then  the  amount  of  depreciation  Dn
allowed during the nth year is given by

Dn ⫽ 1C ⫺ S2 N ⫺ 1n ⫺ 12

SN

(0 ⱕ n ⱕ N)

where SN is the sum of the first N positive integers. Thus,

SN ⫽ 1 ⫹ 2 ⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⫹N ⫽

N1N ⫹ 12

2

a. Verify that the sum of the arithmetic progression 

SN ⫽ 1 ⫹ 2 ⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⫹N is given by

N1N ⫹ 12

2

b. If office furniture worth $6000 is to be depreciated by
this method over N ⫽ 10 years and the salvage value of
the furniture is $500, find the depreciation for the third
year by computing D3.

22. SUM-OF-THE-YEARS’-DIGITS METHOD OF DEPRECIATION Refer to
Example 1, Section 2.5. The amount of depreciation allowed
for a network server, which has an estimated useful life of
5 years, an initial value of $10,000, and a salvage value of
$3000, was $1400/year using the straight-line method of de-
preciation. Determine the amount of depreciation that would
be allowed for the first year if the network server were de-
preciated using the sum-of-the-years’-digits method described
in Exercise 21. Which method would result in a larger depre-
ciation of the asset in its first year of use?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

242

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

In Exercises 23–28, determine which of the sequences are geo-
metric  progressions.  For  each  geometric  progression,  find  the
seventh term and the sum of the first seven terms.
, ⫺1
8

23. 4, 8, 16, 32, . . .

, . . .

24.

1, ⫺1
2

, 

1
4

1
25. ᎏ
2

, ⫺3
8

, 

1
4

, ⫺ 9
64

, . . .

26. 0.004, 0.04, 0.4, 4, . . .

27. 243, 81, 27, 9, . . .

28. ⫺1, 1, 3, 5, . . .

29. Find the twentieth term and sum of the first 20 terms of the

geometric progression ⫺3, 3, ⫺3, 3, . . . .

30. Find the twenty-third term in a geometric progression hav-

ing the first term a ⫽ 0.1 and ratio r ⫽ 2.

31. POPULATION GROWTH It has been projected that the popula-
tion of a certain city in the southwest will increase by 8%
during each of the next 5 years. If the current population is
200,000, what is the expected population after 5 years?

32. SALES GROWTH Metro Cable TV had sales of $2,500,000 in
its first year of operation. If thereafter the sales increased
by 12% of the previous year, find the sales of the company
in the fifth year and the total sales over the first 5 years of
operation.

33. COLAS Suppose the cost-of-living index had increased by
3% during each of the past 6 years and that a member of
the  EUW  Union  had  been  guaranteed  an  annual  increase
equal to 2% above the increase in the cost-of-living index
over  that  period.  What  would  be  the  present  salary  of  a
union member whose salary 6 years ago was $42,000?

34. SAVINGS PLANS The  parents  of  a  9-year-old  boy  have
agreed  to  deposit  $10  in  their  son’s  bank  account  on  his
10th birthday and to double the size of their deposit every
year thereafter until his 18th birthday.
a. How much will they have to deposit on his 18th birth-

day?

b. How much will they have deposited by his 18th birth-

day?

35. SALARY COMPARISONS The starting salary of a Stenton Print-
ing Co. employee is $48,000. The employee has the option of
taking an annual raise of 8%/year or a fixed annual raise of
$4000/year  for  each  of  the  following  three  years.  Which
option would be more profitable to him considering his total
earnings over the 4-year period?

4.4 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. Use  Equation  (23)  with  a ⫽ ⫺24,  n ⫽ 5  and 

r ⫽ ⫺1
2

,

obtaining

⫺2431 ⫺ 1⫺1
22 54
1 ⫺ 1⫺1
22
⫺2411 ⫹ 1
322

S5 ⫽

 ⫽

⫽ ⫺33
2

3
2

36. BACTERIA GROWTH A culture of a certain bacteria is known
to double in number every 3 hr. If the culture has an initial
count of 20, what will be the population of the culture at
the end of 24 hr?

37. TRUST FUNDS Sarah is the recipient of a trust fund that she
will receive over a period of 6 years. Under the terms of the
trust, she is to receive $10,000 the first year and each suc-
ceeding annual payment is to be increased by 15%.
a. How much will she receive during the sixth year?
b. What is the total amount of the six payments she will

receive?

In Exercises 38–40, find the book value of office equipment pur-
chased at a cost C at the end of the nth year if it is to be depreci-
ated by the double declining-balance method over 10 years.
38. C ⫽ $20,000, n ⫽ 4

39. C ⫽ $150,000, n ⫽ 8

40. C ⫽ $80,000, n ⫽ 7
41. DOUBLE DECLINING–BALANCE METHOD OF DEPRECIATION Res-
taurant equipment purchased at a cost of $150,000 is to be
depreciated by the double declining–balance method over
10 years. What is the book value of the equipment at the
end of 6 years? By what amount has the equipment been
depreciated at the end of the sixth year?

42. DOUBLE DECLINING–BALANCE METHOD OF DEPRECIATION Refer
to Exercise 22. Recall that a network server with an esti-
mated useful life of 5 years, an initial value of $10,000, and
a  salvage  value  of  $3000  was  to  be  depreciated.  At  the
end  of  the  first  year,  the  amount  of  depreciation  allowed 
was $1400 using the straight-line method and $2333 using
the sum-of-the-years’-digits method. Determine the amount
of  depreciation  that  would  be  allowed  for  the  first  year
if  the  network  server  were  depreciated  by  the  double
declining–balance method. Which of these three methods
would  result  in  the  largest  depreciation  of  the  network
server at the end of its first year of use?

In Exercises 43 and 44, determine whether the statement is true
or  false.  If  it  is  true,  explain  why  it  is  true.  If  it  is  false,  give  an
example to show why it is false.
43. If a1, a2, a3, . . . , an and b1, b2, b3, . . . , bn are arithmetic
progressions, then a1 ⫹ b1, a2 ⫹ b2, a3 ⫹ b3, . . . , an ⫹ bn
is also an arithmetic progression.

44. If a1, a2, a3, . . . , an and b1, b2, b3, . . . , bn are geometric
progressions, then a1b1, a2b2, a3b3, . . . , anbn is also a geo-
metric progression.

2. Use Equation (24) with C ⫽ 75,000, N ⫽ 5, and n ⫽ 3,
giving the book value of the office equipment at the end of
3 years as

5b 3
V132 ⫽ 75,000a 1 ⫺ 2

⫽ 16,200

or $16,200.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3. We have

S ⫽ R ⫹ R11 ⫹ i2 ⫹ R11 ⫹ i22 ⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⫹R 11 ⫹ i2n⫺1

The sum on the right is easily seen to be the sum of the first
n terms of a geometric progression with first term R and

CONCEPT REVIEW QUESTIONS

243

common ratio (1  ⫹ i), so by virtue of Equation (23), we
obtain

S ⫽ R c 1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ i2 n

1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ i2 d ⫽ Rc 11 ⫹ i2 n ⫺ 1

i

d

CHAPTER 4

Summary of Principal Formulas and Terms

FORMULAS

1. Simple interest (accumulated amount)
2. Compound interest

a. Accumulated amount
b. Present value

c. Interest rate per conversion period

d. Number of conversion periods

3. Continuous compound interest

A ⫽ P11 ⫹ rt2 
A ⫽ P11 ⫹ i2 n
P ⫽ A11 ⫹ i2 ⫺n
i ⫽ r
m
n ⫽ mt

a. Accumulated amount
b. Present value

4. Effective rate of interest

5. Annuities

a. Future value

b. Present value

6. Amortization payment

7. Amount amortized

8. Sinking fund payment

TERMS

simple interest (190)
accumulated amount (190)
compound interest (191)
nominal rate (stated rate) (191)
conversion period (192)

⫺ 1

A ⫽ Pert
P ⫽ Ae⫺rt
mb m
reff ⫽ a 1 ⫹ r
S ⫽ Rc 11 ⫹ i2 n ⫺ 1
d
P ⫽ Rc 1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ i2 ⫺n
1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ i2 ⫺n
P ⫽ R c 1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ i2 ⫺n

R ⫽

i

i

d

d

Pi

i

R ⫽

iS

11 ⫹ i2 n ⫺ 1

effective rate (196)
present value (198)
future value (198)
annuity (208)
annuity certain (208)

ordinary annuity (208)
simple annuity (209)
future value of an annuity (210)
present value of an annuity (211)
sinking fund (225)

CHAPTER 4

Concept Review Questions

Fill in the blanks.
1. a. Simple  interest  is  computed  on  the  _____ principal
only.  The  formula  for  the  accumulated  amount  using
simple interest is A ⫽ _____.

b. In calculations using compound interest, earned interest
is  periodically  added  to  the  principal  and  thereafter

itself  earns  _____.  The  formula  for  the  accumulated
amount using compound interest is A ⫽ _____. Solving
this equation for P gives the present value formula using
compound interest as P ⫽ _____.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

244

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

2. The effective rate of interest is the _____ interest rate that
would produce the same accumulated amount in _____ year
as the _____ rate compounded _____ times a year. The for-
mula for calculating the effective rate is reff ⫽ _____.

3. A sequence of payments made at regular time intervals is
called a/an _____; if the payments are made at the end of
each payment period, then it is called a/an _____ _____; if
the payment period coincides with the interest conversion
period, then it is called a/an _____ _____.

4. The formula for the future value of an annuity is S ⫽ _____.
The formula for the present value of an annuity is P ⫽ _____.

5. The periodic payment R on a loan of P dollars to be amor-
tized over n periods with interest charged at the rate of i per
period is R ⫽ _____.

6. A sinking fund is an account that is set up for a specific pur-
pose at some _____ date. The periodic payment R required
to accumulate a sum of S dollars over n periods with inter-
est charged at the rate of i per period is R ⫽ _____.

7. An  arithmetic  progression  is  a  sequence  of  numbers  in
which each term after the first is obtained by adding a/an
_____ _____ to  the  preceding  term.  The  nth  term  of  an
arithmetic progression is an ⫽ _____. The sum of the first
n terms of an arithmetic progression is Sn ⫽ _____.

8. A geometric progression is a sequence of numbers in which
each term after the first is obtained by multiplying the pre-
ceding term by a/an _____ _____. The nth term of a geo-
metric progression is an ⫽ _____. If r ⫽ 1, the sum of the
first n terms of a geometric progression is Sn ⫽ _____.

CHAPTER 4

Review Exercises

1. Find  the  accumulated  amount  after  4  years  if  $5000  is
invested at 10%/year compounded (a) annually, (b) semi-
annually, (c) quarterly, and (d) monthly.

12. Find the payment R needed to amortize a loan of $10,000
at  9.2%/year  compounded  monthly  with  36  monthly  in-
stallments over a period of 3 years.

2. Find the accumulated amount after 8 years if $12,000 is in-
vested  at  6.5%/year  compounded  (a)  annually,  (b)  semi-
annually, (c) quarterly, and (d) monthly.

13. Find  the  payment  R needed  to  accumulate  $18,000  with
48 monthly  installments  over  a  period  of  4  years  at  an
interest rate of 6%/year compounded monthly.

3. Find the effective rate of interest corresponding to a nomi-
nal rate of 12%/year compounded (a) annually, (b) semi-
annually, (c) quarterly, and (d) monthly.

14. Find  the  payment  R needed  to  accumulate  $15,000  with
60 monthly  installments  over  a  period  of  5  years  at  an
interest rate of 7.2%/year compounded monthly.

4. Find the effective rate of interest corresponding to a nomi-
nal rate of 11.5%/year compounded (a) annually, (b) semi-
annually, (c) quarterly, and (d) monthly.

5. Find the present value of $41,413 due in 5 years at an inter-

est rate of 6.5%/year compounded quarterly.

6. Find the present value of $64,540 due in 6 years at an inter-

est rate of 8%/year compounded monthly.

7. Find the amount (future value) of an ordinary annuity of
$150/quarter for 7 years at 8%/year compounded quarterly.

8. Find the future value of an ordinary annuity of $120/month

for 10 years at 9%/year compounded monthly.

9. Find  the  present  value  of  an  ordinary  annuity  of  36  pay-
ments of $250 each made monthly and earning interest at
9%/year compounded monthly.

15. Find the effective rate of interest corresponding to a nomi-

nal rate of 7.2%/year compounded monthly.

16. Find the effective rate of interest corresponding to a nomi-

nal rate of 9.6%/year compounded monthly.

17. Find  the  present  value  of  $119,346  due  in  4  years  at  an

interest rate of 10%/year compounded continuously.

18. COMPANY SALES JCN Media had sales of $1,750,000 in the
first year of operation. If the sales increased by 14%/year
thereafter, find the company’s sales in the fourth year and
the total sales over the first 4 years of operation.

19. CDS The manager of a money market fund has invested $4.2
million in certificates of deposit that pay interest at the rate of
5.4%/year  compounded  quarterly  over  a  period  of  5 years.
How much will the investment be worth at the end of 5 years?

10. Find  the  present  value  of  an  ordinary  annuity  of  60  pay-
ments of $5000 each made quarterly and earning interest at
8%/year compounded quarterly.

11. Find the payment R needed to amortize a loan of $22,000
at  8.5%/year  compounded  monthly  with  36  monthly  in-
stallments over a period of 3 years.

20. SAVINGS ACCOUNTS Emily  deposited  $2000  into  a  bank 
account 5 years ago. The bank paid interest at the rate of
8%/year  compounded  weekly.  What  is  Emily’s  account
worth today?

21. SAVINGS ACCOUNTS Kim  invested  a  sum  of  money  4  years
ago in a savings account that has since paid interest at the

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

rate of 6.5%/year compounded monthly. Her investment is
now worth $19,440.31. How much did she originally invest?

22. SAVINGS ACCOUNTS Andrew  withdrew  $5986.09  from  a
savings  account,  which  he  closed  this  morning.  The
account  had  earned  interest  at  the  rate  of  6%/year  com-
pounded  continuously  during  the  3-year period  that  the
money was on deposit. How much did Andrew originally
deposit into the account?

23. MUTUAL FUNDS Juan  invested  $24,000  in  a  mutual  fund
5 years ago. Today his investment is worth $34,616. Find
the effective annual rate of return on his investment over
the 5-year period.

24. COLLEGE SAVINGS PROGRAM The  Blakes  have  decided  to
start a monthly savings program to provide for their son’s
college  education.  How  much  should  they  deposit  at  the
end of each month in a savings account earning interest at
the  rate  of  8%/year  compounded  monthly  so  that,  at  the
end  of  the  tenth  year,  the  accumulated  amount  will  be
$40,000?

25. RETIREMENT ACCOUNTS Mai Lee has contributed $200 at the
end  of  each  month  into  her  company’s  employee  retire-
ment  account  for  the  past  10  years.  Her  employer  has
matched  her  contribution  each  month.  If  the  account  has
earned interest at the rate of 8%/year compounded monthly
over  the  10-year  period,  determine  how  much  Mai  Lee
now has in her retirement account.

26. AUTOMOBILE LEASING Maria has leased an auto for 4 years
at  $300/month.  If  money  is  worth  5%/year  compounded
monthly,  what  is  the  equivalent  cash  payment  (present
value)  of  this  annuity?  (Assume  that  the  payments  are
made at the end of each month.)

27. INSTALLMENT FINANCING Peggy  made  a  down  payment  of
$400 toward the purchase of new furniture. To pay the bal-
ance of the purchase price, she has secured a loan from her
bank at 12%/year compounded monthly. Under the terms
of her finance agreement, she is required to make payments
of $75.32 at the end of each month for 24 months. What
was the purchase price of the furniture?

28. HOME FINANCING The Turners have purchased a house for
$150,000. They made an initial down payment of $30,000
and secured a mortgage with interest charged at the rate of
9%/year on the unpaid balance. (Interest computations are
made at the end of each month.) Assume that the loan is
amortized over 30 years.

CHAPTER 4

Before Moving On . . .

BEFORE MOVING ON . . . 

245

a. What monthly payment will the Turners be required to

make?

b. What will be their total interest payment?
c. What will be their equity (disregard depreciation) after

10 years?

29. HOME FINANCING Refer to Exercise 28. If the loan is amor-

tized over 15 years:
a. What monthly payment will the Turners be required to

make?

b. What will be their total interest payment?
c. What will be their equity (disregard depreciation) after

10 years?

30. SINKING FUNDS The  management  of  a  corporation  antici-
pates a capital expenditure of $500,000 in 5 years for the
purpose of purchasing replacement machinery. To finance
this purchase, a sinking fund that earns interest at the rate
of 10%/year compounded quarterly will be set up. Deter-
mine the amount of each (equal) quarterly installment that
should  be  deposited  in  the  fund.  (Assume  that  the  pay-
ments are made at the end of each quarter.)

31. SINKING FUNDS The management of a condominium associ-
ation  anticipates  a  capital  expenditure  of  $120,000  in
2 years for the purpose of painting the exterior of the con-
dominium.  To pay  for  this  maintenance,  a  sinking  fund
will be set up that will earn interest at the rate of 5.8%/year
compounded  monthly.  Determine  the  amount  of  each
(equal)  monthly  installment  the  association  will  be  re-
quired to deposit into the fund at the end of each month for
the next 2 years.

32. CREDIT CARD PAYMENTS The outstanding balance on Bill’s
credit card account is $3200. The bank issuing the credit
card is charging 18.6%/year compounded monthly. If Bill
decides  to  pay  off  this  balance  in  equal  monthly  install-
ments  at  the  end  of  each  month  for  the  next  18  months,
how much will be his monthly payment? What is the effec-
tive rate of interest the bank is charging Bill?

33. FINANCIAL PLANNING Matt’s  parents  have  agreed  to  con-
tribute $250/month toward the rent for his apartment in his
junior year in college. The plan is for Matt’s parents to de-
posit a lump sum in Matt’s bank account on August 1 and
then have Matt withdraw $250 on the first of each month
starting on September 1 and ending on May 1 the follow-
ing year. If the bank pays interest on the balance at the rate
of  5%/year  compounded  monthly,  how  much  should
Matt’s parents deposit into his account?

1. Find the accumulated amount at the end of 3 years if $2000 
is  deposited  in  an  account  paying  interest  at  the  rate  of
8%/year compounded monthly.

2. Find the effective rate of interest corresponding to a nomi-
nal rate of 6%/year compounded daily. (Use a 365-day year.)

3. Find the future value of an ordinary annuity of $800/week

for 10 years at 6%/year compounded weekly.

4. Find the monthly payment required to amortize a loan of
$100,000 over 10 years with interest earned at the rate of
8%/year compounded monthly.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

246

CHAPTER 4 MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE

5. Find the weekly payment required to accumulate a sum of
$15,000  over  6  years  with  interest  earned  at  the  rate  of
10%/year compounded weekly.

6. a. Find the sum of the first ten terms of the arithmetic pro-

gression 3, 7, 11, 15, 19, . . . .

b. Find the sum of the first eight terms of the geometric

progression 1

2, 1, 2, 4, 8, . . . .

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5

SYSTEMS OF LINEAR 
EQUATIONS AND
MATRICES

© Philip Lange 2010/Shutterstock.com

THE LINEAR EQUATIONS in two variables that we studied in 

Chapter 2 are readily extended to cases involving more than

two variables. For example, a linear equation in three variables

represents a plane in three-dimensional space. In this chapter, we

see how some real-world problems can be formulated in terms of

systems of linear equations, and we develop two methods for

solving these equations.

In addition, we see how matrices (rectangular arrays of

numbers) can be used to write systems of linear equations in

compact form. We then go on to consider some real-life

applications of matrices. 

Checkers Rent-A-Car is planning to

expand its fleet of cars next quarter.

How should the company use its budget

of $12 million to meet the expected

additional demand for compact and full-

size cars? In Example 5, page 316, we

will see how we can find the solution 

to this problem by solving a system of

equations.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

247

248

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

5.1

Systems of Linear Equations: An Introduction

Systems of Equations
Recall  that  in  Section  2.5,  we  had  to  solve  two  simultaneous  linear  equations  to
find  the  break-even  point and  the  equilibrium  point.  These  are  two  examples  of
real-world problems that call for the solution of a system of linear equations in
two or more variables. In this chapter, we take up a more systematic study of such 
systems.

We begin by considering a system of two linear equations in two variables. Recall

that such a system may be written in the general form

ax ⫹ by ⫽ h
cx ⫹ dy ⫽ k

(1)

where  a,  b,  c,  d,  h,  and  k are  real  constants  and  neither  a and  b nor  c and  d are 
both zero.

Now  let’s  study  the  nature  of  the  solution  of  a  system  of  linear  equations in
more detail. Recall that the graph of each equation in System (1) is a straight line in
the plane, so geometrically, the solution to the system is the point(s) of intersection of
the two straight lines L1 and L2, represented by the first and second equations of the
system.

Given two lines L1 and L2, one and only one of the following may occur:

a. L1 and L2 intersect at exactly one point.
b. L1 and L2 are parallel and coincident.
c. L1 and L2 are parallel and distinct.
(See Figure 1.) In the first case, the system has a unique solution corresponding to
the single point of intersection of the two lines. In the second case, the system has
infinitely  many  solutions  corresponding  to  the  points  lying  on  the  same  line.
Finally, in the third case, the system has no solution because the two lines do not
intersect.

y

y

y

L1 L 2

L1

L 2

L1

L 2

x

x

x

(a) Unique solution
FIGURE 1

(b) Infinitely many solutions

(c) No solution

Explore & Discuss
Generalize the discussion on this page to the case in which there are three straight lines in
the plane defined by three linear equations. What if there are n lines defined by n equations?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

5.1 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS: AN INTRODUCTION

249

Let’s illustrate each of these possibilities by considering some specific examples.

1. A system of equations with exactly one solution Consider the system

2 x ⫺  y ⫽ 1
3x ⫹ 2y ⫽ 12

Solving the first equation for y in terms of x, we obtain the equation

Substituting this expression for y into the second equation yields

y ⫽ 2x ⫺ 1

3x ⫹ 212 x ⫺ 12 ⫽ 12
3x ⫹ 4 x ⫺ 2 ⫽ 12
7x ⫽ 14
x ⫽ 2

Finally, substituting this value of x into the expression for y obtained earlier gives

y ⫽ 2122 ⫺ 1 ⫽ 3

Therefore, the unique solution of the system is given by x ⫽ 2 and y ⫽ 3. Geo-
metrically, the two lines represented by the two linear equations that make up the
system intersect at the point (2, 3) (Figure 2).

y

5

2x – y = 1

(2, 3)

3x + 2y = 12

x

5

FIGURE 2
A system of equations with one solution

Note We can check our result by substituting the values x ⫽ 2 and y ⫽ 3 into the
equations. Thus,

 2122 ⫺ 132 ⫽ 1
 3122 ⫹ 2132 ⫽ 12

✓

✓

From the geometric point of view, we have just verified that the point (2, 3) lies on
both lines.

2. A system of equations with infinitely many solutions Consider the system

2 x ⫺  y ⫽ 1
6x ⫺ 3y ⫽ 3

Solving the first equation for y in terms of x, we obtain the equation

Substituting this expression for y into the second equation gives

y ⫽ 2x ⫺ 1

6x ⫺ 312x ⫺ 12 ⫽ 3
  6x ⫺ 6x ⫹ 3 ⫽ 3
0 ⫽ 0
 

which is a true statement. This result follows from the fact that the second equation
is equivalent to the first. (To see this, just multiply both sides of the first equation
by 3.) Our computations have revealed that the system of two equations is equiva-
lent to the single equation 2x ⫺ y ⫽ 1. Thus, any ordered pair of numbers (x, y) 
satisfying the equation 2x ⫺ y ⫽ 1 (or y ⫽ 2x ⫺ 1) constitutes a solution to the 
system.

In particular, by assigning the value t to x, where t is any real number, we find
that y ⫽ 2t ⫺ 1, so the ordered pair (t, 2t ⫺ 1) is a solution of the system. The vari-
able t is called a parameter. For example, setting t ⫽ 0 gives the point (0, ⫺1) as
a solution of the system, and setting t ⫽ 1 gives the point (1, 1) as another solution.
Since t represents any real number, there are infinitely many solutions of the sys-

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

250

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

y

5

2x – y = 1
6x – 3y = 3

tem. Geometrically, the two equations in the system represent the same line, and
all solutions of the system are points lying on the line (Figure 3). Such a system is
said to be dependent.

3. A system of equations that has no solution Consider the system

x

5

FIGURE 3
A system of equations with infinitely
many solutions; each point on the line is a
solution.

y

4

2x – y = 1

6x – 3y = 12

x

5

FIGURE 4
A system of equations with no solution

2x ⫺ y ⫽ 1
6x ⫺ 3y ⫽ 12

The first equation is equivalent to y ⫽ 2x ⫺ 1. Substituting this expression for y
into the second equation gives

6x ⫺ 312x ⫺ 12 ⫽ 12
6x ⫺ 6x ⫹ 3 ⫽ 12
0 ⫽ 9

which is clearly impossible. Thus, there is no solution to the system of equations.
To interpret this situation geometrically, cast both equations in the slope-intercept
form, obtaining

y ⫽ 2x ⫺ 1
y ⫽ 2x ⫺ 4

We  see  at  once  that  the  lines  represented  by  these  equations  are  parallel  (each 
has  slope  2)  and  distinct,  since  the  first  has  y-intercept  ⫺1  and  the  second  has 
y-intercept ⫺4 (Figure 4). Systems with no solutions, such as this one, are said to
be inconsistent.

Explore & Discuss
1. Consider a system composed of two linear equations in two variables. Can the sys-
tem have exactly two solutions? Exactly three solutions? Exactly a finite number of
solutions?

2. Suppose at least one of the equations in a system composed of two equations in two vari-

ables is nonlinear. Can the system have no solution? Exactly one solution? Exactly two
solutions? Exactly a finite number of solutions? Infinitely many solutions? Illustrate each
answer with a sketch.

Note We have used the method of substitution in solving each of these systems. If
you are familiar with the method of elimination, you might want to re-solve each of
these systems using this method. We will study the method of elimination in detail in
Section 5.2.

In Section 2.5, we presented some real-world applications of systems involving
two linear equations in two variables. Here is an example involving a system of three
linear equations in three variables.

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 1 Manufacturing: Production Scheduling Ace Novelty
wishes to produce three types of souvenirs: Types A, B, and C. To manu-

facture a Type A souvenir requires 2 minutes on Machine I, 1 minute on Machine
II, and 2 minutes on Machine III. A Type B souvenir requires 1 minute on
Machine I, 3 minutes on Machine II, and 1 minute on Machine III. A Type C
souvenir requires 1 minute on Machine I and 2 minutes each on Machines II and
III. There are 3 hours available on Machine I, 5 hours available on Machine II,
and 4 hours available on Machine III for processing the order. How many sou-

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

5.1 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS: AN INTRODUCTION

251

venirs of each type should Ace Novelty make in order to use all of the available
time? Formulate but do not solve the problem. (We will solve this problem in
Example 7, Section 5.2.)

Solution The given information may be tabulated as follows:

Type A

Type B

Type C

Time Available (min)

Machine I
Machine II
Machine III

2
1
2

1
3
1

1
2
2

180
300
240

We have to determine the number of each of three types of souvenirs to be made.
So let x, y, and z denote the respective numbers of Type A, Type B, and Type C
souvenirs to be made. The total amount of time that Machine I is used is given by
2x ⫹ y ⫹ z minutes and must equal 180 minutes. This leads to the equation

2x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⫽ 180

Time spent on Machine I

Similar considerations on the use of Machines II and III lead to the following
equations:

x ⫹ 3y ⫹ 2z ⫽ 300
2x ⫹ y ⫹ 2z ⫽ 240

Time spent on Machine II

Time spent on Machine III

Since the variables x, y, and z must satisfy simultaneously the three conditions
represented by the three equations, the solution to the problem is found by solv-
ing the following system of linear equations:

 2 x ⫹  y ⫹  z ⫽ 180
 x ⫹ 3y ⫹ 2z ⫽ 300
 2 x ⫹  y ⫹ 2z ⫽ 240

Solutions of Systems of Equations
We will complete the solution of the problem posed in Example 1 later on (page 265).
For the moment, let’s look at a geometric interpretation of a system of linear equa-
tions, such as the system in Example 1, to gain some insight into the nature of the solu-
tion.

A linear system composed of three linear equations in three variables x, y, and z

has the general form

a1 x ⫹ b1  y ⫹ c1z ⫽ d1
a2 x ⫹ b2  y ⫹ c2 z ⫽ d2
a3 x ⫹ b3  y ⫹ c3 z ⫽ d3

(2)

Just as a linear equation in two variables represents a straight line in the plane, it can
be shown that a linear equation ax ⫹ by ⫹ cz ⫽ d (a, b, and c not all equal to zero)
in three variables represents a plane in three-dimensional space. Thus, each equation
in System (2) represents a plane in three-dimensional space, and the solution(s) of the
system is precisely the point(s) of intersection of the three planes defined by the three
linear equations that make up the system. As before, the system has one and only one
solution, infinitely many solutions, or no solution, depending on whether and how the
planes intersect one another. Figure 5 illustrates each of these possibilities.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

252

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

In Figure 5a, the three planes intersect at a point corresponding to the situation in
which System (2) has a unique solution. Figure 5b depicts a situation in which there
are infinitely many solutions to the system. Here, the three planes intersect along a
line, and the solutions are represented by the infinitely many points lying on this line.
In Figure 5c, the three planes are parallel and distinct, so there is no point common to
all three planes; System (2) has no solution in this case.

P3

P2

P1

P3

P2

P1

P1

P2

P3

(a) A unique solution
FIGURE 5

(b) Infinitely many solutions

(c) No solution

Note The  situations  depicted  in  Figure  5  are  by  no  means  exhaustive.  You  may
consider various other orientations of the three planes that would illustrate the three
possible outcomes in solving a system of linear equations involving three variables.

Linear Equations in n Variables
A linear equation in n variables, x1, x2, . . . , xn is an equation of the form

a1x1 ⫹ a2x2 ⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⫹ anxn ⫽ c
where a1, a2, . . . , an (not all zero) and c are constants.

For example, the equation

3x1 ⫹ 2x2 ⫺ 4x3 ⫹ 6x4 ⫽ 8

is a linear equation in the four variables, x1, x2, x3, and x4.

When  the  number  of  variables  involved  in  a  linear  equation  exceeds  three,
we no longer have the geometric interpretation we had for the lower-dimensional
spaces. Nevertheless, the algebraic concepts of the lower-dimensional spaces gen-
eralize  to  higher  dimensions.  For  this  reason,  a  linear  equation  in  n variables, 
a1x1 ⫹ a2x2 ⫹ . . . ⫹ anxn ⫽ c, where a1, a2, . . . , an are not all zero, is referred to
as an n-dimensional hyperplane. We may interpret the solution(s) to a system com-
prising a finite number of such linear equations to be the point(s) of intersection of
the hyperplanes defined by the equations that make up the system. As in the case of
systems involving two or three variables, it can be shown that only three possibili-
ties exist regarding the nature of the solution of such a system: (1) a unique solu-
tion, (2) infinitely many solutions, or (3) no solution.

Explore & Discuss
Refer to the Note above.
Using the orientation of three
planes, illustrate the outcomes in
solving a system of three linear
equations in three variables that
result in no solution or infinitely
many solutions.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

5.1 Self-Check Exercises

VIDEO

1. Determine whether the system of linear equations

2x ⫺ 3y ⫽ 12
x ⫹ 2y ⫽ 6

has (a) a unique solution, (b) infinitely many solutions, or
(c)  no  solution.  Find  all  solutions  whenever  they  exist.
Make a sketch of the set of lines described by the system.

2. A  farmer  has  200  acres  of  land  suitable  for  cultivating
Crops A, B, and C. The cost per acre of cultivating Crops A,
B, and C is $40, $60, and $80, respectively. The farmer has

5.1 Concept Questions

5.1 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS: AN INTRODUCTION

253

$12,600  available  for  cultivation.  Each  acre  of  Crop  A
requires  20  labor-hours,  each  acre  of  Crop  B requires  25
labor-hours,  and  each  acre  of  Crop  C requires  40  labor-
hours.  The  farmer  has  a  maximum  of  5950  labor-hours
available. If she wishes to use all of her cultivatable land,
the  entire  budget,  and  all  the  labor  available,  how  many
acres of each crop should she plant? Formulate but do not
solve the problem.

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 5.1 can be found on 
page 255.

1. Suppose you are given a system of two linear equations in

2. Suppose you are given a system of two linear equations in

two variables.
a. What can you say about the solution(s) of the system of

equations?

b. Give a geometric interpretation of your answers to the

question in part (a).

two variables.
a. Explain what it means for the system to be dependent.
b. Explain what it means for the system to be inconsistent.

5.1 Exercises

In  Exercises  1–16,  determine  whether  each  system  of  linear
equations has (a) one and only one solution, (b) infinitely many
solutions,  or  (c)  no  solution.  Find  all  solutions  whenever  they
exist.
1.

2.

x ⫺ 3y ⫽ ⫺1
4x ⫹ 3y ⫽ 11

2 x ⫺ 4y ⫽ 5
3x ⫹ 2y ⫽ 6

3.

 x ⫹ 4y ⫽ 7

1
2

 x ⫹ 2y ⫽ 5

5.

x ⫹ 2y ⫽ 7
2x ⫺ y ⫽ 4

7.

9.

2 x ⫺ 5y ⫽ 10
6 x ⫺ 15y ⫽ 30

4 x ⫺ 5y ⫽ 14
2 x ⫹ 3y ⫽ ⫺4

11.

2x ⫺ 3y ⫽ 6
6x ⫺ 9y ⫽ 12

4.

3x ⫺ 4y ⫽ 7
9x ⫺ 12y ⫽ 14

6.

3
2

 x ⫺  2y ⫽ 4
 x ⫹ 1
3

 y ⫽ 2

8.

10.

12.

 5x ⫺  6y ⫽ 8
10x ⫺ 12y ⫽ 16
 x ⫺ 2
3
 x ⫹ 5
3

 y ⫽ 3

 y ⫽ 6

5
4
1
 
4

2
 
3
1
2

 x ⫹  y ⫽ 5

 x ⫹ 3
4

 y ⫽ 15
4

13.

15.

⫺ 3x ⫹ 5y   ⫽ 1
   2x ⫺ 4y ⫽ ⫺1

     3x ⫺ 6y ⫽ 2
⫺ 3
2

x ⫹ 3y ⫽ ⫺1

14.

16.

⫺ 10x ⫹ 15y ⫽ ⫺3
      4x ⫺    6y ⫽ ⫺3
x ⫺ 1
3
2
2
⫺ x   ⫹ 1
3

y ⫽ ⫺2
3

y ⫽ 1

17. Determine  the  value  of  k for  which  the  system  of  linear

equations

2 x ⫺    y ⫽ 3
 4 x ⫹ ky ⫽ 4

has no solution.

18. Determine  the  value  of  k for  which  the  system  of  linear

equations

3x ⫹ 4 y ⫽ 12
 x ⫹ k y ⫽   4

has infinitely many solutions. Then find all solutions cor-
responding to this value of k.

In Exercises 19–31, formulate but do not solve the problem. You
will be asked to solve these problems in the next section.
19. AGRICULTURE The Johnson Farm has 500 acres of land allot-
ted  for  cultivating  corn  and  wheat.  The  cost  of  cultivating

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

254

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

corn and wheat (including seeds and labor) is $42 and $30 per
acre, respectively. Jacob Johnson has $18,600 available for
cultivating these crops. If he wishes to use all the allotted land
and  his  entire  budget  for  cultivating  these  two  crops,  how
many acres of each crop should he plant?

20. INVESTMENTS Michael Perez has a total of $2000 on deposit
with two savings institutions. One pays interest at the rate
of 6%/year, whereas the other pays interest at the rate of
8%/year. If Michael earned a total of $144 in interest dur-
ing  a  single  year,  how  much  does  he  have  on  deposit  in
each institution?

21. MIXTURES The Coffee Shoppe sells a coffee blend made
from two coffees, one costing $5/lb and the other costing
$6/lb.  If  the  blended  coffee  sells  for  $5.60/lb,  find  how
much  of  each  coffee is used to obtain the desired blend.
Assume that the weight of the blended coffee is 100 lb.

22. INVESTMENTS Kelly Fisher has a total of $30,000 invested
in  two  municipal  bonds  that  have  yields  of  8%  and  10%
interest per year, respectively. If the interest Kelly receives
from the bonds in a year is $2640, how much does she have
invested in each bond?

23. RIDERSHIP The total number of passengers riding a certain
city bus during the morning shift is 1000. If the child’s fare
is $0.50, the adult fare is $1.50, and the total revenue from
the fares in the morning shift is $1300, how many children
and  how  many  adults  rode  the  bus  during  the  morning
shift?

24. REAL ESTATE Cantwell Associates, a real estate developer, is
planning to build a new apartment complex consisting of one-
bedroom units and two- and three-bedroom townhouses. A
total of 192 units is planned, and the number of family units
(two- and three-bedroom townhouses) will equal the number
of one-bedroom units. If the number of one-bedroom units
will be 3 times the number of three-bedroom units, find how
many units of each type will be in the complex.

25. INVESTMENT PLANNING The annual returns on Sid Carring-
ton’s  three  investments  amounted  to  $21,600:  6%  on  a
savings  account,  8%  on  mutual  funds,  and  12%  on
bonds.  The  amount  of  Sid’s  investment  in  bonds  was
twice  the  amount  of  his  investment  in  the  savings
account,  and  the  interest  earned  from  his  investment  in
bonds  was  equal  to  the  dividends  he  received  from  his
investment  in  mutual  funds.  Find  how  much  money  he
placed in each type of investment.

26. INVESTMENT CLUB A private investment club has $200,000
earmarked for investment in stocks. To arrive at an accept-
able  overall  level  of  risk,  the  stocks  that  management  is
considering  have  been  classified  into  three  categories: 
high-risk,  medium-risk,  and  low-risk.  Management  esti-
mates  that  high-risk  stocks  will  have  a  rate  of  return  of
15%/year;  medium-risk  stocks,  10%/year;  and  low-risk
stocks,  6%/year.  The  members  have  decided  that  the
investment in low-risk stocks should be equal to the sum of
the investments in the stocks of the other two categories.
Determine how much the club should invest in each type of

stock  if  the  investment  goal  is  to  have  a  return  of
$20,000/year on the total investment. (Assume that all the
money available for investment is invested.)

27. MIXTURE PROBLEM—FERTILIZER Lawnco  produces 

three
grades of commercial fertilizers. A 100-lb bag of grade A
fertilizer contains 18 lb of nitrogen, 4 lb of phosphate, and
5 lb of potassium. A 100-lb bag of grade B fertilizer con-
tains  20  lb  of  nitrogen  and  4  lb  each  of  phosphate  and
potassium.  A  100-lb  bag  of  grade  C  fertilizer  contains 
24 lb of nitrogen, 3 lb of phosphate, and 6 lb of potassium.
How many 100-lb bags of each of the three grades of fer-
tilizers  should  Lawnco  produce  if  26,400  lb  of  nitrogen,
4900 lb of phosphate, and 6200 lb of potassium are avail-
able and all the nutrients are used?

28. BOX-OFFICE RECEIPTS A  theater  has  a  seating  capacity  of
900 and charges $4 for children, $6 for students, and $8 for
adults.  At  a  certain  screening  with  full  attendance,  there
were  half  as  many  adults  as  children  and  students  com-
bined.  The  receipts  totaled  $5600.  How  many  children
attended the show?

29. MANAGEMENT DECISIONS The management of Hartman Rent-
A-Car has allocated $2.25 million to buy a fleet of new auto-
mobiles consisting of compact, intermediate-size, and full-
size  cars.  Compacts  cost  $18,000  each,  intermediate-size
cars cost $27,000 each, and full-size cars cost $36,000 each.
If Hartman purchases twice as many compacts as intermedi-
ate-size cars and the total number of cars to be purchased is
100,  determine  how  many  cars  of  each  type  will  be  pur-
chased. (Assume that the entire budget will be used.)

30. INVESTMENT CLUBS The  management  of  a  private  invest-
ment  club  has  a  fund  of  $200,000  earmarked  for  invest-
ment in stocks. To arrive at an acceptable overall level of
risk, the stocks that management is considering have been
classified  into  three  categories:  high-risk,  medium-risk,
and low-risk. Management estimates that high-risk stocks
will have a rate of return of 15%/year; medium-risk stocks,
10%/year; and low-risk stocks, 6%/year. The investment in
low-risk stocks is to be twice the sum of the investments in
stocks of the other two categories. If the investment goal is
to have an average rate of return of 9%/year on the total
investment, determine how much the club should invest in
each type of stock. (Assume that all the money available
for investment is invested.)

31. DIET PLANNING A  dietitian  wishes  to  plan  a  meal  around
three foods. The percentages of the daily requirements of
proteins, carbohydrates, and iron contained in each ounce
of the three foods are summarized in the following table:

Food I

Food II

Food III

Proteins (%)
Carbohydrates (%)
Iron (%)

10
10
5

6
12
4

8
6
12

Determine  how  many  ounces  of  each  food  the  dietitian
should include in the meal to meet exactly the daily require-
ment of proteins, carbohydrates, and iron (100% of each).

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.2 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS: UNIQUE SOLUTIONS

255

33. Suppose the straight lines represented by a system of three
linear equations in two variables are parallel to each other.
Then the system has no solution, or it has infinitely many
solutions.

34. If  at  least  two  of  the  three  lines  represented  by  a  system
composed  of  three  linear  equations  in  two  variables  are
parallel, then the system has no solution.

2. Let x, y, and z denote the number of acres of Crop A, Crop
B, and Crop C, respectively, to be cultivated. Then the con-
dition that all the cultivatable land be used translates into
the equation

x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⫽ 200

Next, the total cost incurred in cultivating all three crops is
40x ⫹ 60y ⫹ 80z dollars, and since the entire budget is to
be expended, we have

40x ⫹ 60y ⫹ 80z ⫽ 12,600

Finally, the amount of labor required to cultivate all three
crops is 20x ⫹ 25y ⫹ 40z hours, and since all the available
labor is to be used, we have

20x ⫹ 25y ⫹ 40z ⫽ 5950

Thus, the solution is found by solving the following system
of linear equations:

 x ⫹  y ⫹  z ⫽ 200
40x ⫹ 60y ⫹ 80z ⫽ 12,600
20x ⫹ 25y ⫹ 40z ⫽   5,950

In Exercises 32–34, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
32. A system composed of two linear equations must have at
least one solution if the straight lines represented by these
equations are nonparallel.

5.1 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. Solving the first equation for y in terms of x, we obtain

y ⫽ 2
3

 x ⫺ 4

Next, substituting this result into the second equation of the
system, we find

x ⫹ 2 a2
3
x ⫹ 4
3

 x ⫺ 4b ⫽ 6
 x ⫺ 8 ⫽ 6

7
 
3

 x ⫽ 14

x ⫽ 6

Substituting  this  value  of  x into  the  expression  for  y ob-
tained earlier, we have
y ⫽ 2
3

 162 ⫺ 4 ⫽ 0

Therefore,  the  system  has  the  unique  solution  x ⫽ 6  and 
y ⫽ 0. Both lines are shown in the accompanying figure.

y

5

x ⫹ 2y ⫽ 6

(6, 0)

x

⫺3

2x ⫺ 3y ⫽ 12

5.2

Systems of Linear Equations: Unique Solutions

The Gauss–Jordan Method
The method of substitution used in Section 5.1 is well suited to solving a system of
linear equations when the number of linear equations and variables is small. But for
large systems, the steps involved in the procedure become difficult to manage.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

256

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

The Gauss–Jordan elimination method is a suitable technique for solving sys-
tems of linear equations of any size. One advantage of this technique is its adaptabil-
ity to the computer. This method involves a sequence of operations on a system of lin-
ear equations to obtain at each stage an equivalent system—that is, a system having
the same solution as the original system. The reduction is complete when the original
system has been transformed so that it is in a certain standard form from which the
solution can be easily read.

The operations of the Gauss–Jordan elimination method are as follows:

1. Interchange any two equations.
2. Replace an equation by a nonzero constant multiple of itself.
3. Replace an equation by the sum of that equation and a constant multiple of any

other equation.

To illustrate the Gauss–Jordan elimination method for solving systems of linear

equations, let’s apply it to the solution of the following system:

2 x ⫹ 4 y ⫽ 8
3x ⫺ 2y ⫽ 4

We begin by working with the first, or x, column. First, we transform the system

into an equivalent system in which the coefficient of x in the first equation is 1:

 2 x ⫹ 4y ⫽ 8
 3x ⫺ 2y ⫽ 4
 x ⫹ 2y ⫽ 4
 3x ⫺ 2y ⫽ 4

Multiply the first equation in
System (3a) by  (operation 2).

1
2

Next, we eliminate x from the second equation:

x ⫹ 2y ⫽   4
 ⫺8y ⫽ ⫺8

Replace the second equation in System
(3b) by the sum of ⫺3 ⫻ the first 
equation and the second equation 
(operation 3):

⫺3x ⫺ 6y ⫽ ⫺12
3x ⫺ 2y ⫽ 4
————————
⫺8y ⫽ ⫺8

(3a)

(3b)

(3c)

Then we obtain the following equivalent system, in which the coefficient of y in the
second equation is 1:

x ⫹ 2y ⫽ 4
 y ⫽ 1

Multiply the second equation in 
(operation 2).
System (3c) by 

⫺1
8

(3d)

Next, we eliminate y in the first equation:

x

⫽ 2
 y ⫽ 1

Replace the first equation in System (3d) 
by the sum of ⫺2 ⫻ the second equation and
the first equation (operation 3):

x ⫹ 2y ⫽ 4
⫺ 2y ⫽ ⫺2
——————
⫽ 2
x

This system is now in standard form, and we can read off the solution to System (3a)
as x ⫽ 2 and y ⫽ 1. We can also express this solution as (2, 1) and interpret it geo-
metrically as the point of intersection of the two lines represented by the two linear
equations that make up the given system of equations. 

Let’s consider another example, involving a system of three linear equations and

three variables.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.2 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS: UNIQUE SOLUTIONS

257

EXAMPLE 1 Solve the following system of equations:

2 x ⫹ 4y ⫹ 6z ⫽ 22
  3x ⫹ 8y ⫹ 5z ⫽ 27
⫺x ⫹ y ⫹ 2z ⫽   2

Solution First, we transform this system into an equivalent system in which the
coefficient of x in the first equation is 1:

2 x ⫹ 4y ⫹ 6z ⫽ 22
  3x ⫹ 8y ⫹ 5z ⫽ 27
⫺x ⫹  y ⫹  2z ⫽   2

 x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 3z ⫽ 11
3x ⫹ 8y ⫹ 5z ⫽ 27
 ⫺x ⫹  y ⫹ 2z ⫽   2

Multiply the first equation in System
(4a) by .1
2

Next, we eliminate the variable x from all equations except the first:

 x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 3z ⫽   11
2y ⫺ 4z ⫽ ⫺6
 
⫺x ⫹   y ⫹ 2z ⫽ 2

Replace the second equation in System
(4b) by the sum of ⫺3 ⫻ the first equa-
tion and the second equation:

⫺3x ⫺ 6y ⫺ 9z ⫽ ⫺33
3x ⫹ 8y ⫹ 5z ⫽ 27
———————————
2y ⫺ 4z ⫽ ⫺6

x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 3z ⫽  11
 2y ⫺ 4z ⫽ ⫺6
 3y ⫹ 5z ⫽  13

Replace the third equation in System
(4c) by the sum of the first equation
and the third equation:

x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 3z ⫽ 11
⫺x ⫹ y ⫹ 2z ⫽ 2
—————————
3y ⫹ 5z ⫽ 13

(4a)

(4b)

(4c)

(4d)

Then we transform System (4d) into yet another equivalent system, in which the
coefficient of y in the second equation is 1:

 x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 3z ⫽  11
 y ⫺ 2z ⫽  ⫺3
 3y ⫹ 5z ⫽  13

Multiply the second equation in
System (4d) by .1
2

(4e)

We now eliminate y from all equations except the second, using operation 3 of the
elimination method:

x 

x 

⫹ 7z ⫽  17
 y ⫺ 2z ⫽ ⫺3
 3y ⫹ 5z ⫽  13

⫹ 7z ⫽  17
 y ⫺ 2z ⫽ ⫺3
 11z ⫽  22

Replace the first equation in System
(4e) by the sum of the first equation
and (⫺2) ⫻ the second equation:

x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 3z ⫽ 11
⫺2y ⫹ 4z ⫽ 6
————————
⫹ 7z ⫽ 17
x

Replace the third equation in System
(4f) by the sum of (⫺3) ⫻ the sec-
ond equation and the third equation:

⫺3y ⫹ 6z ⫽ 9
3y ⫹ 5z ⫽ 13
———————
11z ⫽ 22

(4f)

(4g)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

258

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

Multiplying the third equation by 

1
11
x 

in (4g) leads to the system

⫹ 7z ⫽  17
 y ⫺ 2z ⫽ ⫺3
 z ⫽   2

Eliminating z from all equations except the third (try it!) then leads to the system

x 

 y

⫽ 3
⫽ 1
 z ⫽ 2

(4h)

In its final form, the solution to the given system of equations can be easily read off!
We have x ⫽ 3, y ⫽ 1, and z ⫽ 2. Geometrically, the point (3, 1, 2) is the intersec-
tion of the three planes described by the three equations comprising the given sys-
tem.

Augmented Matrices
Observe from the preceding example that the variables x, y, and z play no significant
role in each step of the reduction process, except as a reminder of the position of each
coefficient in the system. With the aid of matrices, which are rectangular arrays of
numbers, we can eliminate writing the variables at each step of the reduction and thus
save ourselves a great deal of work. For example, the system

2 x ⫹ 4y ⫹ 6z ⫽ 22
3x ⫹ 8y ⫹ 5z ⫽ 27
 ⫺x ⫹  y ⫹ 2z ⫽ 02

may be represented by the matrix

£

2
3
⫺1

4
8
1

 

6
5
2

†  

22
27
2

§

The augmented matrix representing System (5)

(5)

(6)

The submatrix consisting of the first three columns of Matrix (6) is called the coeffi-
cient matrix of System (5). The matrix itself, Matrix (6), is referred to as the aug-
mented matrix of System (5), since it is obtained by joining the matrix of coefficients
to the column (matrix) of constants. The vertical line separates the column of con-
stants from the matrix of coefficients.

The next example shows how much work you can save by using matrices instead

of the standard representation of the systems of linear equations.

EXAMPLE 2 Write the augmented matrix corresponding to each equivalent system
given in Systems (4a) through (4h).

Solution The required sequence of augmented matrices follows.

a.

b.

Equivalent System
 2 x ⫹ 4y ⫹ 6z ⫽ 22
 3x ⫹ 8y ⫹ 5z ⫽ 27
 ⫺x ⫹ y ⫹ 2z ⫽ 2
  x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 3z ⫽ 11
3x ⫹ 8y ⫹ 5z ⫽ 27
 ⫺x ⫹   y ⫹ 2z ⫽ 2

Augmented Matrix

£

£

2
3
⫺1

1
3
⫺1

4
8
1

2
8
1

 

6
5
2

 

3
5
2

†  

†  

22
27
2

11
27
2

§

§

(7a)

(7b)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

c.

d.

e.

  x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 3z ⫽   11
2y ⫺ 4z ⫽ ⫺6
⫺x ⫹ y ⫹ 2z ⫽ 2

x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 3z ⫽   11
 2y ⫺ 4z ⫽ ⫺6
 3y ⫹ 5z ⫽   13

x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 3z ⫽  11
y ⫺ 2z ⫽ ⫺3
3y ⫹ 5z ⫽  13

f.

x  

g.

x

h.

x

⫹  7z ⫽  17
y ⫺  2z ⫽  ⫺3
3y ⫹  5z ⫽  13

⫹ 17z ⫽  17
y ⫺ 12z ⫽ ⫺3
11z ⫽  22

y

⫽ ⫺3
⫽ ⫺1
z ⫽ ⫺2

5.2 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS: UNIQUE SOLUTIONS

259

£

£

£

£

£

£

1
0
⫺1

2
2⫺4
1

3

 

2

†  

11
⫺6
2

§

1
0
0

1
0
0

1
0
0

1
0
0

1
0
0

2
2⫺4
3

2
1⫺2
3

0
1⫺2
3

0
1⫺2
0

3

 

5

3

 

5

†  

†  

7

5

  †  

7

 

11

†  

11
⫺6
13

11
⫺3
13

17
⫺3
13

17
⫺3
22

§

§

§

§

0
1
0

 

0
0
1

†  

3
1
2

§

(7c)

(7d)

(7e)

(7f)

(7g)

(7h)

The augmented matrix in (7h) is an example of a matrix in row-reduced form. In
general, an augmented matrix with m rows and n columns (called an m ⫻ n matrix) is
in row-reduced form if it satisfies the following conditions.

Row-Reduced Form of a Matrix
1. Each  row  consisting  entirely  of  zeros  lies  below  all  rows  having  nonzero

entries.

2. The first nonzero entry in each (nonzero) row is 1 (called a leading 1).
3. In any two successive (nonzero) rows, the leading 1 in the lower row lies to

the right of the leading 1 in the upper row.

4. If  a  column  in  the  coefficient  matrix  contains  a  leading  1,  then  the  other

entries in that column are zeros.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 3 Determine which of the following matrices are in row-reduced form. If
a matrix is not in row-reduced form, state the condition that is violated.

b.

e.

£

£

1
0
0

1
0
0

0
1
0

2
0
0

 

0
0
0

 

0
1
2

†  

†  

4
3
0

0
3
1

§

§

c.

f.

£

£

1
0
0

1
0
0

2
0
0

 

0
3
0

 

0
1
0

†  

0
0
1

§

†  

4
0
0

§

a.

d.

£

£

g. £

1
0
0

0
1
0

0
1
0

0
1
0

1
0
0

0
0
1

 

0
0
1

 

2
0
1

 

0
0
0

†  

†  

†  

0
0
3

§

⫺2
3
2

§

0
3
2

§

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

260

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

Solution The matrices in parts (a)–(c) are in row-reduced form.
d. This matrix is not in row-reduced form. Conditions 3 and 4 are violated: The

leading 1 in row 2 lies to the left of the leading 1 in row 1. Also, column 3 con-
tains a leading 1 in row 3 and a nonzero element above it.

e. This matrix is not in row-reduced form. Conditions 2 and 4 are violated: The first

nonzero entry in row 3 is a 2, not a 1. Also, column 3 contains a leading 1 and
has a nonzero entry below it.

f. This matrix is not in row-reduced form. Condition 2 is violated: The first nonzero

entry in row 2 is not a leading 1.

g. This matrix is not in row-reduced form. Condition 1 is violated: Row 1 consists

of all zeros and does not lie below the nonzero rows.

The foregoing discussion suggests the following adaptation of the Gauss–Jordan
elimination method in solving systems of linear equations using matrices. First, the
three operations on the equations of a system (see page 256) translate into the follow-
ing row operations on the corresponding augmented matrices.

Row Operations
1. Interchange any two rows.
2. Replace any row by a nonzero constant multiple of itself.
3. Replace any row by the sum of that row and a constant multiple of any other

row.

We obtained the augmented matrices in Example 2 by using the same operations

that we used on the equivalent system of equations in Example 1.

To  help  us  describe  the  Gauss–Jordan  elimination  method  using  matrices, 
let’s introduce some terminology. We begin by defining what is meant by a unit 
column.

Unit Column
A column in a coefficient matrix is called a unit column if one of the entries in
the column is a 1 and the other entries are zeros.

For  example,  in  the  coefficient  matrix  of  (7d),  only  the  first  column  is  in  unit
form; in the coefficient matrix of (7h), all three columns are in unit form. Now, the
sequence of row operations that transforms the augmented matrix (7a) into the equiv-
alent matrix (7d) in which the first column

2
3
⫺1

of (7a) is transformed into the unit column

1
0
0

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.2 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS: UNIQUE SOLUTIONS

261

is called pivoting the matrix about the element (number) 2. Similarly, we have piv-
oted about the element 2 in the second column of (7d), shown circled,

2
2
3

to obtain the augmented matrix (7g), in which the second column

0
1
0

is a unit column. Finally, pivoting about the element 11 in column 3 of (7g)

7
⫺2
11

leads to the augmented matrix (7h), in which the third column

0
0
1

is a unit column. Observe that in the final augmented matrix, all three columns to the
left of the vertical line are in unit form. The element about which a matrix is pivoted
is called the pivot element.

Before looking at the next example, let’s introduce the following notation for the

three types of row operations.

Notation for Row Operations
Letting Ri denote the ith row of a matrix, we write:
Operation 1 Ri 4 Rj to mean: Interchange row i with row j.
Operation 2 cRi to mean: Replace row i with c times row i.
Operation 3 Ri ⫹ aRj to mean: Replace row i with the sum of row i and a

times row j.

EXAMPLE 4 Pivot the matrix about the circled element.

c 3

2

 

5
3

`   9
5d

Solution We need a 1 in row 1 where the pivot element (the circled 3) is. One way of
doing this is to replace row 1 by 

. In other words, we use operation 2. Thus,

times 

R1

1
3
5
3

c 3

2

 

`   9
5d

 1
3R1→

c 1

2

 

5
3
3

`   3
5d

Next, we need to replace row 2 by a row with a 0 in the position that is currently
occupied by the number 2. This can be accomplished by replacing row 2 by the sum
of row 2 and ⫺2 times row 1. In other words, we use operation 3. Thus,

c 1

2

 

5
3
3

`   3
5d

 R2⫺2R1→

5
c 1
3
0 ⫺1
3

 

`  

3

⫺1d

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

262

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

Putting these two steps together, we can write the required operations as follows:

c 3

2

 

5
3

`   9
5d

1

3 R1⎯→

c 1

2

 

5
3
3

`   3
5d

R2 ⫺ 2R1
⎯⎯⎯⎯→

5
c 1
3
0 ⫺1
3

 

`  

3

⫺1d

The first column, which originally contained the entry 3, is now in unit form, with 
a 1 where the pivot element used to be, and we are done.

Alternative Solution In the first solution, we used operation 2 to obtain a 1 
where the pivot element was originally. Alternatively, we can use operation 3 as 
follows:

c 3

2

 

5
3

`   9
5d

R1 ⫺ R2
⎯⎯⎯→

c 1

2

 

2
3

`   4
5d

R2 ⫺ 2R1
⎯⎯⎯⎯→

c 1

2
0 ⫺1

 

`  

4

⫺3d

Note

In Example 4, the two matrices

5
c 1
3
0 ⫺1
3

 

`  

3

⫺1d

and

c 1

2
0 ⫺1

 

`  

4

⫺3d

look quite different, but they are in fact equivalent. You can verify this by observing
that they represent the systems of equations

x ⫹ 5
3

⫺ 1
3

 y ⫽ 3 

  x ⫹ 2y ⫽ 4

and

 y ⫽ ⫺1

⫺y ⫽ ⫺3

respectively, and both have the same solution: x ⫽ ⫺2 and y ⫽ 3. Example 4 also
shows that we can sometimes avoid working with fractions by using an appropriate
row operation.

A summary of the Gauss–Jordan method follows.

The Gauss–Jordan Elimination Method
1. Write the augmented matrix corresponding to the linear system.
2. Interchange rows (operation 1), if necessary, to obtain an augmented matrix
in  which  the  first  entry  in  the  first  row  is  nonzero.  Then  pivot  the  matrix
about this entry.

3. Interchange the second row with any row below it, if necessary, to obtain an
augmented matrix in which the second entry in the second row is nonzero.
Pivot the matrix about this entry.

4. Continue until the final matrix is in row-reduced form.

Before writing the augmented matrix, be sure to write all equations with the vari-
ables on the left and constant terms on the right of the equal sign. Also, make sure
that the variables are in the same order in all equations.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 5 Solve the system of linear equations given by

3x ⫺ 2y ⫹ 8z ⫽ 9
⫺2x ⫹ 2y ⫹ z ⫽ 3
x ⫹ 2y ⫺ 3z ⫽ 8

(8)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.2 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS: UNIQUE SOLUTIONS

263

Solution Using the Gauss–Jordan elimination method, we obtain the following
sequence of equivalent augmented matrices:

§

§

§

£

3 ⫺2
8
2
1
2 ⫺3

⫺2
1

 

†  

9
3
8

§

R1 ⫹ R2
⎯⎯⎯→

£

1
⫺2
1

0
2
2⫺3

9
1

 

†  

12
3
8

R2 ⫹ 2R1
⎯⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫺ R1

£

R2 4  R3
⎯⎯⎯⎯→

1

2 R2⎯→

R3 ⫺ 2R2
⎯⎯⎯⎯→

1

31 R3 ⎯→

£

£

£

£

R1 ⫺ 9R3
⎯⎯⎯⎯→
R2 ⫹ 6R3

£

1
0
0

1
0
0

1
0
0

1
0
0

1
0
0

1
0
0

9
19

 

0
2
2⫺12

0
2⫺12
2

9

 

19

9

 

0
1⫺6
2

19

0
1⫺6
0

9

 

31

0
1⫺6
0

9

 

1

†  

†  

12
27
⫺4

12
⫺4
27

†  

†  

†  

12
⫺2
27

12
⫺2
31

12
⫺2
1

§

§

§

0
1
0

 

0
0
1

†  

3
4
1

§

The solution to System (8) is given by x ⫽ 3, y ⫽ 4, and z ⫽ 1. This may be veri-
fied by substitution into System (8) as follows:

3132 ⫺ 2142 ⫹ 8112 ⫽ 9
⫺2132 ⫹ 2142 ⫹ 1 ⫽ 3
3 ⫹ 2142 ⫺ 3112 ⫽ 8

✓

✓

✓

When you are searching for an element to serve as a pivot, it is important to keep
in mind that you may work only with the row containing the potential pivot or
any row below it. To see what can go wrong if this caution is not heeded, con-
sider the following augmented matrix for some linear system:

£

1
0
0

1
0
2

 

2
3
1

†  

3
1
⫺2

§

Observe that column 1 is in unit form. The next step in the Gauss–Jordan elimi-
nation procedure calls for obtaining a nonzero element in the second position of

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

264

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

row 2. If you use row 1 (which is above the row under consideration) to help you
obtain the pivot, you might proceed as follows:

£

1
0
0

1
0
2

 

2
3
1

†  

3
1
⫺2

§

R2 4  R1
⎯⎯⎯⎯→

£

0
1
0

0
1
2

 

3
2
1

†  

1
3
⫺2

§

As you can see, not only have we obtained a nonzero element to serve as the next
pivot, but it is already a 1, thus obviating the next step. This seems like a good
move. But beware—we have undone some of our earlier work: Column 1 is no
longer a unit column in which a 1 appears first. The correct move in this case is
to interchange row 2 with row 3 in the first augmented matrix.

Explore & Discuss
1. Can the phrase “a nonzero constant multiple of itself” in a type 2 row operation be

replaced by “a constant multiple of itself”? Explain.

2. Can a row of an augmented matrix be replaced by a row obtained by adding a constant
to every element in that row without changing the solution of the system of linear equa-
tions? Explain.

The next example illustrates how to handle a situation in which the first entry in 

row 1 of the augmented matrix is zero.

EXAMPLE 6 Solve the system of linear equations given by

2y ⫹ 3z ⫽ 7
3x ⫹ 6y ⫺ 12z ⫽ ⫺3
5x ⫺ 2y ⫹ 2z ⫽ ⫺7

Solution Using the Gauss–Jordan elimination method, we obtain the following
sequence of equivalent augmented matrices:

£

0
3
5 ⫺2

2
3
6 ⫺12
2

 

†  

7
⫺3
⫺7

§

R1 4  R2
⎯⎯⎯⎯→

£

6 ⫺12
3
2
3
0
5 ⫺2
2

 

†  

⫺3
7
⫺7

§

1

3 R1⎯→

R3 ⫺ 5R1
⎯⎯⎯⎯→

1

2 R2⎯→

£

£

£

2 ⫺4
1
2
3
0
5 ⫺2
2

 

†  

⫺1
7
⫺7

§

2 ⫺4
1
0
2
3
0 ⫺12
22

 

2 ⫺4
1
 
3
0
1
2
0 ⫺12
22

†  

†  

⫺1
7
⫺2

⫺1
7
2
⫺2

§

§

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.2 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS: UNIQUE SOLUTIONS

265

R1 ⫺ 2R2
⎯⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫹ 12R2

1

40 R3⎯→

R1 ⫹ 7R3
⎯⎯⎯⎯→
R2 ⫺ 3
2 R3

£

£

1
0
0

1
0
0

£

1
0
0

0⫺7
1
0

0⫺7
1
0

 

3
2
40

 

3
2
1

†  

†  

⫺8
7
2
40

⫺8
7
2
1

§

§

0
1
0

 

0
0
1

†  

⫺1
2
1

§

The solution to the system is given by x ⫽ ⫺1, y ⫽ 2, and z ⫽ 1; this may be verified
by substituting these values into each equation of the system.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 7 Manufacturing: Production Scheduling Complete the
solution to Example 1 in Section 5.1, page 250.

Solution To complete the solution of the problem posed in Example 1, recall
that the mathematical formulation of the problem led to the following system of
linear equations:

2 x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⫽ 180
x ⫹ 3y ⫹ 2z ⫽ 300
2 x ⫹ y ⫹ 2z ⫽ 240

where x, y, and z denote the respective numbers of Type A, Type B, and Type C
souvenirs to be made.

Solving the foregoing system of linear equations by the Gauss–Jordan elimina-
tion method, we obtain the following sequence of equivalent augmented matrices:

£

2
1
2

1
3
1

 

1
2
2

†  

180
300
240

§

R1 4  R2
⎯⎯⎯⎯→

£

1
2
2

3
1
1

 

2
1
2

†  

300
180
240

§

R2 ⫺ 2R1
⎯⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫺ 2R1

⫺1
5 R2 ⎯⎯→

R1 ⫺ 3R2
⎯⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫹ 5R2

R1 ⫺ 1
5 R3
⎯⎯⎯⎯→
R2 ⫺ 3
5 R3

£

£

£

£

3

1
2
 
0 ⫺5 ⫺3
0 ⫺5 ⫺2

3
1

1
2
 
3
0
5
0 ⫺5 ⫺2

†  

†  

300
⫺420
⫺360

300
84
⫺360

§

§

1
0
0

1
0
0

0
1
0

0
1
0

 

1
5
3
5
1

 

0
0
1

†  

†  

48
84
60

36
48
60

§

§

Thus, x ⫽ 36, y ⫽ 48, and z ⫽ 60; that is, Ace Novelty should make 36 Type A
souvenirs, 48 Type B souvenirs, and 60 Type C souvenirs to use all available
machine time.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

266

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

5.2 Self-Check Exercises

1. Solve the system of linear equations

 2 x ⫹ 3y ⫹ z ⫽ 6
  x ⫺ 2y ⫹ 3z ⫽ ⫺3
 3x ⫹ 2y ⫺ 4z ⫽  12

using the Gauss–Jordan elimination method.

2. A  farmer  has  200  acres  of  land  suitable  for  cultivating
Crops A, B, and C. The cost per acre of cultivating Crop A,
Crop B, and Crop C is $40, $60, and $80, respectively. The

5.2 Concept Questions

farmer has $12,600 available for land cultivation. Each acre
of  Crop  A requires  20  labor-hours,  each  acre  of  Crop  B
requires 25 labor-hours, and each acre of Crop C requires
40 labor-hours. The farmer has a maximum of 5950 labor-
hours available. If she wishes to use all of her cultivatable
land,  the  entire  budget,  and  all  the  labor  available,  how
many acres of each crop should she plant?

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 5.2 can be found on 
page 269.

1. a. Explain what it means for two systems of linear equa-

3. Suppose that a matrix is in row-reduced form.

tions to be equivalent to each other.

a. What  is  the  position  of  a  row  consisting  entirely  of

b. Give the meaning of the following notation used for row

zeros relative to the nonzero rows?

operations in the Gauss–Jordan elimination method:
i. Ri 4  Rj

iii. Ri ⫹ aRj

ii. cRi

b. What is the first nonzero entry in each row?
c. What is the position of the leading 1s in successive non-

zero rows?

2. a. What is an augmented matrix? A coefficient matrix? A

d. If a column contains a leading 1, then what is the value

unit column?

b. Explain what is meant by a pivot operation.

of the other entries in that column?

5.2 Exercises

In Exercises 1–4, write the augmented matrix corresponding to
each system of equations.
1.

2.

2x ⫺ 3y ⫽ 7
3x ⫹ y ⫽ 4

3x ⫹ 7y ⫺ 8z ⫽ 5
⫹ 3z ⫽ ⫺2
x
⫽ 7
4x ⫺ 3y

3.

⫺ y ⫹ 2z ⫽ 5
2x ⫹ 2y ⫺ 8z ⫽ 4
3y ⫹ 4z ⫽ 0

4.

3x1 ⫹ 2x2
⫽ 0
x1 ⫺ x2 ⫹ 2x3 ⫽ 4
2x2 ⫺ 3x3 ⫽ 5

In Exercises 5–8, write the system of equations corresponding to
each augmented matrix.

5.

6.

7.

c 3

2
1 ⫺1

 

`   ⫺4
5d

£

£

3

0
2
1 ⫺1 ⫺2
3
4

0

 

†  

4
⫺3
2

§

3
1
0
2
3 ⫺3

 

2
0
2

†  

4
5
6

§

8. £

2
4
0

3
3
0

 

1
2
0

†  

6
5
0

§

In Exercises 9–18, indicate whether the matrix is in row-reduced
form.

9.

11.

13.

15.

17.

0

c 1
c 0

1

£

£

£

1
0
0

1
0
0

0
0
0

 

0
1

 

1
0

0
1
0

3

`  
⫺2d
`   3
5d

 

0
0
1

†  

3
4
5

§

0
1
0⫺1

1
0

 

†  

3
4
6

§

0
1
0

 

0
2
0

†  

0
4
0

§

10.

12.

14.

16.

0

c 1
c 0

0

£

£

1
0
0

1
0
0

18. ≥

1
0
0
0

 

1
0

 

1
0

0
1
0

 

0
1
0

0
1
0
0

`   3
0d
`   3
5d

 

0
0
2

†  

⫺1
⫺2
⫺3

§

†  

⫺10
2
0

 

0
0
0
1

∞  

§

3
6
4
5

¥

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

19.

21.

23.

25.

 

4
1

3

c 2
c ⫺1

6

`   8
2d
`   3
2d

 

2
8

£

£

4
2
2
3
3 ⫺1

 

6
1
2

†  

12
5
4

§

0
2
5

1
4
6

3
 
1
2

†  

4
3
⫺4

§

20.

22.

24.

26.

£

£

1
2
⫺1

3
4
2

2
 
8
3

†  

4
6
4

§

1
2
0 ⫺3
0

3
3
4 ⫺1

 

†  

5
2
3

§

In Exercises 27–30, fill in the missing entries by performing the
indicated row operations to obtain the row-reduced matrices.

0

B1

 

0
1

`   2

0R

2
#

B3
B 1
B1
B 1

2
#

£

£

£

£

27.

28.

29.

30.

R3 ⫺ R1 
⎯⎯⎯→

1

11 R3  ⎯→

1
0
#

1
0
#

£

£

 

9
1
3
#  

 

2
3
2
#  

`   6

4R
`   2#R
⫺1R
`   1#R

1

`  

1

3 R1 ⎯→

⫺1
5 R2 ⎯⎯→

R2 ⫺ 2R1
⎯⎯⎯⎯→

⫺R2 ⎯⎯→

R2 ⫺ 2R1
⎯⎯⎯⎯→

R1 ⫺ 3R2
⎯⎯⎯⎯→

 

#
1
3
#  

2
#

B #
B 1
B 1
§B1

0

#

#

`  

4R
`   2#R
`   1#R
3R

2
#  
`   ⫺5

 

0
1

1
#
#

£

R2 ⫺ 3R1
⎯⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫺ 2R1

R1 ⫺ 2R2
⎯⎯⎯⎯→

†  

3
7
⫺10

 

1
3
1

3
1
8
3
2 ⫺3
1
3
1
#
#
#
0 ⫺9 ⫺1
#
0
#

#
#  
0

#
1
#

†  

 

†  

#
2# §

3#
⫺16

§

R1 ⫺ 3R2
⎯⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫹ 9R2

R1 ⫹ R3 
⎯⎯⎯→

⫺R3

£

1
0
0

1
0
1
2
1 ⫺2

 

3
1
0

†  

⫺4
7
1

§

R1 4 R2   
⎯⎯⎯→

£

2
1
#

1
3

#  

7

⫺4# §

†  

R1 ⫺ 2R2
⎯⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫹ 4R2

 

0
1
0

0
0
1
#
#
#
#
1 ⫺2
#
0
#

£

3
#
#

1
#
#  

3#
# §

†  

⫺R2 ⎯⎯→

†  

⫺1
2
⫺2
#
#
 
0

#
1
#

§

†  
#
#  
3

#
#
1

§

#
⫺4# §

†  

0 ⫺5
1
3
#

#  

15

⫺4# §

†  

R1 ⫹ 5R3
⎯⎯⎯⎯→
R2 ⫺ 3R3

£

1
0
0

0
1
0

 

0
0
1

†  

5
2
⫺2

§

In Exercises 35–56, solve the system of linear equations using the
Gauss–Jordan elimination method.
36.
35.

x ⫺ 2y ⫽ ⫺3
2x ⫹ 3y ⫽ 8

x ⫹ y ⫽ 3
2x ⫺ y ⫽ 3

37.

39.

41.

x ⫺ 2y ⫽ 8
3x ⫹ 4y ⫽ 4

2x ⫺ 3y ⫽ ⫺8
4x ⫹ y ⫽ ⫺2

6x ⫹ 8y ⫽ 15
2x ⫺ 4y ⫽ ⫺5

43.

3x ⫺ 2y ⫽ 1
2x ⫹ 4y ⫽ 2

45.

47.

49.

51.

53.

55.

x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⫽ 0
2x ⫺ y ⫹ z ⫽ 1
x ⫹ y ⫺ 2z ⫽ 2

2x ⫹ 2y ⫹ z ⫽ 9
⫹ z ⫽ 4
x
4y ⫺ 3z ⫽ 17

⫺ x2 ⫹ x3 ⫽ 2
4x1 ⫺ 3x2 ⫹ 2x3 ⫽ 16
3x1 ⫹ 2x2 ⫹ x3 ⫽ 11
x1 ⫺ 2x2 ⫹ x3 ⫽    6
2x1 ⫹ x2 ⫺ 3x3 ⫽ ⫺3
x1 ⫺ 3x2 ⫹ 3x3 ⫽   10

⫹ 3z ⫽ ⫺1
2x
3x ⫺ 2y ⫹ z ⫽ 9
x ⫹ y ⫹ 4z ⫽ 4

x1 ⫺ x2 ⫹ 3x3 ⫽   14
x1 ⫹ x2 ⫹ x3 ⫽    6
⫺2x1 ⫺ x2 ⫹ x3 ⫽ ⫺4

38.

40.

42.

44.

46.

48.

50.

52.

54.

56.

3x ⫹ y ⫽ 1
⫺7x ⫺ 2y ⫽ ⫺1

5x ⫹ 3y ⫽ 9
⫺2x ⫹ y ⫽ ⫺8

2x ⫹ 10y ⫽ 1
⫺4x ⫹ 6y ⫽ 11
y ⫽ 7
6
 x ⫹ 4 y ⫽ 2
3

x ⫺ 1
2

 ⫺1
2

2x ⫹ y ⫺ 2z ⫽ 4
x ⫹ 3y ⫺ z ⫽ ⫺3
3x ⫹ 4y ⫺ z ⫽ 7

2x ⫹ 3y ⫺ 2z ⫽   10
3x ⫺ 2y ⫹ 2z ⫽ 0
4x ⫺ y ⫹ 3z ⫽ ⫺1

2x ⫹ 4y ⫺ 6z ⫽ 38
x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 3z ⫽ 7
3x ⫺ 4y ⫹ 4z ⫽ ⫺19

2x ⫹ 3y ⫺ 6z ⫽ ⫺11
x ⫺ 2y ⫹ 3z ⫽ 9
3x ⫹ y
⫽ 7

2x1 ⫺ x2 ⫹ 3x3 ⫽ ⫺4
x1 ⫺ 2x2 ⫹ x3 ⫽ ⫺1
x1 ⫺ 5x2 ⫹ 2x3 ⫽ ⫺3
2x1 ⫺ x2 ⫺ x3 ⫽ 0
3x1 ⫹ 2x2 ⫹ x3 ⫽ 7
x1 ⫹ 2x2 ⫹ 2x3 ⫽ 5

The  problems  in  Exercises  57–69  correspond  to  those  in  Exer-
cises 19–31, Section 5.1. Use the results of your previous work to
help you solve these problems.
57. AGRICULTURE The  Johnson  Farm  has  500  acres  of  land
allotted for cultivating corn and wheat. The cost of culti-
vating corn and wheat (including seeds and labor) is $42
and $30 per acre, respectively. Jacob Johnson has $18,600
available for cultivating these crops. If he wishes to use all
the allotted land and his entire budget for cultivating these
two crops, how many acres of each crop should he plant?

In Exercises 19–26, pivot the system about the circled element.

32. Repeat  Exercise  31  for  the  augmented  matrix  of  Exer-

5.2 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS: UNIQUE SOLUTIONS

267

4

c 3
c 1

2

 

2
2

3
 
4

`   6
5d
`   4
6d

cise 28.

33. Repeat  Exercise  31  for  the  augmented  matrix  of  Exer-

cise 29.

34. Repeat  Exercise  31  for  the  augmented  matrix  of  Exer-

cise 30.

31. Write  a  system  of  linear  equations  for  the  augmented
matrix  of  Exercise  27.  Using  the  results  of  Exercise  27,
determine the solution of the system.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

268

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

58. INVESTMENTS Michael Perez has a total of $2000 on deposit
with two savings institutions. One pays interest at the rate
of 6%/year, whereas the other pays interest at the rate of
8%/year. If Michael earned a total of $144 in interest dur-
ing  a  single  year,  how  much  does  he  have  on  deposit  in
each institution?

59. MIXTURES The Coffee Shoppe sells a coffee blend made
from two coffees, one costing $5/lb and the other costing
$6/lb.  If  the  blended  coffee  sells  for  $5.60/lb,  find  how
much  of  each  coffee is used to obtain the desired blend.
Assume that the weight of the blended coffee is 100 lb.

60. INVESTMENTS Kelly Fisher has a total of $30,000 invested
in  two  municipal  bonds  that  have  yields  of  8%  and  10%
interest per year, respectively. If the interest Kelly receives
from the bonds in a year is $2640, how much does she have
invested in each bond?

61. RIDERSHIP The total number of passengers riding a certain
city bus during the morning shift is 1000. If the child’s fare
is $0.50, the adult fare is $1.50, and the total revenue from
the fares in the morning shift is $1300, how many children
and how many adults rode the bus during the morning shift?
62. REAL ESTATE Cantwell Associates, a real estate developer, is
planning  to  build  a  new  apartment  complex  consisting  of
one-bedroom units and two- and three-bedroom townhouses.
A  total  of  192  units  is  planned,  and  the  number  of  family
units  (two-  and  three-bedroom  townhouses)  will  equal  the
number of one-bedroom units. If the number of one-bedroom
units will be 3 times the number of three-bedroom units, find
how many units of each type will be in the complex.

63. INVESTMENT PLANNING The  annual  returns  on  Sid  Carring-
ton’s three investments amounted to $21,600: 6% on a sav-
ings account, 8% on mutual funds, and 12% on bonds. The
amount of Sid’s investment in bonds was twice the amount
of  his  investment  in  the  savings  account,  and  the  interest
earned from his investment in bonds was equal to the divi-
dends he received from his investment in mutual funds. Find
how much money he placed in each type of investment.

64. INVESTMENT CLUB A private investment club has $200,000
earmarked for investment in stocks. To arrive at an accept-
able  overall  level  of  risk,  the  stocks  that  management  is
considering  have  been  classified  into  three  categories: 
high-risk,  medium-risk,  and  low-risk.  Management  esti-
mates  that  high-risk  stocks  will  have  a  rate  of  return  of
15%/year;  medium-risk  stocks,  10%/year;  and  low-risk
stocks,  6%/year.  The  members  have  decided  that  the
investment in low-risk stocks should be equal to the sum of
the investments in the stocks of the other two categories.
Determine how much the club should invest in each type of
stock  if  the  investment  goal  is  to  have  a  return  of
$20,000/year on the total investment. (Assume that all the
money available for investment is invested.)

65. MIXTURE PROBLEM—FERTILIZER Lawnco  produces 

three
grades of commercial fertilizers. A 100-lb bag of grade A
fertilizer contains 18 lb of nitrogen, 4 lb of phosphate, and
5 lb of potassium. A 100-lb bag of grade B fertilizer con-
tains  20  lb  of  nitrogen  and  4  lb  each  of  phosphate  and
potassium.  A  100-lb  bag  of  grade  C  fertilizer  contains 

24 lb of nitrogen, 3 lb of phosphate, and 6 lb of potassium.
How many 100-lb bags of each of the three grades of fer-
tilizers  should  Lawnco  produce  if  26,400  lb  of  nitrogen,
4900 lb of phosphate, and 6200 lb of potassium are avail-
able and all the nutrients are used?

66. BOX-OFFICE RECEIPTS A  theater  has  a  seating  capacity  of
900 and charges $4 for children, $6 for students, and $8 for
adults.  At  a  certain  screening  with  full  attendance,  there
were  half  as  many  adults  as  children  and  students  com-
bined.  The  receipts  totaled  $5600.  How  many  children
attended the show?

67. MANAGEMENT DECISIONS The management of Hartman Rent-
A-Car has allocated $2.25 million to buy a fleet of new auto-
mobiles consisting of compact, intermediate-size, and full-
size  cars.  Compacts  cost  $18,000  each,  intermediate-size
cars cost $27,000 each, and full-size cars cost $36,000 each.
If Hartman purchases twice as many compacts as intermedi-
ate-size cars and the total number of cars to be purchased is
100,  determine  how  many  cars  of  each  type  will  be  pur-
chased. (Assume that the entire budget will be used.)

68. INVESTMENT CLUBS The  management  of  a  private  invest-
ment  club  has  a  fund  of  $200,000  earmarked  for  invest-
ment in stocks. To arrive at an acceptable overall level of
risk, the stocks that management is considering have been
classified  into  three  categories:  high-risk,  medium-risk,
and low-risk. Management estimates that high-risk stocks
will have a rate of return of 15%/year; medium-risk stocks,
10%/year; and low-risk stocks, 6%/year. The investment in
low-risk stocks is to be twice the sum of the investments in
stocks of the other two categories. If the investment goal is
to have an average rate of return of 9%/year on the total
investment, determine how much the club should invest in
each type of stock. (Assume that all of the money available
for investment is invested.)

69. DIET PLANNING A  dietitian  wishes  to  plan  a  meal  around
three foods. The percentages of the daily requirements of
proteins, carbohydrates, and iron contained in each ounce
of the three foods are summarized in the following table:

Food I

Food II

Food III

Proteins (%)
Carbohydrates (%)
Iron (%)

10
10
5

6
12
4

8
6
12

Determine  how  many  ounces  of  each  food  the  dietitian
should include in the meal to meet exactly the daily require-
ment of proteins, carbohydrates, and iron (100% of each).
70. INVESTMENTS Mr. and Mrs. Garcia have a total of $100,000
to  be  invested  in  stocks,  bonds,  and  a  money  market
account. The stocks have a rate of return of 12%/year, while
the bonds and the money market account pay 8%/year and
4%/year, respectively. The Garcias have stipulated that the
amount  invested  in  the  money  market  account  should  be
equal to the sum of 20% of the amount invested in stocks
and 10% of the amount invested in bonds. How should the
Garcias  allocate  their  resources  if  they  require  an  annual
income of $10,000 from their investments?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

71. BOX-OFFICE RECEIPTS For  the  opening  night  at  the  Opera
House,  a  total  of  1000  tickets  were  sold.  Front  orchestra
seats cost $80 apiece, rear orchestra seats cost $60 apiece,
and front balcony seats cost $50 apiece. The combined num-
ber of tickets sold for the front orchestra and rear orchestra
exceeded twice the number of front balcony tickets sold by
400.  The  total  receipts  for  the  performance  were  $62,800.
Determine how many tickets of each type were sold.

72. PRODUCTION SCHEDULING A  manufacturer  of  women’s
blouses  makes  three  types  of  blouses:  sleeveless,  short-
sleeve, and long-sleeve. The time (in minutes) required by
each department to produce a dozen blouses of each type is
shown in the following table:

Sleeveless

Short-
Sleeve

Long-
Sleeve

Cutting
Sewing
Packaging

9
22
6

12
24
8

15
28
8

The  cutting,  sewing,  and  packaging  departments  have
available  a  maximum  of  80,  160,  and  48  labor-hours,
respectively,  per  day.  How  many  dozens  of  each  type  of
blouse can be produced each day if the plant is operated at
full capacity?

73. BUSINESS TRAVEL EXPENSES An  executive  of  Trident  Com-
munications recently traveled to London, Paris, and Rome.

5.2 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. We obtain the following sequence of equivalent augmented

matrices:

£

2
3
1 ⫺2
3

1
3
2 ⫺4

 

†  

6
⫺3
12

§

R1 4 R2   
⎯⎯⎯→

£

1 ⫺2
3
3
2
1
2 ⫺4
3

 

†  

⫺3
6
12

§

R2 ⫺ 2R1
⎯⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫺ 3R1

£

1 ⫺2
3
⫺5
7
0
8 ⫺13
0

 

†  

⫺3
12
21

§

R2 4 R3   
⎯⎯⎯→

£

1 ⫺2
0
0

3
8 ⫺13
⫺5
7

 

†  

⫺3
21
12

§

R2 ⫺ R3   
⎯⎯⎯→

£

1 ⫺2
0
0

3
1 ⫺8
7 ⫺5

 

†  

⫺3
9
12

§

R1 ⫹ 2R2
⎯⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫺ 7R2

R1 ⫹ 13R3  
⎯⎯⎯⎯→
R2 ⫹ 8R3

£

£

1
0
0

1
0
0

0⫺13
1
0

⫺8
51

 

†  

15
9
⫺51

§

1

51 R3⎯⎯→

£

1
0
0

0⫺13
1
0

⫺8
1

 

†  

15
9
⫺1

§

0
1
0

 

0
0
1

†  

2
1
⫺1

§

The solution to the system is x ⫽ 2, y ⫽ 1, and z ⫽ ⫺1.

5.2 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS: UNIQUE SOLUTIONS

269

He  paid  $180,  $230,  and  $160  per  night  for  lodging  in 
London, Paris, and Rome, respectively, and his hotel bills
totaled $2660. He spent $110, $120, and $90 per day for
his  meals  in  London,  Paris,  and  Rome,  respectively,  and
his expenses for meals totaled $1520. If he spent as many
days  in  London  as  he  did  in  Paris  and  Rome  combined,
how many days did he stay in each city?

74. VACATION COSTS Joan  and  Dick  spent  2  weeks  (14  nights)
touring four cities on the East Coast—Boston, New York,
Philadelphia, and Washington. They paid $240, $400, $160,
and $200 per night for lodging in each city, respectively, and
their total hotel bill came to $4040. The number of days they
spent in New York was the same as the total number of days
they spent in Boston and Washington, and the couple spent
3 times as many days in New York as they did in Philadel-
phia. How many days did Joan and Dick stay in each city?

In Exercises 75 and 76, determine whether the statement is true
or  false.  If  it  is  true,  explain  why  it  is  true.  If  it  is  false,  give  an
example to show why it is false.
75. An equivalent system of linear equations can be obtained
from a system of equations by replacing one of its equa-
tions by any constant multiple of itself.

76. If the augmented matrix corresponding to a system of three
linear  equations  in  three  variables  has  a  row  of  the  form
where a is a nonzero number, then the sys-

30  0  0  0  a4,

tem has no solution.

2. Referring to the solution of Exercise 2, Self-Check Exer-
cises 5.1, we see that the problem reduces to solving the
following system of linear equations:

x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⫽ 200
40x ⫹ 60y ⫹ 80z ⫽ 12,600
20x ⫹ 25y ⫹ 40z ⫽ 5,950

Using the Gauss–Jordan elimination method, we have

£

1
40
20

1

20 R2⎯⎯→

1

10 R3⎯⎯→

1
60
25

 

1
80
40

†  

200
12,600
5,950

§

R2 ⫺ 40R1   
⎯⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫺ 20R1

£

1
0
0

£

£

1
0
0

1
0
0

1
1
5
0⫺1
1
0

1
2
20

 

†  

 

2
1

200
230
1950
⫺30
230
80

†  

§

R1 ⫺ R2  
⎯⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫺ 5R2

§

R1 ⫹ R3  
⎯⎯⎯⎯→
R2 ⫺ 2R3

£

1
0
0

£

1
0
0

1
20
5
0⫺1
1
0

 

1
40
20

†  

†  

 

2
10

200
4600
1950
⫺30
230
800

§

§

0
1
0

 

0
0
1

†  

50
70
80

§

From the last augmented matrix in reduced form, we see
that  x ⫽ 50,  y ⫽ 70,  and  z ⫽ 80.  Therefore,  the  farmer
should plant 50 acres of Crop A, 70 acres of Crop B, and 
80 acres of Crop C.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

270

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Systems of Linear Equations: Unique Solutions
Solving a System of Linear Equations Using the Gauss–Jordan Method
The three matrix operations can be performed on a matrix by using a graphing utility.
The commands are summarized in the following table.

Operation
Ri 4 Rj
cRi
Ri ⫹ aRj

Calculator Function

TI-83/84

TI-86

rowSwap([A], i, j)
*row(c, [A], i)
*rowⴙ(a, [A], j, i)

rSwap(A, i, j)
multR(c, A, i)
mRAdd(a, A, j, i)

or equivalent
or equivalent
or equivalent

When a row operation is performed on a matrix, the result is stored as an answer in
the  calculator.  If  another  operation  is  performed  on  this  matrix,  then  the  matrix  is
erased. Should a mistake be made in the operation, the previous matrix may be lost.
For this reason, you should store the results of each operation. We do this by pressing
STO, followed by the name of a matrix, and then ENTER. We use this process in the fol-
lowing example.

EXAMPLE 1 Use a graphing utility to solve the following system of linear equations
by the Gauss–Jordan method (see Example 5 in Section 5.2):

3x ⫺ 2y ⫹ 8z ⫽ 9
⫺2x ⫹ 2y ⫹ z ⫽ 3
x ⫹ 2y ⫺ 3z ⫽ 8

Solution Using the Gauss–Jordan method, we obtain the following sequence of
equivalent matrices.

£

£

£

£

£

£

3 ⫺2
8
2
1
2 ⫺3

⫺2
1

 

†  

9
3
8

§

1
⫺2
1

0
2
2⫺3

9
1

 

†  

12
3
8

§

*rowⴙ (1, [A], 2, 1) 䉴 B
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→

*rowⴙ (2, [B], 1, 2) 䉴 C
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→

1
0
1

1
0
0

1
0
0

1
0
0

9
19

 

0
2
2⫺3

†  

12
27
8

§

*rowⴙ (⫺1, [C], 1, 3) 䉴 B
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→

9
19

 

0
2
2⫺12

†  

12
27
⫺4

§

*row( , [B], 2) 䉴 C
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→

1
2

0
1
2⫺12

0
1
0⫺31

9
9.5

 

9
9.5

 

†  

†  

12
13.5
⫺4

§

12
13.5

⫺31

§

*rowⴙ (⫺2, [C], 2, 3) 䉴 B
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→

*row(
, [B], 3) 䉴 C
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→

⫺ 1
31

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.2 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS: UNIQUE SOLUTIONS

271

£

£

1
0
0

1
0
0

0
1
0

0
1
0

 

9
9.5
1

 

0
9.5
1

†  

†  

12
13.5
1

3
13.5
1

§

§

*rowⴙ (⫺9, [C], 3, 1) 䉴 B
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→

*rowⴙ (⫺9.5, [B], 3, 2) 䉴 C
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→

£

1
0
0

0
1
0

 

0
0
1

†  

3
4
1

§

The last matrix is in row-reduced form, and we see that the solution of the system is
x ⫽ 3, y ⫽ 4, and z ⫽ 1.

Using rref (TI-83/84 and TI-86) to Solve a System of Linear Equations
The operation rref (or equivalent function in your utility, if there is one) will trans-
form an augmented matrix into one that is in row-reduced form. For example, using
rref, we find

£

3 ⫺2
8
2
1
2 ⫺3

⫺2
1

 

†  

9
3
8

§

rref⎯→

£

1
0
0

0
1
0

 

0
0
1

†  

3
4
1

§

as obtained earlier!

Using SIMULT (TI-86) to Solve a System of Equations
The  operation  SIMULT (or  equivalent  operation  on  your  utility,  if  there  is  one)  of  a
graphing  utility  can  be  used  to  solve  a  system  of  n linear  equations  in  n variables,
where n is an integer between 2 and 30, inclusive.

EXAMPLE 2 Use the SIMULT operation to solve the system of Example 1.

Solution Call for the SIMULT operation. Since the system under consideration has
three equations in three variables, enter n ⫽ 3. Next, enter a1, 1 ⫽ 3, a1, 2 ⫽ ⫺2,
a1, 3 ⫽ 8, b1 ⫽ 9, a2, 1 ⫽ ⫺2, . . . , b3 ⫽ 8. Select <SOLVE>, and the display 

x1 = 3
x2 = 4
x3 = 1

appears on the screen, giving x ⫽ 3, y ⫽ 4, and z ⫽ 1 as the required solution.

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

Use  a  graphing  utility  to  solve  the  system  of  equations 
(a)  by  the  Gauss–Jordan  method,  (b)  using  the  rref  operation,
and (c) using SIMULT.
1.

x1 ⫺ 2x2 ⫹ 2x3 ⫺ 3x4 ⫽ ⫺7
3x1 ⫹ 2x2 ⫺ x3 ⫹ 5x4 ⫽   22
2x1 ⫺ 3x2 ⫹ 4x3 ⫺ x4 ⫽ ⫺3
3x1 ⫺ 2x2 ⫺ x3 ⫹ 2x4 ⫽   12

2.

2x1 ⫺ x2 ⫹ 3x3 ⫺ 2x4 ⫽ ⫺2
x1 ⫺ 2x2 ⫹ x3 ⫺ 3x4 ⫽ 2
x1 ⫺ 5x2 ⫹ 2x3 ⫹ 3x4 ⫽ ⫺6
⫺3x1 ⫹ 3x2 ⫺ 4x3 ⫺ 4x4 ⫽ 9

3.

4.

  2x1 ⫹ x2 ⫹ 3x3 ⫺ x4 ⫽ 9
⫺x1 ⫺ 2x2
⫺ 3x4 ⫽ ⫺1
⫺ 3x3 ⫹ x4 ⫽ 10
x1
x1 ⫺ x2 ⫺ x3 ⫺ x4 ⫽ 8
x1 ⫺ 2x2 ⫺ 2x3 ⫹ x4 ⫽ 1
 2x1 ⫺ x2 ⫹ 2x3 ⫹ 3x4 ⫽ ⫺2
⫺x1 ⫺ 5x2 ⫹ 7x3 ⫺ 2x4 ⫽ 3
 3x1 ⫺ 4x2 ⫹ 3x3 ⫹ 4x4 ⫽ ⫺4

(continued)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

272

5.

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

 2x1 ⫺ 2x2 ⫹ 3x3 ⫺ x4 ⫹ 2x5 ⫽ 16
 3x1 ⫹ x2 ⫺ 2x3 ⫹ x4 ⫺ 3x5 ⫽ ⫺11
  x1 ⫹ 3x2 ⫺ 4x3 ⫹ 3x4 ⫺ x5 ⫽ ⫺13
 2x1 ⫺ x2 ⫹ 3x3 ⫺ 2x4 ⫹ 2x5 ⫽ 15
 3x1 ⫹ 4x2 ⫺ 3x3 ⫹ 5x4 ⫺ x5 ⫽ ⫺10

6.

2.1x1 ⫺ 3.2x2 ⫹ 6.4x3 ⫹ 7x4 ⫺ 3.2x5 ⫽ 54.3
4.1x1 ⫹ 2.2x2 ⫺ 3.1x3 ⫺ 4.2x4 ⫹ 3.3x5 ⫽ ⫺20.81
3.4x1 ⫺ 6.2x2 ⫹ 4.7x3 ⫹ 2.1x4 ⫺ 5.3x5 ⫽ 24.7
4.1x1 ⫹ 7.3x2 ⫹ 5.2x3 ⫹ 6.1x4 ⫺ 8.2x5 ⫽ 29.25
2.8x1 ⫹ 5.2x2 ⫹ 3.1x3 ⫹ 5.4x4 ⫹ 3.8x5 ⫽ 43.72

5.3

Systems of Linear Equations: Underdetermined 
and Overdetermined Systems

In this section, we continue our study of systems of linear equations. More specifi-
cally, we look at systems that have infinitely many solutions and those that have no
solution. We also study systems of linear equations in which the number of variables
is not equal to the number of equations in the system.

Solution(s) of Linear Equations
Our first two examples illustrate the situation in which a system of linear equations
has infinitely many solutions.

EXAMPLE 1 A System of Equations with an Infinite Number of Solutions Solve the
system of linear equations given by

 x ⫹ 2y ⫽ 4
3x ⫹ 6y ⫽ 12

(9)

Solution Using the Gauss-Jordan elimination method, we obtain the following sys-
tem of equivalent matrices:

c 1

3

 

2
6

`   4
12d

R2 ⫺ 3R1
⎯⎯⎯⎯→

c 1

0

 

2
0

`   4
0d

The last augmented matrix is in row-reduced form. Interpreting it as a system of lin-
ear equations, we see that the given System (9) is equivalent to the single equation

x ⫹ 2y ⫽ 4  or  x ⫽ 4 ⫺ 2y

If we assign a particular value to y—say, 

y ⫽ 0

—we obtain x ⫽ 4, giving the

solution (4, 0) to System (9). By setting y ⫽ 1, we obtain the solution (2, 1). In 
general, if we set y ⫽ t, where t represents some real number (called a parameter), 
we obtain the solution given by 
. Since the parameter t may be any real
number, we see that System (9) has infinitely many solutions. Geometrically, the
solutions of System (9) lie on the line on the plane with equation 
two equations in the system have the same graph (straight line), which you can 
verify graphically.

14 ⫺ 2t,  t2

x ⫹ 2y ⫽ 4.

The

EXAMPLE 2 A System of Equations with an Infinite Number of Solutions Solve the
system of linear equations given by

x ⫹ 2y ⫺ 3z ⫽ ⫺2
3x ⫺ y ⫺ 2z ⫽ 1
2x ⫹ 3y ⫺ 5z ⫽ ⫺3

(10)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.3 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS: UNDERDETERMINED AND OVERDETERMINED SYSTEMS

273

Solution Using the Gauss–Jordan elimination method, we obtain the following
sequence of equivalent augmented matrices:

£

£

2 ⫺3
1
3 ⫺1 ⫺2
3 ⫺5
2
2 ⫺3
1 ⫺1
1

1
0
0 ⫺1

 

 

†  

†  

⫺2
1
⫺3
⫺2
⫺1
1

§

§

R2 ⫺ 3R1
⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫺ 2R1

R1 ⫺ 2R2
⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫹ R2

£

£

1
0 ⫺7
0 ⫺1
0⫺1
1
1⫺1
0
0
0

†  

0
⫺1
0

§

 

0

2 ⫺3
7
1

 

†  

⫺2
7
1

§

⫺1
7 R2 ⎯⎯→

The last augmented matrix is in row-reduced form. Interpreting it as a system of 
linear equations gives

x ⫺ z ⫽ 0
y ⫺ z ⫽ ⫺1

a system of two equations in the three variables x, y, and z.

Let’s now single out one variable—say, z—and solve for x and y in terms of it.

We obtain

x ⫽ z
y ⫽ z ⫺ 1

1t,  t ⫺ 1,  t2.

If we set z ⫽ t, where t is a parameter, then System (10) has infinitely many solutions
given by 
and let-
ting t ⫽ 1 gives the solution 
Geometrically, the solutions of System (10) lie
on the straight line in three-dimensional space given by the intersection of the three
planes determined by the three equations in the system.

For example, letting t ⫽ 0 gives the solution 

10,  ⫺1, 02,

11,  0,  12.

In Example 2, we chose the parameter to be z because it is more convenient to

Note
solve for x and y (both the x- and y-columns are in unit form) in terms of z.

The next example shows what happens in the elimination procedure when the sys-

tem does not have a solution.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 3 A System of Equations That Has No Solution Solve the system of linear
equations given by

x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⫽ 1
3x ⫺ y ⫺ z ⫽ 4
x ⫹ 5y ⫹ 5z ⫽ ⫺1

(11)

Solution Using the Gauss–Jordan elimination method, we obtain the following
sequence of equivalent augmented matrices:

£

1

1
1
 
3 ⫺1 ⫺1
1
5

5

†  

1
4
⫺1

§

R2 ⫺ 3R1
⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫺ R1

R3 ⫹ R2⎯⎯⎯→

£

£

1

1
1
 
0 ⫺4 ⫺4
0
4
1
1
 
0 ⫺4 ⫺4
0
0

4
1

0

†  

†  

1
1
⫺2
1
1
⫺1

§

§

Observe that row 3 in the last matrix reads 0x ⫹ 0y ⫹ 0z ⫽ ⫺1—that is, 0 ⫽ ⫺1!
We therefore conclude that System (11) is inconsistent and has no solution. Geo-
metrically, we have a situation in which two of the planes intersect in a straight line
but the third plane is parallel to this line of intersection of the two planes and does
not intersect it. Consequently, there is no point of intersection of the three planes.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

274

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

Example 3 illustrates the following more general result of using the Gauss–Jordan

elimination procedure.

Systems with No Solution
If there is a row in an augmented matrix containing all zeros to the left of the
vertical line and a nonzero entry to the right of the line, then the corresponding
system of equations has no solution.

It may have dawned on you that in all the previous examples, we have dealt only with
systems involving exactly the same number of linear equations as there are variables.
However, systems in which the number of equations is different from the number of vari-
ables also occur in practice. Indeed, we will consider such systems in Examples 4 and 5.
The following theorem provides us with some preliminary information on a sys-

tem of linear equations.

THEOREM 1
a. If the number of equations is greater than or equal to the number of variables

in a linear system, then one of the following is true:

i. The system has no solution.
ii. The system has exactly one solution.
iii. The system has infinitely many solutions.

b. If there are fewer equations than variables in a linear system, then the system

either has no solution or has infinitely many solutions.

Note Theorem 1 may be used to tell us, before we even begin to solve a problem,
what the nature of the solution may be.

Although we will not prove this theorem, you should recall that we have illus-
trated geometrically part (a) for the case in which there are exactly as many equations
(three) as there are variables. To show the validity of part (b), let us once again con-
sider the case in which a system has three variables. Now, if there is only one equa-
tion in the system, then it is clear that there are infinitely many solutions correspond-
ing geometrically to all the points lying on the plane represented by the equation.

Next, if there are two equations in the system, then only the following possibili-

ties exist:
1. The two planes are parallel and distinct.
2. The two planes intersect in a straight line.
3. The two planes are coincident (the two equations define the same plane) (Figure 6).

P2

P1

P1

P2

2

(a) No solution

(b) Infinitely many solutions

(c) Infinitely many solutions

FIGURE 6

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

P1, P2

5.3 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS: UNDERDETERMINED AND OVERDETERMINED SYSTEMS

275

Thus, either there is no solution or there are infinitely many solutions corresponding
to the points lying on a line of intersection of the two planes or on a single plane deter-
mined by the two equations. In the case in which two planes intersect in a straight line,
the solutions will involve one parameter, and in the case in which the two planes are
coincident, the solutions will involve two parameters.

Explore & Discuss
Give a geometric interpretation of Theorem 1 for a linear system composed of equations
involving two variables. Specifically, illustrate what can happen if there are three linear
equations in the system (the case involving two linear equations has already been discussed
in Section 5.1). What if there are four linear equations? What if there is only one linear
equation in the system?

EXAMPLE 4 A System with More Equations Than Variables Solve the following sys-
tem of linear equations:

x ⫹ 2y ⫽ 4
x ⫺ 2y ⫽ 0
4x ⫹ 3y ⫽ 12

Solution We obtain the following sequence of equivalent augmented matrices:

£

£

1
2
 
1 ⫺2
3
4

2
1
1
0
0 ⫺5

 

†  

†  

4
0
12

§

4
1
⫺4

§

R2 ⫺ R1⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫺ 4R1

£

1
2
0 ⫺4
0 ⫺5

 

†  

4
⫺4
⫺4

§

⫺1
4 R2 ⎯⎯→

R1 ⫺ 2R2
⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫹ 5R2

£

1
0
0

 

0
1
0

†  

2
1
1

§

The last row of the row-reduced augmented matrix implies that 0 ⫽ 1, which is
impossible, so we conclude that the given system has no solution. Geometrically, the
three lines defined by the three equations in the system do not intersect at a point.
(To see this for yourself, draw the graphs of these equations.)

EXAMPLE 5 A System with More Variables Than Equations Solve the following sys-
tem of linear equations:

x ⫹ 2y ⫺ 3z ⫹ w ⫽ ⫺2
3x ⫺ y ⫺ 2z ⫺ 4w ⫽ 1
2x ⫹ 3y ⫺ 5z ⫹ w ⫽ ⫺3

Solution First, observe that the given system consists of three equations in four
variables, so by Theorem 1b, either the system has no solution or it has infinitely
many solutions. To solve it, we use the Gauss–Jordan method and obtain the follow-
ing sequence of equivalent augmented matrices:

£

£

2 ⫺3

1
1
3 ⫺1 ⫺2 ⫺4
2
1

3 ⫺5

2 ⫺3
1 ⫺1

1
0
0 ⫺1

1
1
1 ⫺1

 

 

†  

†  

⫺2
1
⫺3

⫺2
⫺1
1

§

§

R2 ⫺ 3R1
⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫺ 2R1

R1 ⫺ 2R2
⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫹ R2

£

£

1
0 ⫺7
0 ⫺1

2 ⫺3

1
 
7 ⫺7
1 ⫺1

†  

⫺2
7
1

§

⫺1
7 R2 ⎯⎯→

1
0
0

0⫺1
1⫺1
0

0

⫺1
 
1

0

†  

0
⫺1
0

§

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

276

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

The last augmented matrix is in row-reduced form. Observe that the given system is
equivalent to the system

x ⫺ z ⫺ w ⫽ 0
y ⫺ z ⫹ w ⫽ ⫺1

of two equations in four variables. Thus, we may solve for two of the variables in
terms of the other two. Letting z ⫽ s and w ⫽ t (where s and t are any real num-
bers), we find that

x ⫽ s ⫹ t
y ⫽ s ⫺ t ⫺ 1
z ⫽ s
w ⫽ t

The solutions may be written in the form (s ⫹ t, s ⫺ t ⫺ 1, s, t). Geometrically, the
three equations in the system represent three hyperplanes in four-dimensional space
(since there are four variables), and their “points” of intersection lie in a two-
dimensional subspace of four-space (since there are two parameters).

In Example 5, we assigned parameters to z and w rather than to x and y because

Note
x and y are readily solved in terms of z and w.

The following example illustrates a situation in which a system of linear equations

has infinitely many solutions.

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 6 Traffic Control Figure 7 shows the flow of down-
town traffic in a certain city during the rush hours on a typical weekday.
The arrows indicate the direction of traffic flow on each one-way road, and the
average number of vehicles per hour entering and leaving each intersection
appears beside each road. 5th Avenue and 6th Avenue can each handle up to
2000 vehicles per hour without causing congestion, whereas the maximum capac-
ity of both 4th Street and 5th Street is 1000 vehicles per hour. The flow of traffic
is controlled by traffic lights installed at each of the four intersections.

4th St.

300

5th St.

500

5th Ave.

6th Ave.

1200

x4

1300

800

1400

x2

x1

x3

700

400

FIGURE 7

a. Write a general expression involving the rates of flow—x1, x2, x3, x4—and sug-

gest two possible traffic-flow patterns that will ensure no traffic congestion.

b. Suppose that the part of 4th Street between 5th Avenue and 6th Avenue is to

be resurfaced and that traffic flow between the two junctions must therefore be
reduced to at most 300 vehicles per hour. Find two possible traffic-flow pat-
terns that will result in a smooth flow of traffic.

Solution

a. To avoid congestion, all traffic entering an intersection must also leave that

intersection. Applying this condition to each of the four intersections in a

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

5.3 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS: UNDERDETERMINED AND OVERDETERMINED SYSTEMS

277

clockwise direction beginning with the 5th Avenue and 4th Street intersection,
we obtain the following equations:

1500 ⫽ x1 ⫹ x4
1300 ⫽ x1 ⫹ x2
1800 ⫽ x2 ⫹ x3
2000 ⫽ x3 ⫹ x4

This system of four linear equations in the four variables x1, x2, x3, x4 may be
rewritten in the more standard form

x1
x1 ⫹ x2 

⫹ x4 ⫽ 1500
⫽ 1300
⫽ 1800
 x3 ⫹ x4 ⫽ 2000

 x2 ⫹ x3 

Using the Gauss–Jordan elimination method to solve the system, we obtain

≥

1
1
0
0

0
1
1
0

0
0
1
1

 

1
0
0
1

∞  

1500
1300
1800
2000

¥

R2 ⫺ R1⎯⎯⎯→

R3 ⫺ R2⎯⎯⎯→

R4 ⫺ R3⎯⎯⎯→

≥

≥

≥

1
0
0
0

1
0
0
0

1
0
0
0

0
1
1
0

0
1
0
0

0
1
0
0

0
0⫺1
1
1

0
0⫺1
1
1

0
0⫺1
1
0

 

 

 

1

0
1

1

1
1

1

1
0

∞  

∞  

∞  

1500
⫺200
1800
2000

1500
⫺200
2000
2000

1500
⫺200
2000
0

¥

¥

¥

The last augmented matrix is in row-reduced form and is equivalent to a system
of three linear equations in the four variables x1, x2, x3, x4. Thus, we may express
three of the variables—say, x1, x2, x3—in terms of the fourth, x4. Setting x4 ⫽ t
(t a parameter), we may write the infinitely many solutions of the system as

x1 ⫽ 1500 ⫺ t
x2 ⫽ ⫺200 ⫹ t
x3 ⫽ 2000 ⫺ t
x4 ⫽ t

Observe that for a meaningful solution, we must have 200 ⱕ t ⱕ 1000, since
x1, x2, x3, and x4 must all be nonnegative and the maximum capacity of a street
is 1000. For example, picking t ⫽ 300 gives the flow pattern

x1 ⫽ 1200

x2 ⫽ 100

x3 ⫽ 1700

x4 ⫽ 300

Selecting t ⫽ 500 gives the flow pattern

x1 ⫽ 1000

x2 ⫽ 300

x3 ⫽ 1500

x4 ⫽ 500

b. In this case, x4 must not exceed 300. Again, using the results of part (a), we

find, upon setting x4 ⫽ t ⫽ 300, the flow pattern

x1 ⫽ 1200

x2 ⫽ 100

x3 ⫽ 1700

x4 ⫽ 300

obtained earlier. Picking t ⫽ 250 gives the flow pattern

x1 ⫽ 1250

x2 ⫽ 50

x3 ⫽ 1750

x4 ⫽ 250

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

278

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

5.3 Self-Check Exercises

1. The  following  augmented  matrix  in  row-reduced  form  is
equivalent to the augmented matrix of a certain system of
linear  equations.  Use  this  result  to  solve  the  system  of
equations.

£

1
0
0

0⫺1
1
0

†  

3
⫺2
0

§

 

5
0

2. Solve the system of linear equations

2x ⫺ 3y ⫹ z ⫽ 6
x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 4z ⫽ ⫺4
x ⫺ 5y ⫺ 3z ⫽ 10

using the Gauss–Jordan elimination method.

5.3 Concept Questions

1. a. If a system of linear equations has the same number of
equations  or  more  equations  than  variables,  what  can
you say about the nature of its solution(s)?

b. If a system of linear equations has fewer equations than
variables, what can you say about the nature of its solu-
tion(s)?

5.3 Exercises

In  Exercises  1–12,  given  that  the  augmented  matrix  in  row-
reduced form is equivalent to the augmented matrix of a system
of linear equations, (a) determine whether the system has a solu-
tion and (b) find the solution or solutions to the system, if they
exist.

1.

3.

5.

7.

£

£

1
0
0

1
0
0

c 1

0

≥

1
0
0
0

0
1
0

 

0
1
0

 

0
0
1

†  

3
⫺1
2

§

†  

2
5
0

§

0
1

1
 
0

`  

4

⫺2d

0
1
0
0

0
0
1
0

 

0
0
0
0

∞  

2
1
3
1

¥

2.

4.

6.

£

£

£

1
0
0

1
0
0

1
0
0

8. ≥

1
0
0
0

0
1
0

0
1
0

0
1
0

0
1
0
0

0
 
0
1

 

0
0
0

0
1
0

†  

†  

3
⫺2
1

§

3
1
0

§

 

0
0
1

†  

3
⫺1
2

§

0
0
 
1
0

∞  

4
⫺1
3
1

¥

3. Solve the system of linear equations

x ⫺ 2y ⫹ 3z ⫽ 9
2x ⫹ 3y ⫺ z ⫽ 4
x ⫹ 5y ⫺ 4z ⫽ 2

using the Gauss–Jordan elimination method.

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 5.3 can be found on 
page 280.

2. A  system  consists  of  three  linear  equations  in  four  vari-

ables. Can the system have a unique solution?

9.

11.

≥

≥

1
0
0
0

1
0
0
0

0
1
0
0

0
0
1
0

 

0
0
1
0

∞  

4
⫺1
3
0

0
1⫺1
0
0

0

3

0
0

 

0

0
0

∞  

2
1
0
0

¥

¥

10.

12.

≥

≥

0
0
0
0

1
0
0
0

1
0
0
0

0
1⫺2
0
0

 

1

0
0

∞  

0
1⫺2
0
0

3⫺1
3

0
0

 

0
0

3
4
0
0

∞  

¥

4
2
0
0

¥

In  Exercises  13–34,  solve  the  system  of  linear  equations,  using
the Gauss–Jordan elimination method.
13.

14.

2x ⫺ y ⫽ 3
x ⫹ 2y ⫽ 4
2x ⫹ 3y ⫽ 7

x ⫹ 2y ⫽ 3
2x ⫺ 3y ⫽ ⫺8
x ⫺ 4y ⫽ ⫺9

15.

17.

3x ⫺ 2y ⫽ ⫺3
2x ⫹ y ⫽ 3
x ⫺ 2y ⫽ ⫺5

3x ⫺ 2y ⫽ 5
⫺x ⫹ 3y ⫽ ⫺4
2x ⫺ 4y ⫽ 6

16.

18.

2x ⫹ 3y ⫽ 2
x ⫹ 3y ⫽ ⫺2
x ⫺ y ⫽ 3

4x ⫹ 6y ⫽ 8
3x ⫺ 2y ⫽ ⫺7
x ⫹ 3y ⫽ 5

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.3 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS: UNDERDETERMINED AND OVERDETERMINED SYSTEMS

279

19.

21.

23.

25.

27.

29.

31.

33.

x ⫺ 2y ⫽ 2
7x ⫺ 14y ⫽ 14
3x ⫺ 6y ⫽ 6

⫺3

x ⫹ 2y ⫹ z ⫽ ⫺2
⫺2x ⫺ 3y ⫺ z ⫽ 1
2x ⫹ 4y ⫹ 2z ⫽ ⫺4
3x ⫹ 2y ⫽ 4
2 x ⫺ y ⫽ ⫺2
6x ⫹ 4y ⫽ 8
x ⫹ y ⫺ 2z ⫽ ⫺3
2x ⫺ y ⫹ 3z ⫽ 7
x ⫺ 2y ⫹ 5z ⫽ 0
x ⫺ 2y ⫹ 3z ⫽ 4
2x ⫹ 3y ⫺ z ⫽ 2
x ⫹ 2y ⫺ 3z ⫽ ⫺6
4x ⫹ y ⫺ z ⫽ 4
8x ⫹ 2y ⫺ 2z ⫽ 8
2x ⫹ y ⫺ 3z ⫽ 1
x ⫺ y ⫹ 2z ⫽ 1
5x ⫺ 2y ⫹ 3z ⫽ 6
x ⫹ 2y ⫺ z ⫽ ⫺4
2x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⫽ 7
x ⫹ 3y ⫹ 2z ⫽ 7
x ⫺ 3y ⫹ z ⫽ 9

20.

22.

24.

26.

28.

30.

32.

34.

3x ⫺ y ⫹ 2z ⫽ 5
x ⫺ y ⫹ 2z ⫽ 1
5x ⫺ 2y ⫹ 4z ⫽ 12

3y ⫹ 2z ⫽ 4
2x ⫺ y ⫺ 3z ⫽ 3
2x ⫹ 2y ⫺ z ⫽ 7

2 x2 ⫹ 3

2x1 ⫺ x2 ⫹ x3 ⫽ ⫺4
3x1 ⫺ 3
2 x3 ⫽ ⫺6
⫺6x1 ⫹ 3x2 ⫺ 3x3 ⫽   12
2x1 ⫹ 6x2 ⫺ 5x3
⫽ 5
x1 ⫹ 3x2 ⫹ x3 ⫹ 7x4 ⫽ ⫺1
3x1 ⫹ 9x2 ⫺ x3 ⫹ 13x4 ⫽ 1
x1 ⫺ 2x2 ⫹ x3 ⫽ ⫺3
2x1 ⫹ x2 ⫺ 2x3 ⫽ 2
x1 ⫹ 3x2 ⫺ 3x3 ⫽ 5
x1 ⫹ 2x2 ⫹ 4x3 ⫽ 2
x1 ⫹ x2 ⫹ 2x3 ⫽ 1
3x ⫺ 9y ⫹ 6z ⫽ ⫺12
x ⫺ 3y ⫹ 2z ⫽ ⫺4
2x ⫺ 6y ⫹ 4z ⫽ 8
3x ⫺ 2y ⫹ z ⫽ 4
x ⫹ 3y ⫺ 4z ⫽ ⫺3
2x ⫺ 3y ⫹ 5z ⫽ 7
x ⫺ 8y ⫹ 9z ⫽  10

35. MANAGEMENT DECISIONS The  management  of  Hartman
Rent-A-Car has allocated $1,512,000 to purchase 60 new
automobiles to add to the existing fleet of rental cars. The
company  will  choose  from  compact,  mid-sized,  and  full-
sized  cars  costing  $18,000,  $28,800,  and  $39,600  each,
respectively. Find formulas giving the options available to
the company. Give two specific options. (Note: Your an-
swers will not be unique.)

36. NUTRITION A dietitian wishes to plan a meal around three
foods.  The  meal  is  to  include  8800  units  of  vitamin  A,
3380 units of vitamin C, and 1020 units of calcium. The
number  of  units  of  the  vitamins  and  calcium  in  each
ounce of the foods is summarized in the following table:

Food I

Food II

Food III

Vitamin A
Vitamin C
Calcium

400
110
90

1200
570
30

800
340
60

Determine  the  amount  of  each  food  the  dietitian  should
include in the meal in order to meet the vitamin and cal-
cium requirements.

37. NUTRITION Refer  to  Exercise  36.  In  planning  for  another
meal,  the  dietitian  changes  the  requirement  of  vitamin  C
from  3380  units  to  2160  units.  All  other  requirements
remain the same. Show that such a meal cannot be planned
around the same foods.

38. MANUFACTURING PRODUCTION SCHEDULE Ace  Novelty  manu-
factures Giant Pandas, Saint Bernards, and Big Birds. Each
Giant Panda requires 1.5 yd2 of plush, 30 ft3 of stuffing, and
5 pieces of trim; each Saint Bernard requires 2 yd2 of plush,
35 ft3 of stuffing, and 8 pieces of trim; and each Big Bird
requires 2.5 yd2 of plush, 25 ft3 of stuffing, and 15 pieces of
trim. If 4700 yd2 of plush, 65,000 ft3 of stuffing, and 23,400
pieces of trim are available, how many of each of the stuffed
animals should the company manufacture if all the material
is to be used? Give two specific options.

39. INVESTMENTS Mr. and Mrs. Garcia have a total of $100,000
to  be  invested  in  stocks,  bonds,  and  a  money  market
account.  The  stocks  have  a  rate  of  return  of  12%/year,
while  the  bonds  and  the  money  market  account  pay
8%/year and 4%/year, respectively. The Garcias have stip-
ulated that the amount invested in stocks should be equal
to the sum of the amount invested in bonds and 3 times the
amount invested in the money market account. How should
the  Garcias  allocate  their  resources  if  they  require  an
annual  income  of  $10,000  from  their  investments?  Give
two specific options.

40. TRAFFIC CONTROL The accompanying figure shows the flow
of traffic near a city’s Civic Center during the rush hours
on a typical weekday. Each road can handle a maximum of
1000 cars/hour without causing congestion. The flow of
traffic is controlled by traffic lights at each of the five inter-
sections.

6th Ave.
700

7th Ave.
600

3rd St.

4th St.

500

x1

600

x2

x5

x6

Civic D
riv
x 3
e

800

x4

700

700

600

a. Set up a system of linear equations describing the traf-

fic flow.

b. Solve  the  system  devised  in  part  (a),  and  suggest  two
possible traffic-flow patterns that will ensure no traffic
congestion.

c. Suppose  7th  Avenue  between  3rd  and  4th  Streets  is
soon  to  be  closed  for  road  repairs.  Find  one  possible
traffic-flow pattern that will result in a smooth flow of
traffic.

41. TRAFFIC CONTROL The  accompanying  figure  shows  the
flow of downtown traffic during the rush hours on a typi-
cal  weekday.  Each  avenue  can  handle  up  to  1500  vehi-
cles/hour without causing congestion, whereas the maxi-
mum  capacity  of  each  street  is  1000  vehicles/hour.  The
flow of traffic is controlled by traffic lights at each of the
six intersections.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

280

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

5th Ave.
900

6th Ave.

1000

7th St.

8th St.

9th St.

600

700

800

x2

x1

900

x3

x7

x6

600

700

700

x4

x5

1100

a. Set up a system of linear equations describing the traf-

fic flow.

b. Solve  the  system  devised  in  part  (a),  and  suggest  two
possible traffic-flow patterns that will ensure no traffic
congestion.

c. Suppose  the  traffic  flow  along  9th  Street  between  5th
and 6th Avenues, x6, is restricted because of sewer con-
struction. What is the minimum permissible traffic flow
along this road that will not result in traffic congestion?

42. Determine the value of k such that the following system of
linear  equations  has  a  unique  solution,  and  then  find  the
solution:

2x ⫹ 3y ⫽ 2
x ⫹ 4y ⫽ 6
5x ⫹ ky ⫽ 2

5.3 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. Let x, y, and z denote the variables. Then the given row-
reduced augmented matrix tells us that the system of linear
equations is equivalent to the two equations

x  ⫺ z ⫽ 3
  y ⫹ 5z ⫽ ⫺2

Letting z ⫽ t, where t is a parameter, we find the infinitely
many solutions given by

x ⫽ t ⫹ 3
y ⫽ ⫺5t ⫺ 2
z ⫽ t

2. We  obtain  the  following  sequence  of  equivalent  aug-

mented matrices:

£

£

2 ⫺3
1
1
4
2
1 ⫺5 ⫺3

 

4
1
2
2 ⫺3
1
1 ⫺5 ⫺3

 

†  

†  

6
⫺4
10
⫺4
6
10

§

§

R1 4  R2
⎯⎯⎯⎯→

R2 ⫺ 2R1⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫺ R1

43. Determine the value of k such that the following system of
linear  equations  has  infinitely  many  solutions,  and  then
find the solutions:

3x ⫺ 2y ⫹ 4z ⫽ 12
⫺9x ⫹ 6y ⫺ 12z ⫽   k

44. Solve the system:

1
x

2
x
2
x

⫹ 1
y
⫹ 3
y
⫹ 1
y

⫹ 1
z
⫹ 2
z
⫹ 2
z

⫽ ⫺1

⫽ 3

⫽ ⫺7

In Exercises 45 and 46, determine whether the statement is true
or  false.  If  it  is  true,  explain  why  it  is  true.  If  it  is  false,  give  an
example to show why it is false.
45. A system of linear equations having fewer equations than
variables  has  no  solution,  a  unique  solution,  or  infinitely
many solutions.

46. A system of linear equations having more equations than
variables  has  no  solution,  a  unique  solution,  or  infinitely
many solutions.

£

£

2

1
4
 
0 ⫺7 ⫺7
0 ⫺7 ⫺7

2
1

4
1
0
1
0 ⫺7 ⫺7

 

†  

†  

⫺4
14
14

⫺4
⫺2
14

§

§

⫺1
7 R2 ⎯⎯→

R1 ⫺ 2R2⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫹ 7R2

£

1
0
0

0
1
0

 

2
1
0

†  

0
⫺2
0

§

The last augmented matrix, which is in row-reduced form,
tells us that the given system of linear equations is equiv-
alent to the following system of two equations:

x  ⫹ 2z ⫽ 0
  y ⫹ z ⫽ ⫺2

Letting z ⫽ t, where t is a parameter, we see that the infi-
nitely many solutions are given by

x ⫽ ⫺2t
y ⫽ ⫺t ⫺ 2
z ⫽ t

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

5.3 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS: UNDERDETERMINED AND OVERDETERMINED SYSTEMS

281

3. We  obtain  the  following  sequence  of  equivalent  aug-

mented matrices:

Since the last row of the final augmented matrix is equiva-
lent  to  the  equation  0  ⫽ 7,  a  contradiction,  we  conclude
that the given system has no solution.

£

£

1 ⫺2
2
1

3
3 ⫺1
5 ⫺4

 

1 ⫺2
0
0

3
7 ⫺7
7 ⫺7

 

†  

†  

9
4
2

§

R2 ⫺ 2R1⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫺ R1

9
⫺14
⫺7

§

R3 ⫺ R2⎯⎯→

£

1 ⫺2
0
0

3
7 ⫺7
0
0

 

†  

9
⫺14
7

§

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Systems of Linear Equations: Underdetermined 
and Overdetermined Systems
We can use the row operations of a graphing utility to solve a system of m linear equa-
tions in n unknowns by the Gauss–Jordan method, as we did in the previous technol-
ogy  section.  We  can  also  use  the  rref or  equivalent  operation  to  obtain  the  row-
reduced form without going through all the steps of the Gauss–Jordan method. The
SIMULT function,  however,  cannot  be  used  to  solve  a  system  where  the  number  of
equations and the number of variables are not the same.

EXAMPLE 1 Solve the system

x1 ⫺ 2x2 ⫹ 4x3 ⫽ 2
2x1 ⫹ x2 ⫺ 2x3 ⫽ ⫺1
3x1 ⫺ x2 ⫹ 2x3 ⫽ 1
2x1 ⫹ 6x2 ⫺ 12x3 ⫽ ⫺6

Solution First, we enter the augmented matrix A into the calculator as

A ⫽ ≥

1 ⫺2
2
1
3 ⫺1
2

4
⫺2
2
6 ⫺12

 

∞  

2
⫺1
1
⫺6

¥

Then using the rref or equivalent operation, we obtain the equivalent matrix

≥

1
0
0
0

0
1⫺2
0
0

 

0

0
0

∞  

0
⫺1
0
0

¥

in reduced form. Thus, the given system is equivalent to

x1

⫽ 0
x2 ⫺ 2x3 ⫽ ⫺1

If we let x3 ⫽ t, where t is a parameter, then we find that the solutions are 
(0, 2t ⫺ 1, t).

(continued)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

282

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

Use a graphing utility to solve the system of equations using the
rref or equivalent operation.
1. 2x1 ⫺ x2 ⫺ x3 ⫽ 0
3x1 ⫺ 2x2 ⫺ x3 ⫽ ⫺1
⫺x1 ⫹ 2x2 ⫺ x3 ⫽ 3
2x2 ⫺ 2x3 ⫽ 4
2. 3x1 ⫹ x2 ⫺ 4x3 ⫽ 5
2x1 ⫺ 3x2 ⫹ 2x3 ⫽ ⫺4
⫺x1 ⫺ 2x2 ⫹ 4x3 ⫽ 6
4x1 ⫹ 3x2 ⫺ 5x3 ⫽ 9

3. 2x1 ⫹ 3x2 ⫹ 2x3 ⫹ x4 ⫽ ⫺1
x1 ⫺ x2 ⫹ x3 ⫺ 2x4 ⫽ ⫺8
5x1 ⫹ 6x2 ⫺ 2x3 ⫹ 2x4 ⫽ 11
x1 ⫹ 3x2 ⫹ 8x3 ⫹ x4 ⫽ ⫺14

5.4 Matrices

4.

5.

x1 ⫺ x2 ⫹ 3x3 ⫺ 6x4 ⫽ 2
x1 ⫹ x2 ⫹ x3 ⫺ 2x4 ⫽ 2
⫺2x1 ⫺ x2 ⫹ x3 ⫹ 2x4 ⫽ 0
x1 ⫹ x2 ⫺ x3 ⫺ x4 ⫽ ⫺1
x1 ⫺ x2 ⫹ x3 ⫹ 4x4 ⫽ ⫺6
3x1 ⫹ x2 ⫺ x3 ⫹ 2x4 ⫽ ⫺4
5x1 ⫹ x2 ⫺ 3x3 ⫹ x4 ⫽ ⫺9

6. 1.2x1 ⫺ 2.3x2 ⫹ 4.2x3 ⫹ 5.4x4 ⫺ 1.6x5 ⫽ 4.2
2.3x1 ⫹ 1.4x2 ⫺ 3.1x3 ⫹ 3.3x4 ⫺ 2.4x5 ⫽ 6.3
1.7x1 ⫹ 2.6x2 ⫺ 4.3x3 ⫹ 7.2x4 ⫺ 1.8x5 ⫽ 7.8
2.6x1 ⫺ 4.2x2 ⫹ 8.3x3 ⫺ 1.6x4 ⫹ 2.5x5 ⫽ 6.4

Using Matrices to Represent Data
Many practical problems are solved by using arithmetic operations on the data asso-
ciated with the problems. By properly organizing the data into blocks of numbers, we
can then carry out these arithmetic operations in an orderly and efficient manner. In
particular, this systematic approach enables us to use the computer to full advantage.
Let’s begin by considering how the monthly output data of a manufacturer may
be  organized.  The  Acrosonic  Company  manufactures  four  different  loudspeaker
systems  at  three  separate  locations.  The  company’s  May  output  is  described  in 
Table 1.

TABLE 1

Location I
Location II
Location III

Model A

Model B

Model C

Model D

320
480
540

280
360
420

460
580
200

280
0
880

Now, if we agree to preserve the relative location of each entry in Table 1, we can
summarize the set of data as follows:

£

320
480
540

280
360
420

460
580
200

280
0
880

§

A matrix summarizing the data in Table 1

The  array  of  numbers  displayed  here  is  an  example  of  a  matrix.  Observe  that 
the numbers in row 1 give the output of models A, B, C, and D of Acrosonic loud-
speaker systems manufactured at Location I; similarly, the numbers in rows 2 and 3
give the respective outputs of these loudspeaker systems at Locations II and III. The
numbers in each column of the matrix give the outputs of a particular model of loud-
speaker system manufactured at each of the company’s three manufacturing locations.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.4 MATRICES

283

More generally, a matrix is a rectangular array of real numbers. For example, each

of the following arrays is a matrix:

A ⫽ c 3

2

0⫺1
1

4d

B ⫽ £

3
0
⫺1

2
1
4

§

C ⫽ ≥

1
2
4
0

¥

D ⫽ 31  3  0  14

The real numbers that make up the array are called the entries, or elements, of the
matrix. The entries in a row in the array are referred to as a row of the matrix, whereas
the entries in a column in the array are referred to as a column of the matrix. Matrix
A, for example, has two rows and three columns, which may be identified as follows:

Column 1

冤 3

2

Row 1

Row 2

Column 2

0
1

A 2 ⫻ 3 matrix

Column 3

⫺1冥

4

The  size, or  dimension,  of  a  matrix is  described  in  terms  of  the  number  of
rows and  columns  of  the  matrix.  For  example,  matrix  A has  two  rows  and  three
columns and is said to have size 2 by 3, denoted 2 ⫻ 3. In general, a matrix having 
m rows and n columns is said to have size m ⫻ n.

Matrix
A  matrix is  an  ordered  rectangular  array  of  numbers.  A  matrix  with  m rows 
and n columns has size m ⫻ n. The entry in the ith row and jth column of a
matrix A is denoted by aij.

A matrix of size 1 ⫻ n—a matrix having one row and n columns—is referred to
as a row matrix, or row vector, of dimension n. For example, the matrix D is a row
vector of dimension 4. Similarly, a matrix having m rows and one column is referred
to as a column matrix, or column vector, of dimension m. The matrix C is a column
vector of dimension 4. Finally, an n ⫻ n matrix—that is, a matrix having the same
number of rows as columns—is called a square matrix. For example, the matrix

£

⫺3
2
1

8
1
4
3

6
4
2

§

A 3 ⫻ 3 square matrix

is a square matrix of size 3 ⫻ 3, or simply of size 3.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 1 Organizing Production Data Consider the matrix

P ⫽ £

320
480
540

280
360
420

460
580
200

280
0
880

§

representing the output of loudspeaker systems of the Acrosonic Company dis-
cussed earlier (see Table 1).
a. What is the size of the matrix P?
b. Find p24 (the entry in row 2 and column 4 of the matrix P), and give an inter-

pretation of this number.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

284

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

c. Find the sum of the entries that make up row 1 of P, and interpret the result.
d. Find the sum of the entries that make up column 4 of P, and interpret the

result.

Solution
a. The matrix P has three rows and four columns and hence has size 3 ⫻ 4.
b. The required entry lies in row 2 and column 4 and is the number 0. This

means that no model D loudspeaker system was manufactured at Location II 
in May.

c. The required sum is given by

320 ⫹ 280 ⫹ 460 ⫹ 280 ⫽ 1340

which gives the total number of loudspeaker systems manufactured at Loca-
tion I in May as 1340 units.

d. The required sum is given by

280 ⫹ 0 ⫹ 880 ⫽ 1160

giving the output of model D loudspeaker systems at all locations of the com-
pany in May as 1160 units.

Equality of Matrices
Two matrices are said to be equal if they have the same size and their corresponding
entries are equal. For example,

Also,

c 2

4

3
6

1

2d

⫽

c13 ⫺ 12

4

3

14 ⫹ 22

1

2d

c 1

2

3
4

5

3d ⫽

£

1
3
5

2
4
3

§

since the matrix on the left has size 2 ⫻ 3, whereas the matrix on the right has size 
3 ⫻ 2, and

c 2

4

3

6d ⫽

c 2

4

3

7d

since the corresponding elements in row 2 and column 2 of the two matrices are not equal.

Equality of Matrices
Two  matrices  are  equal  if  they  have  the  same  size  and  their  corresponding
entries are equal.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 2 Solve the following matrix equation for x, y, and z:

c 1

2

x

y ⫺ 1

3

2d ⫽

c 1

2

4
1

z

2d

Solution Since the corresponding elements of the two matrices must be equal, we
find that x ⫽ 4, z ⫽ 3, and y ⫺ 1 ⫽ 1, or y ⫽ 2.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.4 MATRICES

285

Addition and Subtraction
Two matrices A and B of the same size can be added or subtracted to produce a matrix
of the same size. This is done by adding or subtracting the corresponding entries in the
two matrices. For example,

c 1

⫺1

3
2

4

0d ⫹ c 1

6

4
1⫺2

3

d ⫽ c 1 ⫹ 1

⫺1 ⫹ 6

3 ⫹ 4
2 ⫹ 1

Adding two matrices of the same size

and  £

1
⫺1
4

2
3
0

§ ⫺ £

2 ⫺1
2
3
⫺1
0
Subtracting two matrices of the same size

1 ⫺ 2   
⫺1 ⫺ 3   
4 ⫺ 1⫺12

§ ⫽ £

5

4 ⫹ 3  

0 ⫹ 1⫺22 d ⫽ c 2
2 ⫺ 1⫺12
3 ⫺ 2   
0 ⫺ 0   

§ ⫽ £

7
3⫺2

7

d

3
1
0

§

⫺1
⫺4
5

Addition and Subtraction of Matrices
If A and B are two matrices of the same size, then:
1. The sum A ⫹ B is the matrix obtained by adding the corresponding entries in

the two matrices.

2. The difference A ⫺ B is the matrix obtained by subtracting the correspond-

ing entries in B from those in A.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 3 Organizing Production Data The total output of
Acrosonic for June is shown in Table 2.

TABLE 2

Model A

Model B

Model C

Model D

Location I
Location II
Location III

210
400
420

180
300
280

330
450
180

180
40
740

The output for May was given earlier, in Table 1. Find the total output of the
company for May and June.

Solution As we saw earlier, the production matrix for Acrosonic in May is
given by

A ⫽ £

320
480
540

280
360
420

460
580
200

280
0
880

§

Next, from Table 2, we see that the production matrix for June is given by

B ⫽ £

210
400
420

180
300
280

330
450
180

180
40
740

§

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

286

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

Finally, the total output of Acrosonic for May and June is given by the matrix

A ⫹ B ⫽ £

 ⫽ £

320
480
540

530
880
960

280
360
420

460
660
700

460
580
200

790
1030
380

280
0
880

§ ⫹ £

210
400
420

180
300
280

330
450
180

180
40
740

§

460
40
1620

§

The following laws hold for matrix addition.

Laws for Matrix Addition
If A, B, and C are matrices of the same size, then
1. A ⫹ B ⫽ B ⫹ A
2. (A ⫹ B) ⫹ C ⫽ A ⫹ (B ⫹ C)

Associative law

Commutative law

The commutative law for matrix addition states that the order in which matrix addition
is performed is immaterial. The associative law states that, when adding three matri-
ces together, we may first add A and B and then add the resulting sum to C. Equiva-
lently, we can add A to the sum of B and C.

EXAMPLE 4 Let

A ⫽ £

2
1
3 ⫺2
0
1

§     B ⫽ £

⫺1
3
2

2
0
4

§     C ⫽ £

1
1
3
2
0 ⫺1

§

a. Show that 
b. Show that 

A ⫹ B ⫽ B ⫹ A
.
1A ⫹ B2 ⫹ C ⫽ A ⫹ 1B ⫹ C2

.

Solution

a. A ⫹ B ⫽ £

2
1
3 ⫺2
0
1

§    ⫹   £

⫺1
3
2

2
0
4

§    ⫽   £

2 ⫹ 1⫺12
    1 ⫹ 2
3 ⫹ 3 ⫺2 ⫹ 0
1 ⫹ 2
   0 ⫹ 4

§ ⫽ £

1
3
6 ⫺2
4
3

§

On the other hand,

2
0
4

§    ⫹   £

1
2
3 ⫺2
1
0

§    ⫽   £

⫺1 ⫹ 2
   3 ⫹ 3
   2 ⫹ 1

    2 ⫹ 1
    0 ⫹ ⫺2
    4 ⫹ 0

§ ⫽ £

3
1
6 ⫺2
3
4

§

B ⫹ A ⫽  £

⫺1
3
2
A ⫹ B ⫽ B ⫹ A

, as was to be shown.
so 
b. Using the results of part (a), we have

1A ⫹ B2 ⫹ C ⫽  £

1
3
6 ⫺2
4
3

§ ⫹ £

1
1
3
2
0 ⫺1

§ ⫽ £

2
8
3

4
1
3

§

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.4 MATRICES

287

Next,

so

B ⫹ C ⫽  £

⫺1
3
2

2
0
4

§    ⫹   £

1
1
2
3
0 ⫺1

§    ⫽ £

0
5
2

3
3
3

§

A ⫹ 1B ⫹ C2 ⫽  £

2
1
3 ⫺2
0
1

§    ⫹ £

0
5
2

3
3
3

§ ⫽ £

2
8
3

4
1
3

§

This shows that 

1A ⫹ B2 ⫹ C ⫽ A ⫹ 1B ⫹ C2

.

A zero matrix is one in which all entries are zero. A zero matrix O has the prop-

erty that

A ⫹ O ⫽ O ⫹ A ⫽ A

for any matrix A having the same size as that of O. For example, the zero matrix of
size 3 ⫻ 2 is

O ⫽ £

If A is any 3 ⫻ 2 matrix, then

A ⫹ O ⫽ £

a11
a21
a31

a12
a22
a32

§ ⫹ £

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

§

0
0
0

§ ⫽ £

a11
a21
a31

a12
a22
a32

§ ⫽ A

where aij denotes the entry in the ith row and jth column of the matrix A.

The  matrix  that  is  obtained  by  interchanging  the  rows  and  columns  of  a  given

matrix A is called the transpose of A and is denoted AT. For example, if

then

A ⫽ £

1
4
7

AT ⫽ £

1
2
3

2
5
8

4
5
6

3
6
9

§

7
8
9

§

Transpose of a Matrix
If  A is  an  m ⫻ n matrix  with  elements  aij,  then  the  transpose of  A is  the 
n ⫻ m matrix AT with elements aji.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

288

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

Scalar Multiplication
A  matrix  A may  be  multiplied  by  a  real  number,  called  a  scalar in  the  context  of
matrix algebra. The scalar product, denoted by cA, is a matrix obtained by multiply-
ing each entry of A by c. For example, the scalar product of the matrix

A ⫽ c 3 ⫺1

0

1

2

4d

and the scalar 3 is the matrix

3A ⫽ 3c 3 ⫺1

1

0

2

4d ⫽ c 9 ⫺3

3

0

6

12d

Scalar Product
If A is a matrix and c is a real number, then the scalar product cA is the matrix
obtained by multiplying each entry of A by c.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 5 Given

A ⫽ c 3

⫺1

4

2d   and  B ⫽ c 3

⫺1

2

2d

find the matrix X satisfying the matrix equation 2X ⫹ B ⫽ 3A.

Solution From the given equation 2X ⫹ B ⫽ 3A, we find that

2 X ⫽ 3A ⫺ B

⫺1

 ⫽ 3c 3
 ⫽ c 9
 X ⫽ 1
2  c 6

⫺2

⫺3

12

4

⫺1

2d ⫺ c 3
6d ⫺ c 3
4d ⫽ c 3

⫺1

⫺1

10

2

2

2d
2d ⫽ c 6
2d

⫺2

5

10

4d

APPLIED EXAMPLE 6 Production Planning The management of Acrosonic
has decided to increase its July production of loudspeaker systems by 10% 

(over its June output). Find a matrix giving the targeted production for July.

Solution From the results of Example 3, we see that Acrosonic’s total output
for June may be represented by the matrix

B ⫽ £

210
400
420

180
300
280

330
450
180

180
40
740

§

The required matrix is given by

11.12B ⫽ 1.1£

210
400
420

180
300
280

330
450
180

180
40
740

§

 ⫽ £

231
440
462

198
330
308

363
495
198

198
44
814

§

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

and is interpreted in the usual manner.

5.4 Self-Check Exercises

1. Perform the indicated operations:

and

5.4 MATRICES

289

c 1

⫺1

3
4

2

7d ⫺ 3c 2

1

1
3

0

4d

2. Solve the following matrix equation for x, y, and z:

c x

z

3

2d ⫹ c 2 ⫺ y

2 ⫺ z ⫺xd ⫽ c 3

2

z

7

0d

3. Jack owns two gas stations, one downtown and the other
in  the  Wilshire  district.  Over  two  consecutive  days,  his
gas  stations  recorded  gasoline  sales  represented  by  the
following matrices:

Regular
1200
1100

c

Regular

plus
750
850

Premium

650
600

d

A ⫽ Downtown

Wilshire

Regular
1250
1150

c

Regular

plus
825
750

Premium

550
750

d

B ⫽ 

Downtown
Wilshire

Find a matrix representing the total sales of the two gas
stations over the 2-day period.

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 5.4 can be found on 
page 292.

5.4 Concept Questions

1. Define  (a)  a  matrix,  (b)  the  size  of  a  matrix,  (c)  a  row

matrix, (d) a column matrix, and (e) a square matrix.

3. Construct a 3 ⫻ 3 matrix A having the property that A ⫽ AT.

What special characteristic does A have?

2. When  are  two  matrices  equal?  Give  an  example  of  two

matrices that are equal.

5.4 Exercises

In Exercises 1–6, refer to the following matrices:

 A ⫽ ≥

2 ⫺3
2
0
1

⫺11
6
5

9 ⫺4
7
6
2
9
5 ⫺8

¥

 B ⫽ ≥

3 ⫺1
1
0
2
3
⫺1
0

2
4
1
8

¥

 C ⫽  31  0  3  4  54

 D ⫽ ≥

1
3
⫺2
0

¥

1. What is the size of A? Of B? Of C? Of D?

2. Find a14, a21, a31, and a43.

3. Find b13, b31, and b43.
4. Identify the row matrix. What is its transpose?
5. Identify the column matrix. What is its transpose?
6. Identify the square matrix. What is its transpose?

In Exercises 7–12, refer to the following matrices:

 A ⫽ £

⫺1

2
3 ⫺2
4
0

§  

   B ⫽ £

2
3
⫺2

4
1
2

§

 C ⫽ £

3 ⫺1
2 ⫺2
4
6

0
3
2

§       D ⫽ £

2 ⫺2
6
3
⫺2
3

4
2
1

§

7. What is the size of A? Of B? Of C? Of D?
8. Explain why the matrix A ⫹ C does not exist.
9. Compute A ⫹ B.
11. Compute C ⫺ D.

10. Compute 2A ⫺ 3B.
12. Compute 4D ⫺ 2C.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

290

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

In Exercises 13–20, perform the indicated operations.

In Exercises 25 and 26, let

8

6d ⫺ c 1 ⫺2 ⫺1
2 ⫺5 ⫺7d
0d ⫹ c 4

4⫺1
0

6

3 ⫺2 ⫺4
2

0⫺3

d

4 ⫺5

6d ⫹ c 4

3

0⫺2
6

5d ⫺ c

2
⫺11

9

8

2 ⫺5d

4

3
5

c 6
c 2 ⫺3
c 1

3 ⫺8

3

1

13.

14.

15.

16.

3£

1 ⫺3
1
3
3
2
7 ⫺1
6

§ ⫹ 4£

⫺2 ⫺1
2
6

4
3

8
2
3

§

17.

c 1.2

8.2

4.5 ⫺4.2

6.3 ⫺3.2d ⫺ c 3.1

1.5 ⫺3.6

2.2 ⫺3.3 ⫺4.4d

18.

19.

£

0.12
0.06
0.43
1.11
1.55 ⫺0.43

§ ⫺ £

0.77 ⫺0.75
0.22 ⫺0.65
1.09 ⫺0.57

§

1

2   £

1
3
⫺2

0
0⫺1
1⫺4

0⫺4
6
2

§ ⫹ 4
3  £

3
⫺2
8

0⫺1
1⫺6
2

4
2
0⫺2

§

⫺ 1
3

 £

3 ⫺9 ⫺1
6
0

2
1 ⫺3

0
0 ⫺6
1

§

20.

0.5£

1
5
⫺2

3
2⫺1
0

5

1

§ ⫺ 0.2£

2
⫺1
3

3
1⫺4
5⫺5

4

§

⫹ 0.6£

3
4
1

4⫺1
5
0

§

1
0

In  Exercises  21–24,  solve  for  u,  x,  y,  and  z in  the  given  matrix
equation.

£

2x ⫺ 2
3
2    
4
2z    ⫺3

2    
y ⫺ 2
2    

§ ⫽ £

3
u
2
4
4 ⫺3

2
5
2

§

z

3

⫺1

yd ⫹ c ⫺2

c x ⫺2
2y ⫺3d ⫺ 4c 2 ⫺2
c 1

2d ⫽ c 4  ⫺2
4d
3d ⫽ c 3z
4  ⫺ud

10

2u

0

x

21.

22.

23.

 A ⫽ c 2 ⫺4

4

2

3

1

1d     B ⫽ c 4
1d

0
3 ⫺2

2

 C ⫽ c 1

3
0

2

4d

25. Verify by direct computation the validity of the commuta-

tive law for matrix addition.

26. Verify by direct computation the validity of the associative

law for matrix addition.

In Exercises 27–30, let

A ⫽ £

3
2
⫺4

1
4
0

§   and  B ⫽ £

1
⫺1
3

2
0
2

§

Verify each equation by direct computation.
27. (3 ⫹ 5)A ⫽ 3A ⫹ 5A

28. 2(4A) ⫽ (2 ⭈ 4)A ⫽ 8A

29. 4(A ⫹ B) ⫽ 4A ⫹ 4B

30. 2(A ⫺ 3B) ⫽ 2A ⫺ 6B

In Exercises 31–34, find the transpose of each matrix.
0⫺1
5

2
4⫺1

c 4

2⫺1

33

31.

32.

3

5

4

d

33.

£

1 ⫺1
4
3
0
1

2
2
0

§

34.

≥

1
2
6
4

2
3
2
5

6
2
3
0

4
5
0
2

¥

35. CHOLESTEROL LEVELS Mr. Cross, Mr. Jones, and Mr. Smith
all  suffer  from  coronary  heart  disease.  As  part  of  their
treatment, they were put on special low-cholesterol diets:
Cross on Diet I, Jones on Diet II, and Smith on Diet III.
Progressive records of each patient’s cholesterol level were
kept. At the beginning of the first, second, third, and fourth
months, the cholesterol levels of the three patients were:

Cross: 220, 215, 210, and 205
Jones: 220, 210, 200, and 195
Smith: 215, 205, 195, and 190

Represent this information in a 3 ⫻ 4 matrix.

36. INVESTMENT PORTFOLIOS The following table gives the num-
ber  of  shares  of  certain  corporations  held  by  Leslie  and
Tom in their respective IRA accounts at the beginning of
the year:

24. £

1
2
3
4
x ⫺1

§ ⫺ 3£

y ⫺ 1
1    
4    

2    
2    
2z ⫹ 1

§ ⫽ 2£

⫺4 ⫺u
0 ⫺1
4
4

§

Leslie
Tom

IBM
500
400

GE
350
450

Ford
200
300

Wal-Mart

400
200

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Over the year, they added more shares to their accounts, as
shown in the following table:

Leslie
Tom

IBM
50
0

GE
50
80

Ford

0
100

Wal-Mart

100
50

a. Write a matrix A giving the holdings of Leslie and Tom
at the beginning of the year and a matrix B giving the
shares they have added to their portfolios.

b. Find a matrix C giving their total holdings at the end of

the year.

37. HOME SALES K & R Builders build three models of houses,
M1, M2, and M3, in three subdivisions I, II, and III located
in three different areas of a city. The prices of the houses
(in thousands of dollars) are given in matrix A:

M1
340
410
620

£

M2
360
430
660

M3
380
440
700

§

I
A ⫽ II
III

K & R Builders has decided to raise the price of each house
by 3% next year. Write a matrix B giving the new prices of
the houses.

38. HOME SALES K & R Builders build three models of houses,
M1, M2, and M3, in three subdivisions I, II, and III located
in three different areas of a city. The prices of the homes
(in thousands of dollars) are given in matrix A:

M1
340
410
620

£

M2
360
430
660

M3
380
440
700

§

I
A ⫽ II
III

The new price schedule for next year, reflecting a uniform
percentage increase in each house, is given by matrix B:

M1
357
430.5
651

£

M2
378
451.5
693

M3
399
462
735

§

I
B ⫽ II
III

What  was  the  percentage  increase  in  the  prices  of  the
houses?
Hint: Find r such that (1 ⫹ 0.01r)A ⫽ B.

39. BANKING The numbers of three types of bank accounts on
January 1 at the Central Bank and its branches are repre-
sented by matrix A:

Checking
accounts
2820
1030
1170

£

Savings
accounts
1470
520
540

Fixed-
deposit
accounts
1120
480
460

§

Main office

A ⫽ Westside branch
Eastside branch

5.4 MATRICES

291

The number and types of accounts opened during the first
quarter are represented by matrix B, and the number and
types of accounts closed during the same period are repre-
sented by matrix C. Thus,

B ⫽ £

260
140
120

120
60
70

110
50
50

§

and  C ⫽ £

120
70
60

80
30
20

80
40
40

§

a. Find  matrix  D,  which  represents  the  number  of  each
type  of  account  at  the  end  of  the  first  quarter  at  each
location.

b. Because  a  new  manufacturing  plant  is  opening  in  the
immediate area, it is anticipated that there will be a 10%
increase in the number of accounts at each location dur-
ing  the  second  quarter.  Write  a  matrix  E ⫽ 1.1D to
reflect this anticipated increase.

40. BOOKSTORE INVENTORIES The  Campus  Bookstore’s  inven-

tory of books is

Hardcover: textbooks, 5280; fiction, 1680; nonfiction,
2320; reference, 1890
Paperback: fiction, 2810; nonfiction, 1490; reference,
2070; textbooks, 1940

The College Bookstore’s inventory of books is

Hardcover: textbooks, 6340; fiction, 2220; nonfiction,
1790; reference, 1980
Paperback: fiction, 3100; nonfiction, 1720; reference,
2710; textbooks, 2050

a. Represent Campus’s inventory as a matrix A.
b. Represent College’s inventory as a matrix B.
c. The  two  companies  decide  to  merge,  so  now  write  a
matrix C that represents the total inventory of the newly
amalgamated company.

41. INSURANCE CLAIMS The property damage claim frequencies
per 100 cars in Massachusetts in the years 2000, 2001, and
2002  were  6.88,  7.05,  and  7.18,  respectively.  The  corre-
sponding claim frequencies in the United States were 4.13,
4.09, and 4.06, respectively. Express this information using
a 2 ⫻ 3 matrix.
Sources: Registry of Motor Vehicles; Federal Highway Administration.

42. MORTALITY RATES Mortality  actuarial  tables  in  the  United
States were revised in 2001, the fourth time since 1858. On
the basis of the new life insurance mortality rates, 1% of 
60-year-old  men,  2.6%  of  70-year-old  men,  7%  of 
80-year-old men, 18.8% of 90-year-old men, and 36.3% of
100-year-old  men  would  die  within  a  year.  The  corre-
sponding rates for women are 0.8%, 1.8%, 4.4%, 12.2%,
and 27.6%, respectively. Express this information using a
2 ⫻ 5 matrix.
Source: Society of Actuaries.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

292

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

43. LIFE EXPECTANCY Figures  for  life  expectancy  at  birth  of
Massachusetts  residents  in  2008  are  82.6,  80.5,  and  91.2
years for white, black, and Hispanic women, respectively,
and 78.0, 73.9, and 84.8 years for white, black, and His-
panic men, respectively. Express this information using a 
2 ⫻ 3 matrix and a 3 ⫻ 2 matrix.
Source: Massachusetts Department of Public Health.

44. MARKET SHARE OF MOTORCYCLES The  market  share  of
motorcycles in the United States in 2001 follows: Honda
27.9%,  Harley-Davidson  21.9%,  Yamaha  19.2%,  Suzuki
11.0%,  Kawasaki  9.1%,  and  others  10.9%.  The  corre-
sponding  figures  for  2002  are  27.6%,  23.3%,  18.2%,
10.5%, 8.8%, and 11.6%, respectively. Express this infor-
mation using a 2 ⫻ 6 matrix. What is the sum of all the ele-
ments in the first row? In the second row? Is this expected?

5.4 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

Which  company  gained  the  most  market  share  between
2001 and 2002?
Source: Motorcycle Industry Council.

In Exercises 45–48, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
45. If A and B are matrices of the same size and c is a scalar,

46. If A and B are matrices of the same size, then 

47. If A is a matrix and c is a nonzero scalar, then 

then c1A ⫹ B2 ⫽ cA ⫹ cB.
A ⫺ B ⫽ A ⫹ 1⫺12 B.
1cA2 T ⫽ 11>c2 AT.

48. If A is a matrix, then 1AT2 T ⫽ A.

1. 

c 1

⫺1

3
4

2

7d ⫺ 3c 2

1

1
3

2. We are given

0

2

3
4

⫺1

4d ⫽ c 1
 ⫽ c ⫺5

7d ⫺ c 6
⫺4 ⫺5 ⫺5d

0

2

3

3
9

0

12d

By the equality of matrices, we have

2 ⫹ x ⫺ y ⫽ 3
 3 ⫹ z ⫽ 7
 2 ⫺ x ⫽ 0

c x

z

3

2d ⫹ c 2 ⫺ y

2 ⫺ z ⫺xd ⫽ c 3

2

z

7

0d

from which we deduce that x ⫽ 2, y ⫽ 1, and z ⫽ 4.

3. The required matrix is

Performing  the  indicated  operation  on  the  left-hand  side,
we obtain

c 2 ⫹ x ⫺ y

2

3 ⫹ z

2 ⫺ xd ⫽ c 3

2

7

0d

1100

A ⫹ B ⫽ c 1200
 ⫽ c 2450

2250

750
850

1575
1600

650

1150

600d ⫹ c 1250
1350d

1200

825
750

550

750d

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Matrix Operations

Graphing Utility
A  graphing  utility  can  be  used  to  perform  matrix  addition,  matrix  subtraction,  and
scalar multiplication. It can also be used to find the transpose of a matrix.

EXAMPLE 1 Let

A ⫽ £

1.2
⫺2.1
3.1

3.1
4.2
4.8

§   and  B ⫽ £

4.1
1.3
1.7

3.2
6.4
0.8

§

Find (a) A ⫹ B, (b) 2.1A ⫺ 3.2B, and (c) (2.1A ⫹ 3.2B)T.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.4 MATRICES

293

Solution We first enter the matrices A and B into the calculator.
a. Using matrix operations, we enter the expression A ⫹ B and obtain

A ⫹ B ⫽ £

5.3
⫺0.8
4.8

6.3
10.6
5.6

§

b. Using matrix operations, we enter the expression 2.1A ⫺ 3.2B and obtain

2.1A ⫺ 3.2B ⫽ £

⫺10.6  
⫺3.73
⫺8.57 ⫺11.66
7.52

1.07

§

c. Using matrix operations, we enter the expression (2.1A ⫹ 3.2B)T and obtain

12.1A ⫹ 3.2B2 T ⫽ c 15.64 ⫺0.25

29.3  

16.75

11.95

12.64d

APPLIED EXAMPLE 2 John operates three gas stations at three locations, I,
II, and III. Over two consecutive days, his gas stations recorded the follow-

ing fuel sales (in gallons):

Regular

Regular Plus

Premium Diesel

Day 1

Location I
Location II
Location III

1400
1600
1200

1200
900
1500

1100
1200
800

200
300
500

Regular

Regular Plus

Premium Diesel

Day 2

Location I
Location II
Location III

1000
1800
800

900
1200
1000

800
1100
700

150
250
400

Find a matrix representing the total fuel sales at John’s gas stations.

Solution The fuel sales can be represented by the matrix A (day 1) and matrix B
(day 2):

A ⫽ £

1400
1600
1200

1200
900
1500

1100
1200
800

200
300
500

§   and  B ⫽ £

1000
1800
800

900
1200
1000

800
1100
700

150
250
400

§

We  enter  the  matrices  A and  B into  the  calculator.  Using  matrix  operations,  we
enter the expression A ⫹ B and obtain

A ⫹ B ⫽ £

2400
3400
2000

2100
2100
2500

1900
2300
1500

350
550
900

§

Excel
First, we show how basic operations on matrices can be carried out by using Excel.

EXAMPLE 3 Given the following matrices,

A ⫽ £

1.2
⫺2.1
3.1

3.1
4.2
4.8

§   and  B ⫽ £

4.1
1.3
1.7

3.2
6.4
0.8

§

a. Compute A ⫹ B.

b. Compute 2.1A ⫺ 3.2B.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(continued)

294

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

FIGURE T1
The elements of matrix A and matrix B in
a spreadsheet

FIGURE T2
The matrix A ⫹ B

FIGURE T3
The matrix 2.1A ⫺ 3.2B

Solution

a. First, represent the matrices A and B in a spreadsheet. Enter the elements of

each matrix in a block of cells as shown in Figure T1.

1
2
3
4

A

1.2
-2.1
3.1

B
A
3.1
4.2
4.8

C

D

E
B
3.2
6.4
0.8

4.1
1.3
1.7

Second, compute the sum of matrix A and matrix B. Highlight the cells that will
contain matrix A ⫹ B, type =, highlight the cells in matrix A, type +, highlight
. The resulting matrix A ⫹ B is
the cells in matrix B, and press 
shown in Figure T2.

Ctrl-Shift-Enter

8
9
10
11

A

5.3
-0.8
4.8

B

A + B

6.3
10.6
5.6

b. Highlight the cells that will contain matrix 2.1A ⫺ 3.2B. Type ⫽ 2.1*, 
highlight matrix A, type ⫺3.2*, highlight the cells in matrix B, and press
. The resulting matrix 2.1A ⫺ 3.2B is shown in Figure T3.
Ctrl-Shift-Enter

13
14
15
16

A

B

2.1A - 3.2B
-3.73
-11.66
7.52

-10.6
-8.57
1.07

APPLIED EXAMPLE 4 John operates three gas stations at three locations, I,
II, and III. Over two consecutive days, his gas stations recorded the 

following fuel sales (in gallons):

Regular

Regular Plus

Premium Diesel

Day 1

Location I
Location II
Location III

1400
1600
1200

1200
900
1500

1100
1200
800

200
300
500

Regular

Regular Plus

Premium Diesel

Day 2

Location I
Location II
Location III

1000
1800
800

900
1200
1000

800
1100
700

150
250
400

Find a matrix representing the total fuel sales at John’s gas stations.

Note: Boldfaced words/characters enclosed in a box (for example, 
required. Words/characters printed blue (for example, Chart sub-type:) indicate words/characters that appear on the screen.
Words/characters printed in a monospace font (for example, =(—2/3)*A2+2) indicate words/characters that need to be typed
and entered.

) indicate that an action (click, select, or press) is

Enter

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

5.5 MULTIPLICATION OF MATRICES

295

Solution The fuel sales can be represented by the matrices A (day 1) and B
(day 2):

A ⫽ £

1400
1600
1200

1200
900
1500

1100
1200
800

200
300
500

§   and  B ⫽ £

1000
1800
800

900
1200
1000

800
1100
700

150
250
400

§

We first enter the elements of the matrices A and B onto a spreadsheet. Next, we
highlight the cells that will contain the matrix A ⫹ B, type =, highlight A, type +,
highlight B, and then press 
shown in Figure T4.

. The resulting matrix A ⫹ B is

Ctrl-Shift-Enter

23
24
25
26

A

2400
3400
2000

B

A + B

2100
2100
2500

C

D

1900
2300
1500

350
550
900

1. 12.5A

3. A ⫺ B

5. 1.3A ⫹ 2.4B

7. 3(A ⫹ B)

2. ⫺8.4B

4. B ⫺ A

6. 2.1A ⫺ 1.7B

8. 1.3(4.1A ⫺ 2.3B)

FIGURE T4
The matrix A ⫹ B

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

Refer to the following matrices and perform the indicated
operations.

 A ⫽ £

1.2
4.1
1.7

3.1 ⫺5.4
3.2
2.8 ⫺5.2

2.7
4.2 ⫺3.1
8.4

§

 B ⫽ £

6.2 ⫺3.2
2.7 ⫺1.2
3.1
1.2 ⫺1.4 ⫺1.7

1.4 ⫺1.2
1.7
2.8

§

5.5 Multiplication of Matrices

Matrix Product
In Section 5.4, we saw how matrices of the same size may be added or subtracted and
how a matrix may be multiplied by a scalar (real number), an operation referred to as
scalar multiplication. In this section we see how, with certain restrictions, one matrix
may be multiplied by another matrix.

To define matrix multiplication, let’s consider the following problem. On a cer-
tain day, Al’s Service Station sold 1600 gallons of regular, 1000 gallons of regular
plus, and 800 gallons of premium gasoline. If the price of gasoline on this day was
$3.59  for  regular,  $3.79  for  regular  plus,  and  $3.95  for  premium  gasoline,  find  the
total revenue realized by Al’s for that day.

The day’s sale of gasoline may be represented by the matrix

1000

8004

Next, we let the unit selling price of regular, regular plus, and premium gasoline be
the entries in the matrix

A ⫽ 31600

Row matrix (1 ⫻ 3)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

B ⫽ £

3.59
3.79
3.95

§

Column matrix (3 ⫻ 1)

296

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

The first entry in matrix A gives the number of gallons of regular gasoline sold, and the
first entry in matrix B gives the selling price for each gallon of regular gasoline, so their
product (1600)(3.59) gives the revenue realized from the sale of regular gasoline for the
day. A similar interpretation of the second and third entries in the two matrices suggests
that we multiply the corresponding entries to obtain the respective revenues realized from
the sale of regular, regular plus, and premium gasoline. Finally, the total revenue realized
by Al’s from the sale of gasoline is given by adding these products to obtain

11600213.592 ⫹ 11000213.792 ⫹ 1800213.952 ⫽ 12,694
This example suggests that if we have a row matrix of size 1 ⫻ n,

or $12,694.

and a column matrix of size n ⫻ 1,

A ⫽ 3a1  a2  a3  p  an4

b1
b2
b3
o  

B ⫽E
bnU
bnU ⫽ a1b1 ⫹ a2b2 ⫹ a3b3 ⫹ p ⫹ anbn

b1
b2
b3
o  

(12)

then we may define the matrix product of A and B, written AB, by

AB ⫽ 3a1  a2  a3  p  an4  E

EXAMPLE 1 Let

A ⫽ 31  ⫺2  3  54  and  B ⫽ ≥

2
3
0
⫺1

¥

Then

AB ⫽ 31 ⫺2

3

54 ≥

2
3
0
⫺1

¥ ⫽ 112122 ⫹ 1⫺22132 ⫹ 132102 ⫹ 1521⫺12 ⫽ ⫺9

APPLIED EXAMPLE 2 Stock Transactions Judy’s stock holdings are given
by the matrix

GM IBM BAC

A ⫽ ”700

400

200’

At the close of trading on a certain day, the prices (in dollars per share) of these
stocks are

GM
B ⫽ IBM
BAC

£

50
120
42

§

What is the total value of Judy’s holdings as of that day?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.5 MULTIPLICATION OF MATRICES

297

Solution Judy’s holdings are worth

2004 £

50
120
42

§ ⫽ 170021502 ⫹ 1400211202 ⫹ 120021422

400

 AB ⫽ 3700
 ⫽ 91,400

or $91,400.

Returning once again to the matrix product AB in Equation (12), observe that the
number of columns of the row matrix A is equal to the number of rows of the column
matrix B. Observe further that the product matrix AB has size 1 ⫻ 1 (a real number
may be thought of as a 1 ⫻ 1 matrix). Schematically,

Size of A
Size of B
1 ⫻ n
n ⫻ 1
——————— 11 ⫻ 12 ———————
앖
앖

Size of AB

More generally, if A is a matrix of size m ⫻ n and B is a matrix of size n ⫻ p (the
number of columns of A equals the numbers of rows of B), then the matrix product of
A and B, AB, is defined and is a matrix of size m ⫻ p. Schematically,

Size of A
Size of B
m ⫻ n
n ⫻ p
——————— 1m ⫻ p2 ———————
앖
앖

Size of AB

Next,  let’s  illustrate  the  mechanics  of  matrix  multiplication  by  computing  the

product of a 2 ⫻ 3 matrix A and a 3 ⫻ 4 matrix B. Suppose

 A ⫽ c a11
a21
b11
b21
b31

B ⫽ £

a12
a22

b12
b22
b32

a13

a23d

b13
b23
b33

b14
b24
b34

§

From the schematic

Size of A

앗———— Same ————앗

2 ⫻ 3
3 ⫻ 4
————— 12 ⫻ 42 —————
앖
앖

Size of AB

Size of B

we see that the matrix product C ⫽ AB is defined (since the number of columns of A
equals the number of rows of B) and has size 2 ⫻ 4. Thus,

C ⫽ c c11
c21

c12
c22

c13
c23

c14

c24d

The entries of C are computed as follows: The entry c11 (the entry in the first row, first
column of C) is the product of the row matrix composed of the entries from the first
row of A and the column matrix composed of the first column of B. Thus,

c11 ⫽ 3a11

a12

a134 £

b11
b21
b31

§ ⫽ a11b11 ⫹ a12b21 ⫹ a13b31

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

298

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

The entry c12 (the entry in the first row, second column of C) is the product of the row
matrix composed of the first row of A and the column matrix composed of the second
column of B. Thus,

c12 ⫽ 3a11

a12

a134 £

b12
b22
b32

§ ⫽ a11b12 ⫹ a12b22 ⫹ a13b32

The other entries in C are computed in a similar manner.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 3 Let

Compute AB.

A ⫽ c 3

⫺1

1
2

4

3d   and  B ⫽ £

1
4 ⫺1
2
4

3 ⫺3
2
1

§

Solution The size of matrix A is 2 ⫻ 3, and the size of matrix B is 3 ⫻ 3. Since
the number of columns of matrix A is equal to the number of rows of matrix B, the
matrix product C ⫽ AB is defined. Furthermore, the size of matrix C is 2 ⫻ 3. Thus,

c 3

⫺1

1
2

4

3d £

1
4 ⫺1
2
4

3 ⫺3
2
1

§ ⫽ c c11
c21

c12
c22

c13

c23d

It remains now to determine the entries c11, c12, c13, c21, c22, and c23. We have

c11 ⫽ 33

c12 ⫽ 33

c13 ⫽ 33

1

1

1

c21 ⫽ 3 ⫺1

c22 ⫽ 3 ⫺1

c23 ⫽ 3 ⫺1

2

2

2

44 £

1
4
2

§ ⫽ 132112 ⫹ 112142 ⫹ 142122 ⫽ 15

44 £

44 £

3
⫺1
4

⫺3
2
1

34 £

1
4
2

§ ⫽ 132132 ⫹ 1121⫺12 ⫹ 142142 ⫽ 24

§ ⫽ 1321⫺32 ⫹ 112122 ⫹ 142112 ⫽ ⫺3

§ ⫽ 1⫺12112 ⫹ 122142 ⫹ 132122 ⫽ 13

34 £

34 £

3
⫺1
4

⫺3
2
1

§ ⫽ 1⫺12132 ⫹ 1221⫺12 ⫹ 132142 ⫽ 7

§ ⫽ 1⫺121⫺32 ⫹ 122122 ⫹ 132112 ⫽ 10

so the required product AB is given by

AB ⫽ c 15

13

24 ⫺3
7

10d

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.5 MULTIPLICATION OF MATRICES

299

EXAMPLE 4 Let

Then

A ⫽ £

3
⫺1
3

2
2
1

1
3
4

§   and  B ⫽ £

1
2
⫺1

3
4
2

4
1
3

§

AB ⫽ £

 ⫽ £

BA ⫽ £

 ⫽ £

⫹ 2 ⴢ 2 ⫹ 1 ⴢ 1⫺12
3 ⴢ 1
1⫺12 ⴢ 1 ⫹ 2 ⴢ 2 ⫹ 3 ⴢ 1⫺12
⫹ 1 ⴢ 2 ⫹ 4 ⴢ 1⫺12
3 ⴢ 1
6
§
0
1
⫹ 3 ⴢ 1⫺12 ⫹ 4 ⴢ 3
1 ⴢ 3
⫹ 4 ⴢ 1⫺12 ⫹ 1 ⴢ 3
2 ⴢ 3
1⫺12 ⴢ 3 ⫹ 2 ⴢ 1⫺12 ⫹ 3 ⴢ 3

17
7
25

19
11
21

12
5
4

12
13
5

26
18
17

§

3 ⴢ 3
⫹ 2 ⴢ 4 ⫹ 1 ⴢ 2
1⫺12 ⴢ 3 ⫹ 2 ⴢ 4 ⫹ 3 ⴢ 2
⫹ 1 ⴢ 4 ⫹ 4 ⴢ 2
3 ⴢ 3

3 ⴢ 4
⫹ 2 ⴢ 1 ⫹ 1 ⴢ 3
1⫺12 ⴢ 4 ⫹ 2 ⴢ 1 ⫹ 3 ⴢ 3
⫹ 1 ⴢ 1 ⫹ 4 ⴢ 3
3 ⴢ 4

§

1 ⴢ 2
⫹ 3 ⴢ 2 ⫹ 4 ⴢ 1
2 ⴢ 2
⫹ 4 ⴢ 2 ⫹ 1 ⴢ 1
1⫺12 ⴢ 2 ⫹ 2 ⴢ 2 ⫹ 3 ⴢ 1

1 ⴢ 1
⫹ 3 ⴢ 3 ⫹ 4 ⴢ 4
2 ⴢ 1
⫹ 4 ⴢ 3 ⫹ 1 ⴢ 4
1⫺12 ⴢ 1 ⫹ 2 ⴢ 3 ⫹ 3 ⴢ 4

§

The preceding example shows that, in general, AB ⫽ BA for two square matrices

A and B. However, the following laws are valid for matrix multiplication.

Laws for Matrix Multiplication
If the products and sums are defined for the matrices A, B, and C, then
1.

Associative law

1AB2C ⫽ A1BC2

2. A1B ⫹ C2 ⫽ AB ⫹ AC

Distributive law

The square matrix of size n having 1s along the main diagonal and 0s elsewhere

is called the identity matrix of size n.

Identity Matrix
The identity matrix of size n is given by

1 0 ⴢ
0 1 ⴢ
ⴢ
ⴢ
ⴢ
ⴢ
ⴢ
ⴢ
0 0 ⴢ

ⴢ
ⴢ
ⴢ

ⴢ
ⴢ
ⴢ
ⴢ
ⴢ
ⴢ

n columns

ⴢ 0
ⴢ 0
ⴢ
ⴢ
ⴢ
ⴢ
ⴢ
ⴢ
ⴢ 1

 V

In ⫽F

n rows

The identity matrix has the properties that In A ⫽ A for every n ⫻ r matrix A and 
BIn ⫽ B for every s ⫻ n matrix B. In particular, if A is a square matrix of size n,
then

InA ⫽ AIn ⫽ A

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

300

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

EXAMPLE 5 Let

Then

A ⫽ £

1
⫺4
1

I3 A ⫽ £

1
0
0

0
1
0

0
0
1

§ £

1
⫺4
1

3
3
0

3
3
0

1
2
1

1
2
1

§

§ ⫽ £

1
⫺4
1

3
3
0

AI3 ⫽ £

3
3
0
so I3A ⫽ AI3 ⫽ A, confirming our result for this special case.

§ ⫽ £

1
⫺4
1

1
⫺4
1

1
2
1

§ £

1
0
0

3
3
0

0
1
0

0
0
1

1
2
1

1
2
1

§ ⫽ A

§ ⫽ A

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 6 Production Planning Ace Novelty received an order
from Magic World Amusement Park for 900 Giant Pandas, 1200 Saint 

Bernards, and 2000 Big Birds. Ace’s management decided that 500 Giant Pandas,
800 Saint Bernards, and 1300 Big Birds could be manufactured in their Los
Angeles plant, and the balance of the order could be filled by their Seattle plant.
Each Panda requires 1.5 square yards of plush, 30 cubic feet of stuffing, and 5
pieces of trim; each Saint Bernard requires 2 square yards of plush, 35 cubic feet
of stuffing, and 8 pieces of trim; and each Big Bird requires 2.5 square yards of
plush, 25 cubic feet of stuffing, and 15 pieces of trim. The plush costs $4.50 per
square yard, the stuffing costs 10 cents per cubic foot, and the trim costs 25 cents
per unit.

a. Find how much of each type of material must be purchased for each plant.
b. What is the total cost of materials incurred by each plant and the total cost of

materials incurred by Ace Novelty in filling the order?

Solution The quantities of each type of stuffed animal to be produced at each
plant location may be expressed as a 2 ⫻ 3 production matrix P. Thus,

P ⫽ 

L.A.

Seattle

Pandas

c 500 
400 

St. Bernards
800 
400 

Birds
1300

700d

Similarly, we may represent the amount and type of material required to manu-
facture each type of animal by a 3 ⫻ 3 activity matrix A. Thus,

Pandas

A ⫽ St. Bernards

Birds

Plush
1.5 
2  
2.5 

£

Stuffing
30 
35 
25 

Trim
5
8
15

§

Finally, the unit cost for each type of material may be represented by the 3 ⫻ 1
cost matrix C.

Plush

C ⫽ Stuffing

Trim

£

4.50
0.10
0.25

§

a. The amount of each type of material required for each plant is given by the

matrix PA. Thus,

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.5 MULTIPLICATION OF MATRICES

301

PA ⫽ c 500

400

800
400

1300

700d £

1.5
2
2.5

30
35
25

5
8
15

§

⫽

L.A.

Seattle

Plush

c 5600

3150

Stuffing
75,500
43,500

Trim
28,400

15,700d

b. The total cost of materials for each plant is given by the matrix PAC:

PAC ⫽ c 5600

3150

75,500
43,500

28,400

15,700d £

4.50
0.10
0.25

§

L.A.⫽
Seattle

c 39,850
22,450d

or $39,850 for the L.A. plant and $22,450 for the Seattle plant. Thus, the total
cost of materials incurred by Ace Novelty is $62,300.

Matrix Representation
Example  7  shows  how  a  system  of  linear  equations  may  be  written  in  a  compact 
form with the help of matrices. (We will use this matrix equation representation in
Section 5.6.)

EXAMPLE 7 Write the following system of linear equations in matrix form.

2x ⫺ 4y ⫹ z ⫽ 6
⫺3x ⫹ 6y ⫺ 5z ⫽ ⫺1
x ⫺ 3y ⫹ 7z ⫽ 0

Solution Let’s write

A ⫽ £

2 ⫺4

⫺3

1 ⫺3

1
6 ⫺5
7

§     X ⫽ £

x
y
z

§     B ⫽ £

6
⫺1
0

§

Note that A is just the 3 ⫻ 3 matrix of coefficients of the system, X is the 3 ⫻ 1 column
matrix of unknowns (variables), and B is the 3 ⫻ 1 column matrix of constants. We
now show that the required matrix representation of the system of linear equations is

To see this, observe that

AX ⫽ B

AX ⫽ £

⫺3

2 ⫺4

1 ⫺3

1
6 ⫺5
7

§ £

x
y
z

§ ⫽ £

2x ⫺ 4y ⫹ z
⫺3x ⫹ 6y ⫺ 5z
x ⫺ 3y ⫹ 7z

§

Equating this 3 ⫻ 1 matrix with matrix B now gives

£

2x ⫺ 4y ⫹ z
⫺3x ⫹ 6y ⫺ 5z
x ⫺ 3y ⫹ 7z

§ ⫽ £

6
⫺1
0

§

which, by matrix equality, is easily seen to be equivalent to the given system of lin-
ear equations.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

302

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

5.5 Self-Check Exercises

1. Compute

c 1

2

3
4⫺1

0

d £

3
2
1

1
0
2⫺1

4
3

§

2. Write  the  following  system  of  linear  equations  in  matrix

form:

y ⫺ 2z ⫽ 1
2x ⫺ y ⫹ 3z ⫽ 0
⫹ 4z ⫽ 7
x

5.5 Concept Questions

1. What  is  the  difference  between  scalar  multiplication  and

matrix multiplication? Give examples of each operation.

2. a. Suppose A and B are matrices whose products AB and
BA are both defined. What can you say about the sizes
of A and B?

5.5 Exercises

3. On June 1, the stock holdings of Ash and Joan Robinson

were given by the matrix

A ⫽ 

Ash

Joan

AT&T

c 2000

1000

TWX
1000
2500

IBM
500
2000

GM
5000

0d

and  the  closing  prices  of  AT&T,  TWX,  IBM,  and  GM
were $54, $113, $112, and $70 per share, respectively. Use
matrix  multiplication  to  determine  the  separate  values  of
Ash’s and Joan’s stock holdings as of that date.

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 5.5 can be found on 
page 307.

b. If A, B, and C are matrices such that A(B ⫹ C) is defined,
what  can  you  say  about  the  relationship  between  the
number of columns of A and the number of rows of C?
Explain.

In Exercises 1–4, the sizes of matrices A and B are given. Find the
size of AB and BA whenever they are defined.
1. A is of size 2 ⫻ 3, and B is of size 3 ⫻ 5.

13.

c 2

3

1
2

2

4d £

⫺1
4
0

2. A is of size 3 ⫻ 4, and B is of size 4 ⫻ 3.

3. A is of size 1 ⫻ 7, and B is of size 7 ⫻ 1.

4. A is of size 4 ⫻ 4, and B is of size 4 ⫻ 4.

5. Let A be a matrix of size m ⫻ n and B be a matrix of size 
s ⫻ t.  Find  conditions  on  m,  n,  s,  and  t such  that  both
matrix products AB and BA are defined.

6. Find  condition(s)  on  the  size  of  a  matrix  A such  that  A2

(that is, AA) is defined.

In Exercises 7–24, compute the indicated products.

7.

9.

11.

c 1

3

2

0d c 1
⫺1d

8.

c ⫺1

5

3

0d c 7
2d

c 4

⫺1

c ⫺1

3

1
2

2

4d £

4
1
⫺2

§

10.

£

3
4 ⫺1
2

2 ⫺1
0
1

⫺5

§ £

3
⫺2
0

§

2

1d c 2

3

4

1d

12.

c 1

⫺1

3

2d c 1

3

3
0

0

2d

2
3
1

§ c 2

3

1
2

2

4d

0.3

0.5d c 0.2

0.4 ⫺0.5d

0.6

2
3
1

§

0.4

2.1d

£

⫺1
4
0

c 1.2

0.4

14.

16.

§ £

1
0
0

0
1
0

0
0
1

§

15.

c 0.1

0.2

0.9

0.8d c 1.2

0.5

0
1 ⫺8
9

17.

18.

£

£

6 ⫺3

⫺2

4 ⫺4
2
4
⫺1 ⫺5
3 ⫺1

§ c 2 ⫺2

3 ⫺1d

4

1

19.

c 3

1

0⫺2
2

1
0⫺1

d ≥

20.

£

1 ⫺3
2
4 ⫺2 ⫺1
0

2

⫺1

0
1
1

21. 4£

1 ⫺2
2 ⫺1
3

0
1
0 ⫺1

§ £

1
1
0

¥

2
⫺1
0

1 ⫺2
0
2
1
0
⫺1 ⫺2
2
2 ⫺1
1
4
3 ⫺3
0 ⫺5
1
0

¥

3
4
1⫺2

§

§ ≥

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

22.

3£

2 ⫺1
0
1
2
2
0 ⫺1
1

§ £

3
2
3 ⫺3
0

23.

c 1

0

0

1d c 4 ⫺3

1 ⫺5d £

2

7

1
0
1 ⫺1
1
0
0

0
1
0

§

0
0
1

§

24.

2£

3
0
2

2⫺1
1
0

1
0
0

§ £

3
3

0
1
0

0
0
1

§ £

In Exercises 25 and 26, let

2

1
0
0 ⫺1 ⫺2
1
1

3

§

 A ⫽ £

1
1 ⫺3
1

0 ⫺2
2
1

⫺2

§  

B ⫽ £

1
2

0
3
2
0
1 ⫺3 ⫺1

§

 C ⫽ £

2 ⫺1
1 ⫺1
3 ⫺2

0
2
1

§

25. Verify the validity of the associative law for matrix multi-

plication.

26. Verify the validity of the distributive law for matrix multi-

plication.

27. Let

A ⫽ c 1

3

2

4d   and  B ⫽ c 2

4

1

3d

Compute AB and BA, and hence deduce that matrix multi-
plication is, in general, not commutative.

28. Let

5.5 MULTIPLICATION OF MATRICES

303

Show that A2 ⫽ 0. Compare this with the equation a2 ⫽ 0,
where a is a real number.

31. Find the matrix A such that

⫺1

Ac 1
dd

b

c

A ⫽ c a

0

3d ⫽ c ⫺1 ⫺3
6d

3

.

Hint: Let 

32. Find the matrix A such that

c

   1
⫺1

c a

c

Hint: Let A ⫽

0

   3

 3d A ⫽ c ⫺1 ⫺3
 6d
dd

b

.

33. A square matrix is called an upper triangular matrix if all
its entries below the main diagonal are zero. For example,
the matrix

A ⫽

c a

0

b

dd

2   ⫻   2

upper triangular matrix.

is a 
a. Show that the sum and the product of two upper tri-
angular  matrices  of  size  two  are  upper  triangular
matrices.

b. If A and B are two upper triangular matrices of size two,

then is it true that 

AB ⫽ BA

, in general?

34. Let

A ⫽ c 3

0

1

2d   and  B ⫽ c 4 ⫺2
1d

2

4

2
5
3 ⫺1 ⫺6
4
4

3

A ⫽ £

0
1
0

3
0
2

0
1
0

§  

B ⫽ £

C ⫽ £

5

4
6
3 ⫺1 ⫺6
2
3

2

§

§

a. Compute (A ⫹ B)2.
b. Compute A2 ⫹ 2AB ⫹ B2.
c. From the results of parts (a) and (b), show that in gen-

eral, (A ⫹ B)2 ⫽ A2 ⫹ 2AB ⫹ B2.

35. Let

a. Compute AB.
b. Compute AC.
c. Using  the  results  of  parts  (a)  and  (b),  conclude  that 

AB ⫽ AC does not imply that B ⫽ C.

29. Let

A ⫽ c 3

8

0

0d   and  B ⫽ c 0

4

0

5d

36. Let

Show that AB ⫽ 0, thereby demonstrating that for matrix
multiplication,  the  equation  AB ⫽ 0  does  not  imply  that
one  or  both  of  the  matrices  A and  B must  be  the  zero
matrix.

30. Let

A ⫽ c 2

⫺2 ⫺2d

2

A ⫽ c 2

5 ⫺6d   and  B ⫽ c 4

⫺7

4

8

3d

a. Find AT and show that (AT)T ⫽ A.
b. Show that (A ⫹ B)T ⫽ AT ⫹ BT.
c. Show that (AB)T ⫽ BTAT.

A ⫽ c 1

⫺2 ⫺1d   and  B ⫽ c 3 ⫺4
2 ⫺2d

3

a. Find AT and show that (AT)T ⫽ A.
b. Show that (A ⫹ B)T ⫽ AT ⫹ BT.
c. Show that (AB)T ⫽ BTAT.

(continued)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

304

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

In Exercises 37–42, write the given system of linear equations in
matrix form.
37.

38.

2x ⫺ 3y ⫽ 7
3x ⫺ 4y ⫽ 8

⫽ 7
2x
3x ⫺ 2y ⫽ 12

39.

41.

2x ⫺ 3y ⫹ 4z ⫽ 6
2y ⫺ 3z ⫽ 7
x ⫺ y ⫹ 2z ⫽ 4

⫺x1 ⫹ x2 ⫹ x3 ⫽ 0
⫺2x1 ⫺ x2 ⫺ x3 ⫽ 2
⫺3x1 ⫹ 2x2 ⫹ 4x3 ⫽ 4

40.

42.

x ⫺ 2y ⫹ 3z ⫽ ⫺1
3x ⫹ 4y ⫺ 2z ⫽ 1
2x ⫺ 3y ⫹ 7z ⫽ 6

 3x1 ⫺ 5x2 ⫹ 4x3 ⫽ 10
 4x1 ⫹ 2x2 ⫺ 3x3 ⫽ ⫺12
 ⫺x1
⫹ x3 ⫽ ⫺2

43. INVESTMENTS William’s  and  Michael’s  stock  holdings  are

given by the matrix

A ⫽ William
Michael

BAC

c 200

100

GM IBM TRW
300
200
200

100
400

0d

At the close of trading on a certain day, the prices (in dol-
lars per share) of the stocks are given by the matrix

BAC
GM

B ⫽ 

IBM

TRW

≥

54
48
98
82

¥

a. Find AB.
b. Explain the meaning of the entries in the matrix AB.

44. FOREIGN EXCHANGE Ethan  has  just  returned  to  the  United
States from a Southeast Asian trip and wishes to exchange
the various foreign currencies that he has accumulated for
U.S.  dollars.  He  has  1200  Thai  bahts,  80,000  Indonesian
rupiahs, 42 Malaysian ringgits, and 36 Singapore dollars.
Suppose the foreign exchange rates are U.S. $0.033 for one
baht,  U.S.  $0.0001  for  one  rupiah,  U.S.  $0.3320  for  one
Malaysian  ringgit,  and  U.S.  $0.8075  for  one  Singapore 
dollar.
a. Write  a  row  matrix  A giving  the  value  of  the  various
currencies  that  Ethan  holds.  (Note: The  answer  is  not
unique.)

b. Write a column matrix B giving the exchange rates for

the various currencies.

c. If Ethan exchanges all of his foreign currencies for U.S.

dollars, how many dollars will he have?

45. FOREIGN EXCHANGE Kaitlin  and  her  friend  Emma  have
returned to the United States from a tour of  four cities: Oslo,
Stockholm,  Copenhagen,  and  Saint  Petersburg.  They  now
wish  to  exchange  the  various  foreign  currencies  that  they
have  accumulated  for  U.S.  dollars.  Kaitlin  has  82  Norwe-
gian kroner, 68 Swedish kronor, 62 Danish kroner, and 1200
Russian  rubles.  Emma  has  64  Norwegian  kroner,  74
Swedish kronor, 44 Danish kroner, and 1600 Russian rubles.
Suppose the exchange rates are U.S. $0.1805 for one Nor-
wegian  krone,  U.S.  $0.1582  for  one  Swedish  krone,  U.S.
$0.1901  for  one  Danish  krone,  and  U.S.  $0.0356  for  one
Russian ruble.

a. Write a 2 ⫻ 4 matrix A giving the values of the various
foreign  currencies  held  by  Kaitlin  and  Emma.  (Note:
The answer is not unique.)

b. Write a column matrix B giving the exchange rate for

the various currencies.

c. If both Kaitlin and Emma exchange all their foreign cur-
rencies for U.S. dollars, how many dollars will each have?

46. REAL ESTATE Bond Brothers, a real estate developer, builds
houses  in  three  states.  The  projected  number  of  units  of
each model to be built in each state is given by the matrix

Model

I
60
20
10

£

II
80
30
15

III
120
60
30

IV
40
10
5

§

N.Y.
A ⫽ Conn.
Mass.

The profits to be realized are $20,000, $22,000, $25,000,
and $30,000, respectively, for each Model I, II, III, and IV
house sold.
a. Write a column matrix B representing the profit for each

type of house.

b. Find  the  total  profit  Bond  Brothers  expects  to  earn  in

each state if all the houses are sold.

47. REAL ESTATE Refer  to  Exercise  46.  Let 

B ⫽ 冤1   1   1冥

and

C ⫽ 冤1   1   1   1冥
.
a. Compute BA, and explain what the entries of the matrix

represent.
b. Compute 

ACT

, and give an interpretation of the matrix.

48. CHARITIES The amount of money raised by Charity I, Char-
ity II, and Charity III (in millions of dollars) in each of the
years 2009, 2010, and 2011 is represented by the matrix A:

I

£

18.2
19.6
20.8

Charity

II
28.2
28.6
30.4

III
40.5
42.6
46.4

§

A ⫽

2009
2010

2011

On  average,  Charity  I  puts  78%  toward  program  cost,
Charity II puts 88% toward program cost, and Charity III
puts  80%  toward  program  cost.  Write  a  3  ⫻ 1  matrix  B
reflecting  the  percentage  put  toward  program  cost  by  the
charities.  Then  use  matrix  multiplication  to  find  the  total
amount of money put toward program cost in each of the 
3 years by the charities under consideration.

49. BOX-OFFICE RECEIPTS The  Cinema  Center  consists  of  four
theaters: Cinemas I, II, III, and IV. The admission price for
one feature at the Center is $4 for children, $6 for students,
and $8 for adults. The attendance for the Sunday matinee
is given by the matrix

A ⫽

Cinema I

Cinema II

Cinema III
Cinema IV

Children Students Adults
50
225
110
225

225 
75 
280 
0 

110 
180 
85 
250 

≥

¥

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Write a column vector B representing the admission prices.
Then  compute  AB,  the  column  vector  showing  the  gross
receipts  for  each  theater.  Finally,  find  the  total  revenue
collected at the Cinema Center for admission that Sunday
afternoon.

50. BOX-OFFICE RECEIPTS Refer to Exercise 49.

a. Find a 1 ⫻ 4 matrix B such that the entries in BA give
the  total  number  of  children,  the  total  number  of  stu-
dents, and the total number of adults who attended the
Sunday matinee.

b. Find a 1 ⫻ 3 matrix C such that the entries in 

give
the  total  number  of  people  (children,  students,  and
adults) who attended Cinema I, Cinema II, Cinema III,
and Cinema IV.

ACT

51. POLITICS: VOTER AFFILIATION Matrix A gives the percentage
of eligible voters in the city of Newton, classified accord-
ing to party affiliation and age group.

Under 30
A ⫽ 30 to 50
Over 50

Dem.
0.50
0.45
0.40

£

Rep.
0.30
0.40
0.50

Ind.
0.20
0.15
0.10

§

The population of eligible voters in the city by age group is
given by the matrix B:

Under 30
B ⫽ ”30,000

30 to 50
40,000

Over 50
20,000’

Find a matrix giving the total number of eligible voters in
the city who will vote Democratic, Republican, and Inde-
pendent.

52. 401(K)  RETIREMENT PLANS Three  network  consultants,
Alan, Maria, and Steven, each received a year-end bonus
of $10,000, which they decided to invest in a 401(k) retire-
ment  plan  sponsored  by  their  employer.  Under  this  plan,
employees are allowed to place their investments in three
funds: an equity index fund (I), a growth fund (II), and a
global equity fund (III). The allocations of the investments
(in dollars) of the three employees at the beginning of the
year are summarized in the matrix

Alan
A ⫽ Maria
Steven

I

£

4000
2000
2000

II

3000
5000
3000

III

3000
3000
5000

§

The returns of the three funds after 1 year are given in the
matrix

I
B ⫽ II
III

£

0.18
0.24
0.12

§

5.5 MULTIPLICATION OF MATRICES

305

class next year. To satisfy admission quotas, incoming stu-
dents  have  been  categorized  according  to  their  sex  and
place  of  residence.  The  number  of  students  in  each  cate-
gory is given by the matrix

In-state

A ⫽ Out-of-state

Foreign

Male
2700
800
500

£

Female
3000
700
300

§

By  using  data  accumulated  in  previous  years,  the  admis-
sions  committee  has  determined  that  these  students  will
elect to enter the College of Letters and Science, the Col-
lege of Fine Arts, the School of Business Administration,
and the School of Engineering according to the percentages
that appear in the following matrix:

Male

B ⫽ 

Female

L. & S.

c 0.25   
0.30  

Fine Arts
0.20  
0.35  

Bus. Ad.
0.30  
0.25  

Eng.
0.25

0.10d

Find the matrix AB that shows the number of in-state, out-
of-state, and foreign students expected to enter each disci-
pline.

54. PRODUCTION PLANNING Refer to Example 6 in this section.
Suppose  Ace  Novelty  received  an  order  from  another
amusement park for 1200 Pink Panthers, 1800 Giant Pan-
das,  and  1400  Big  Birds.  The  quantity  of  each  type  of
stuffed animal to be produced at each plant is shown in the
following production matrix:

P ⫽ 

L.A.

Seattle

c 700

500

Panthers Pandas Birds
800

1000
800

600d

Each Panther requires 1.3 yd2 of plush, 20 ft3 of stuffing,
and  12  pieces  of  trim.  Assume  the  materials  required  to
produce the other two stuffed animals and the unit cost for
each type of material are as given in Example 6.
a. How much of each type of material must be purchased

for each plant?

b. What is the total cost of materials that will be incurred

at each plant?

c. What is the total cost of materials incurred by Ace Nov-

elty in filling the order?

55. COMPUTING PHONE BILLS Cindy  regularly  makes  long-
distance  phone  calls  to  three  foreign  cities:  London,
Tokyo,  and  Hong  Kong.  The  matrices  A and  B give  the
lengths (in minutes) of her calls during peak and nonpeak
hours, respectively, to each of these three cities during the
month of June.

London
A ⫽ ”80

Tokyo

60

Hong Kong

40’

Which  employee  realized  the  best  return  on  his  or  her
investment for the year in question? The worst return?

and

53. COLLEGE ADMISSIONS A  university  admissions  committee
anticipates an enrollment of 8000 students in its freshman

London
B ⫽ ”300

Tokyo
150

Hong Kong

250’

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

306

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

The costs for the calls (in dollars per minute) for the peak
and  nonpeak  periods  in  the  month  in  question  are  given,
respectively, by the matrices

London
C ⫽ Tokyo

Hong Kong

0.34

冤0.42冥 and D ⫽ Tokyo

London

0.48

Hong Kong

0.24

冤0.31冥

0.35

Compute the matrix AC ⫹ BD, and explain what it repre-
sents.

56. PRODUCTION PLANNING The total output of loudspeaker sys-
tems of the Acrosonic Company at their three production
facilities for May and June is given by the matrices A and
B, respectively, where

Model Model Model Model

Location I
A ⫽ Location II
Location III

Location I
B ⫽ Location II
Location III

A
320

冤480

540

B
280
360
420

C
460
580
200

D
280

0冥

880

Model Model Model Model

A
210

冤400

420

B
180
300
280

C
330
450
180

D
180

40冥

740

The unit production costs and selling prices for these loud-
speakers  are  given  by  matrices  C and  D,  respectively,
where

C ⫽

Model A
Model B
Model C
Model D

冤

冥

120
180
260
500

and D ⫽ 

Model A
Model B
Model C
Model D

冤

冥

160
250
350
700

Compute the following matrices, and explain the meaning
of the entries in each matrix.
a. AC
c. BC

d. BD

b. AD

e.

1A ⫹ B2C

f. 1A ⫹ B2D
h. B1D ⫺ C2

g. A1D ⫺ C2

1A ⫹ B21D ⫺ C2

i.

57. DIET PLANNING A dietitian plans a meal around three foods.
The number of units of vitamin A, vitamin C, and calcium
in each ounce of these foods is represented by the matrix
M, where

M ⫽ Vitamin C 冤110

Vitamin A

Food I
400

Calcium

90

Food II
1200
570
30

Food III

800

340冥

60

The matrices A and B represent the amount of each food (in
ounces) consumed by a girl at two different meals, where

Food I
A ⫽ ”7

Food II

1

Food III

6’

Food I
B ⫽ ”9

Food II

3

Food III

2’

Calculate the following matrices, and explain the meaning
of the entries in each matrix.
a. MAT

c. M(A ⫹ B)T

b. MBT

58. PRODUCTION PLANNING Hartman Lumber Company has two
branches in the city. The sales of four of its products for the
last  year  (in  thousands  of  dollars)  are  represented  by  the
matrix

Product

B ⫽ 

Branch I
Branch II

A B C D
8 10
5
6

冤3

2
4

8冥

For  the  present  year,  management  has  projected  that  the
sales  of  the  four  products  in  Branch  I  will  be  10%  more
than the corresponding sales for last year and the sales of
the four products in Branch II will be 15% more than the
corresponding sales for last year.
a. Show  that  the  sales  of  the  four  products  in  the  two
branches  for  the  current  year  are  given  by  the  matrix
AB, where

A ⫽ 

c 1.1

0

0

1.15d

Compute AB.

b. Hartman has m branches nationwide, and the sales of n
of its products (in thousands of dollars) last year are rep-
resented by the matrix

Product

1
2
a11 a12

冤a21 a22

.
.
.

.
.
.
am1 am2 am3

3
a13
a23
.
.
.

⭈ ⭈ ⭈
n
⭈ ⭈ ⭈ a1n

⭈ ⭈ ⭈ a2n冥

.
.
.

⭈ ⭈ ⭈ amn

Branch 1

Branch 2

B ⫽ 

.
.
.

Branch m

Also, management has projected that the sales of the n
products in Branch 1, Branch 2, . . . , Branch m will be
r1%, r2%, . . . , rm%, respectively, more than the corre-
sponding sales for last year. Write the matrix A such that
AB gives the sales of the n products in the m branches
for the current year.

In Exercises 59–62, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
59. If  A and  B are  matrices  such  that  AB and  BA are  both
defined, then A and B must be square matrices of the same
size.

60. If A and B are matrices such that AB is defined and if c is

a scalar, then (cA)B ⫽ A(cB) ⫽ cAB.

61. If A, B, and C are matrices and A(B ⫹ C) is defined, then
B must  have  the  same  size  as  C, and  the  number  of
columns of A must be equal to the number of rows of B.

62. If A is a 2 ⫻ 4 matrix and B is a matrix such that ABA is

defined, then the size of B must be 4 ⫻ 2.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.5 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. We compute

c 1

2

3
4⫺1

0

d £

3
2
1

1
0
2⫺1

4
3

§

⫽

⫽

c 1132 ⫹ 3122 ⫹ 0112
2132 ⫹ 4122 ⫺ 1112
c 9
21d

1
0

13

13

1112 ⫹ 3102 ⫹ 0122
2112 ⫹ 4102 ⫺ 1122

1142 ⫹ 3132 ⫹ 01⫺12
2142 ⫹ 4132 ⫺ 11⫺12 d

2. Let

A ⫽ £

0
2 ⫺1
1
0

1 ⫺2
3
4

§

X ⫽ £

x
y
z

§

B ⫽ £

1
0
7

§

Then the given system may be written as the matrix equa-
tion

AX ⫽ B

5.5 MULTIPLICATION OF MATRICES

307

3. Write

冥

冤

54
113
112
70

AT&T
TWX
IBM
GM

B ⫽ 

and compute the following:

AB ⫽

Ash
Joan

冤

2000
1000

1000
2500

500
2000

5000
0

⫽ 冤

冥

627,000
560,500

Ash
Joan

112冤

54
113

冥

冥 

70

We  conclude  that  Ash’s  stock  holdings  were  worth
$627,000 and Joan’s stock holdings were worth $560,500
on June 1.

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Matrix Multiplication

Graphing Utility
A graphing utility can be used to perform matrix multiplication.

EXAMPLE 1 Let

2.7

A ⫽ c 1.2
B ⫽ c 0.8

1.2
6.2 ⫺0.4

3.1 ⫺1.4
4.2

3.4d
3.3d

3.7

C ⫽ £

2.1
1.2
4.2 ⫺1.2
1.4
3.2

1.3
0.6
0.7

§

Find (a) AC and (b) (1.1A ⫹ 2.3B)C.

Solution First, we enter the matrices A, B, and C into the calculator.
a. Using matrix operations, we enter the expression A*C. We obtain the matrix

c 12.5

25.64

⫺5.68
11.51

2.44

8.41d

(You might need to scroll the display on the screen to obtain the complete matrix.)
b. Using matrix operations, we enter the expression (1.1A ⫹ 2.3B)C. We obtain the

matrix

c 39.464

52.078

21.536
67.999

12.689

32.55 d

(continued)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

308

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

Excel
We use the MMULT function in Excel to perform matrix multiplication.

EXAMPLE 2 Let

A ⫽ c 1.2

2.7

3.1 ⫺1.4
4.2

3.4d

B ⫽ c 0.8

1.2
6.2 ⫺0.4

3.7

3.3d

C ⫽ £

1.2
2.1
4.2 ⫺1.2
1.4
3.2

1.3
0.6
0.7

§

Find (a) AC and (b) (1.1A ⫹ 2.3B)C.

Solution

a. First, enter the matrices A, B, and C onto a spreadsheet (Figure T1).

F
B

1.2
-0.4

G

3.7
3.3

0.8
6.2

A

1.2
2.7

1.2
4.2
1.4

B
A

C

3.1
4.2

2.1
-1.2
3.2

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

C

D

E

-1.4
3.4

1.3
0.6
0.7

Second, compute AC. Highlight the cells that will contain the matrix product AC,
which has size 2 ⫻ 3. Type =MMULT(, highlight the cells in matrix A, type ,,
highlight the cells in matrix C, type ), and press 
. The matrix
Ctrl-Shift-Enter
product AC shown in Figure T2 will appear on your spreadsheet.

FIGURE T1
Spreadsheet showing the matrices A, B,
and C

FIGURE T2
The matrix product AC

10
11
12

A

12.5
25.64

B
AC

-5.68
11.51

C

2.44
8.41

b. Compute (1.1A ⫹ 2.3B)C. Highlight the cells that will contain the matrix product
(1.1A ⫹ 2.3B)C. Next, type =MMULT(1.1*, highlight the cells in matrix A, type
+2.3*, highlight the cells in matrix B, type ,, highlight the cells in matrix C, 
type ), and then press 
will appear on your spreadsheet.

. The matrix product shown in Figure T3

Ctrl-Shift-Enter

FIGURE T3
The matrix product (1.1A ⫹ 2.3B)C

13
14
15

A

B

C

(1.1A + 2.3B)C

39.464
52.078

21.536
67.999

12.689
32.55

Note: Boldfaced words/characters in a box (for example, 
) indicate that an action (click, select, or press) is required.
Words/characters printed blue (for example, Chart sub-type:) indicate words/characters that appear on the screen. Words/char-
acters printed in a monospace font (for example, =(—2/3)*A2+2) indicate words/characters that need to be typed and
entered.

Enter

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

5.6 THE INVERSE OF A SQUARE MATRIX

309

6
4
8
6
7

7
6
4
9
8

5
2
3
5

8U

7.3 ⫺4.0
6.5
3.2
7.3
6.8

9.3
7.1
8.4 ⫺6.3
8.4
9.1 ⫺2.8
6.3
6.5
4.1
9.8
4.8 ⫺9.1

20.4U
7.1U

9.8
2.9
4.2
6.3

2
3
⫺5
8
4

6.2
4.8
5.4
8.2
10.3

 B ⫽E
 C ⫽E
 D ⫽E

4.6
3.9
2.4 ⫺6.8
7.1
9.4
3.4
6.1
7.1 ⫺4.2

6.1
8.4
11.4
7.9
5.7
6.3
5.3
8.4
3.9 ⫺6.4

9. Find AB and BA.

10. Find CD and DC. Is CD ⫽ DC?

11. Find AC ⫹ AD.

12. Find:
a. AC
b. AD

c. A1C ⫹ D2
d. Is A1C ⫹ D2 ⫽ AC ⫹ AD?

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

In Exercises 1–8, refer to the following matrices, and perform the
indicated  operations.  Round  your  answers  to  two  decimal
places.

 A ⫽ £

1.2
7.2
0.8

3.1 ⫺1.2
6.3
3.2 ⫺1.3

4.3
1.8 ⫺2.1
2.8

§

 B ⫽ £

0.7
1.2

0.3
1.7
⫺3.3 ⫺1.2

1.2 ⫺0.8
4.2
3.5
4.2
3.2

§

 C ⫽ ≥

0.8
7.1
3.3 ⫺1.2
1.3
2.1

6.2
4.8
2.8 ⫺1.5
3.2 ⫺8.4

¥

2. CB

4.

12A ⫹ 3B2C

1. AC

3.

5.

1A ⫹ B2C
12A ⫺ 3.1B2C
6. C12.1A ⫹ 3.2B2
14.1A ⫹ 2.7B21.6C
8. 2.5C11.8A ⫺ 4.3B2

7.

In  Exercises  9–12,  refer  to  the  following  matrices,  and  perform
the  indicated  operations.  Round  your  answers  to  two  decimal
places.

 A ⫽ ≥

2
6
4
9

5⫺4
7
5
6

2
4
8

2

8

9
4
3

¥

6
4
2

5.6

The Inverse of a Square Matrix

The Inverse of a Square Matrix
In this section, we discuss a procedure for finding the inverse of a matrix, and we show
how the inverse can be used to help us solve a system of linear equations.
a⫺1 Óthat is,  Ô such that

Recall that if a is a nonzero real number, then there exists a unique real number

1
a

a⫺1a ⫽ a1

ab1a2 ⫽ 1

The use of the (multiplicative) inverse of a real number enables us to solve algebraic
equations of the form

ax ⫽ b

(13)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

310

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

Multiplying both sides of (13) by a⫺1, we have

a⫺11ax2 ⫽ a⫺1b
a1
ab 1ax2
 1b2

 ⫽ 1
a
 x ⫽ b
a

For example, since the inverse of 2 is 2⫺1 ⫽ , we can solve the equation

1
2

2x ⫽ 5

by multiplying both sides of the equation by 2⫺1 ⫽ , giving

1
2

2⫺112x2 ⫽ 2⫺1 # 5

 x ⫽ 5
2

We can use a similar procedure to solve the matrix equation

AX ⫽ B

where A, X, and B are matrices of the proper sizes. To do this, we need the matrix
equivalent of the inverse of a real number. Such a matrix, whenever it exists, is called
the inverse of a matrix.

Inverse of a Matrix
Let A be a square matrix of size n. A square matrix A⫺1 of size n such that

A⫺1A ⫽ AA⫺1 ⫽ In

is called the inverse of A.

Let’s show that the matrix

has the matrix

as its inverse. Since

A ⫽ c 1

3

2

4d

A⫺1 ⫽ c ⫺2

3
2

1
⫺1

2d

3

AA⫺1 ⫽ c 1
A⫺1A ⫽ c ⫺2

3
2

3
2

2

4d c ⫺2
2d c 1

1
⫺1

3

1
⫺1

0

2d ⫽ c 1
4d ⫽ c 1

2

0

0

1d ⫽ I
1d ⫽ I

0

we see that A⫺1 is the inverse of A, as asserted.

Explore & Discuss
In defining the inverse of a matrix A, why is it necessary to require that A be a square matrix?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.6 THE INVERSE OF A SQUARE MATRIX

311

Not every square matrix has an inverse. A square matrix that has an inverse is said
to be nonsingular. A matrix that does not have an inverse is said to be singular. An
example of a singular matrix is given by

If B had an inverse given by

B ⫽ c 0

0

1

0d

B⫺1 ⫽ c a

c

b

dd

where  a,  b,  c,  and  d are  some  appropriate  numbers,  then  by  the  definition  of  an
inverse, we would have BB⫺1 ⫽ I; that is,

c 0

0

c

1

0d c a
 c c

0

b

0

dd ⫽ c 1
0d ⫽ c 1

0

d

0

1d
1d

0

which implies that 0 ⫽ 1—an impossibility! This contradiction shows that B does not
have an inverse.

A Method for Finding the Inverse of a Square Matrix
The methods of Section 5.5 can be used to find the inverse of a nonsingular matrix.
To discover such an algorithm, let’s find the inverse of the matrix

A ⫽ c 1

⫺1

Suppose A⫺1 exists and is given by

A⫺1 ⫽ c a

c

2

3d

b

dd

where a, b, c, and d are to be determined. By the definition of an inverse, we have
AA⫺1 ⫽ I; that is,

c 1

⫺1

which simplifies to

2

3d c a

c

b

dd ⫽ c 1

0

c a ⫹ 2c
⫺a ⫹ 3c ⫺b ⫹ 3dd ⫽ c 1

b ⫹ 2d

0

0

1d

0

1d

But this matrix equation is equivalent to the two systems of linear equations

a ⫹ 2c ⫽ 1

⫺a ⫹ 3c ⫽ 0f   and 

b ⫹ 2d ⫽ 0

⫺b ⫹ 3d ⫽ 1f

with augmented matrices given by

c 1

⫺1

 

2
3

0d   and  c 1
`   1

⫺1

2
 
3

`   0
1d

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

312

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

Note that the matrices of coefficients of the two systems are identical. This sug-
gests that we solve the two systems of simultaneous linear equations by writing the
following augmented matrix, which we obtain by joining the coefficient matrix and
the two columns of constants:

c 1

⫺1

2
 
3

`   1

0

0

1d

Using  the  Gauss–Jordan  elimination  method,  we  obtain  the  following  sequence  of
equivalent matrices:

R2 ⫹ R1————씮

0

0

⫺1

2
 
3

c 1
c 1
0
5, b ⫽ ⫺2

1d
5d

`   1
`   1
1
5
5, c ⫽ 1
5, and d ⫽ 1
5,

2
1

0
1

 

R1 ⫺ 2R2
————씮

1
5R2
——씮

0

c 1
c 1

0

 

2
5

`   1

1

 

0
1

`  

3
5
1
5

0

1d
5d

⫺2
5
1

Thus, 

a ⫽ 3

giving

A⫺1 ⫽ c 3

5
1
5

⫺2
5
1

5d

The following computations verify that A⫺1 is indeed the inverse of A:

c 1

⫺1

2

3d c 3

5
1
5

⫺2
5
1

5d ⫽ c 1

0

0

1d ⫽ c 3

5
1
5

⫺2
5
1

5d c 1

⫺1

2

3d

The preceding example suggests a general algorithm for computing the inverse of

a square matrix of size n when it exists.

Finding the Inverse of a Matrix
Given the n ⫻ n matrix A:
1. Adjoin the n ⫻ n identity matrix I to obtain the augmented matrix

2. Use a sequence of row operations to reduce [A 兩 I’ to the form

[A 兩 I ’

if possible.

Then the matrix B is the inverse of A.

[I 兩 B’

Note Although matrix multiplication is not generally commutative, it is possible to
prove that if A has an inverse and AB ⫽ I, then BA ⫽ I also. Hence, to verify that B is
the inverse of A, it suffices to show that AB ⫽ I.

EXAMPLE 1 Find the inverse of the matrix

A ⫽ £

2
3
2

1
2
1

1
1
2

§

Solution We form the augmented matrix

£

2
3
2

1
2
1

 

1
1
2

†  

1
0
0

0
1
0

0
0
1

§

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

and use the Gauss–Jordan elimination method to reduce it to the form [I 兩 B]:

5.6 THE INVERSE OF A SQUARE MATRIX

313

£

2
3
2

1
2
1

 

1
1
2

†  

1
0
0

0
1
0

0
0
1

§

R1 ⫺ R2⎯⎯→

£

⫺1 ⫺1
2
1

3
2

 

0
1
2

†  

1 ⫺1
1
0
0
0

0
0
1

0
0
1

0
0
1

§

§

§

§

 

0
1
2

1

 

1

†  

†  

⫺1

1
3 ⫺2
2 ⫺2
2 ⫺1
2
0

⫺3
⫺1

0
1
0

 

0
0
1

†  

3 ⫺1 ⫺1
1
1

2
0

⫺4
⫺1

1
1
0 ⫺1
0 ⫺1

0
1⫺1
0

⫺R1⎯⎯⎯→
R2 ⫹ 3R1
R3 ⫹ 2R1

R1 ⫹ R2⎯⎯⎯→

⫺R2

R3 ⫺ R2

R1 ⫺ R3⎯⎯⎯→
R2 ⫹ R3

£

£

£

1
0
0

1
0
0

The inverse of A is the matrix

A⫺1 ⫽ £

3 ⫺1 ⫺1
1
1

2
0

⫺4
⫺1

§

We leave it to you to verify these results.

Example 2 illustrates what happens to the reduction process when a matrix A does

not have an inverse.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 2 Find the inverse of the matrix

A ⫽ £

1
2
3

2
1
3

3
2
5

§

Solution We form the augmented matrix

£

1
2
3

2
1
3

 

3
2
5

†  

1
0
0

0
1
0

0
0
1

§

Explore & Discuss
Explain in terms of solutions to
systems of linear equations why
the final augmented matrix in
Example 2 implies that A has no
inverse. Hint: See the discussion
on page 311.

and use the Gauss–Jordan elimination method:

£

1
2
3

2
1
3

 

3
2
5

†  

1
0
0

0
1
0

0
0
1

§

R2 ⫺ 2R1
⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫺ 3R1

⫺R2⎯⎯→
R3 ⫺ R2

£

£

2

1
3
0 ⫺3 ⫺4
0 ⫺3 ⫺4

 

†  

1
⫺2
⫺3

0
1
0

0
0
1

§

1
0
0

2
3
0

 

3
4
0

†  

1
0
2 ⫺1
⫺1 ⫺1

0
0
1

§

Since the entries in the last row of the 3 ⫻ 3 submatrix that comprises the left-hand
side of the augmented matrix just obtained are all equal to zero, the latter cannot be
reduced to the form [I 兩 B]. Accordingly, we draw the conclusion that A is singular—
that is, it does not have an inverse.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

314

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

More generally, we have the following criterion for determining when the inverse

of a matrix does not exist.

Matrices That Have No Inverses
If there is a row to the left of the vertical line in the augmented matrix contain-
ing all zeros, then the matrix does not have an inverse.

A Formula for the Inverse of a 2 ⫻ 2 Matrix
Before turning to some applications, we show an alternative method that employs a
formula for finding the inverse of a 2 ⫻ 2 matrix. This method will prove useful in
many situations; we will see an application in Example 5. The derivation of this for-
mula is left as an exercise (Exercise 52).

Formula for the Inverse of a 2 ⴛ 2 Matrix
Let

A ⫽ c a

c

b

dd

Suppose D ⫽ ad ⫺ bc is not equal to zero. Then A⫺1 exists and is given by

A⫺1 ⫽ 1
D

 c d ⫺b
ad

⫺c

(14)

Note As an aid to memorizing the formula, note that D is the product of the elements
along the main diagonal minus the product of the elements along the other diagonal:

Next, the matrix

c a

c

b

dd

:

Main diagonal

D ⫽ ad ⫺ bc

c d ⫺b
ad

⫺c

is obtained by interchanging a and d and reversing the signs of b and c. Finally, A⫺1
is obtained by dividing this matrix by D.

EXAMPLE 3 Find the inverse of

A ⫽ c 1

3

2

4d

Solution We first compute D ⫽ (1)(4) ⫺ (2)(3) ⫽ 4 ⫺ 6 ⫽ ⫺2. Next, we rewrite
the given matrix obtaining

Finally, dividing this matrix by D, we obtain

c 4 ⫺2
1d

⫺3

Explore & Discuss
Suppose A is a square matrix
with the property that one of its
rows is a nonzero constant mul-
tiple of another row. What can
you say about the existence or
nonexistence of A⫺1? Explain
your answer.

A⫺1 ⫽ ⫺1

2  c 4 ⫺2

⫺3

1d ⫽ c ⫺2

3
2

1
⫺1

2d

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.6 THE INVERSE OF A SQUARE MATRIX

315

Solving Systems of Equations with Inverses
We now show how the inverse of a matrix may be used to solve certain systems of lin-
ear equations in which the number of equations in the system is equal to the number
of  variables.  For  simplicity,  let’s  illustrate  the  process  for  a  system  of  three  linear
equations in three variables:

a11x1 ⫹ a12 x2 ⫹ a13 x3 ⫽ b1
a21x1 ⫹ a22 x2 ⫹ a23 x3 ⫽ b2
a31x1 ⫹ a32 x2 ⫹ a33 x3 ⫽ b3

(15)

Let’s write

A ⫽ £

a11
a21
a31

a12
a22
a32

a13
a23
a33

§

X ⫽ £

x1
x2
x3

§

B ⫽ £

b1
b2
b3

§

You should verify that System (15) of linear equations may be written in the form of
the matrix equation

(16)
If A is nonsingular, then the method of this section may be used to compute A⫺1. Next,
multiplying both sides of Equation (16) by A⫺1 (on the left), we obtain

AX ⫽ B

A⫺1AX ⫽ A⫺1B or

IX ⫽ A⫺1B or X ⫽ A⫺1B

the desired solution to the problem.

In the case of a system of n equations with n unknowns, we have the following

more general result.

Using Inverses to Solve Systems of Equations
If AX ⫽ B is a linear system of n equations in n unknowns and if A⫺1 exists, then

is the unique solution of the system.

X ⫽ A⫺1B

The  use  of  inverses  to  solve  systems  of  equations  is  particularly  advantageous
when we are required to solve more than one system of equations, AX ⫽ B, involving
the same coefficient matrix, A, and different matrices of constants, B. As you will see
in Examples 4 and 5, we need to compute A⫺1 just once in each case.

EXAMPLE 4 Solve the following systems of linear equations:
a.

b.

2x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⫽ 1
3x ⫹ 2y ⫹ z ⫽ 2
2x ⫹ y ⫹ 2z ⫽ ⫺1

2x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⫽ 2
3x ⫹ 2y ⫹ z ⫽ ⫺3
2x ⫹ y ⫹ 2z ⫽ 1

Solution We may write the given systems of equations in the form

respectively, where

AX ⫽ B and AX ⫽ C

A ⫽ £

2
3
2

1
2
1

1
1
2

§

X ⫽ £

x
y
z

§

B ⫽ £

1
2
⫺1

§

C ⫽ £

2
⫺3
1

§

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

316

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

The inverse of the matrix A,

A⫺1 ⫽ £

3 ⫺1 ⫺1
1
1

2
0

⫺4
⫺1

§

was found in Example 1. Using this result, we find that the solution of the first 
system (a) is

X ⫽ A⫺1B ⫽ £

 ⫽ £

§ ⫽ £

2
⫺1
⫺2

§

§

2
0

§ £

1
2
⫺1

3 ⫺1 ⫺1
1
1

⫺4
⫺1
132112 ⫹ 1⫺12122 ⫹ 1⫺121⫺12
1⫺42112 ⫹ 122122 ⫹ 1121⫺12
1⫺12112 ⫹ 102122 ⫹ 1121⫺12

or x ⫽ 2, y ⫽ ⫺1, and z ⫽ ⫺2.

The solution of the second system (b) is

X ⫽ A⫺1C ⫽ £

3 ⫺1 ⫺1
1
1

2
0

⫺4
⫺1

§   £

2
⫺3
1

§ ⫽ £

8
⫺13
⫺1

§

or x ⫽ 8, y ⫽ ⫺13, and z ⫽ ⫺1.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 5 Capital Expenditure Planning The management of
Checkers Rent-A-Car plans to expand its fleet of rental cars for the next 

quarter by purchasing compact and full-size cars. The average cost of a compact
car is $15,000, and the average cost of a full-size car is $36,000.
a. If a total of 800 cars is to be purchased with a budget of $18 million, how

many cars of each size will be acquired?

b. If the predicted demand calls for a total purchase of 1000 cars with a budget

of $21 million, how many cars of each type will be acquired?

Solution Let x and y denote the number of compact and full-size cars, respectively,
to be purchased. Furthermore, let n denote the total number of cars to be acquired,
and let b denote the amount of money budgeted for the purchase of these cars. Then

x ⫹

y ⫽ n
15,000x ⫹ 36,000y ⫽ b

This system of two equations in two variables may be written in the matrix form

AX ⫽ B

where

Therefore,

A ⫽ c

1
15,000

1

36,000d

X ⫽ c x
yd

B ⫽ c n
bd

Since A is a 2 ⫻ 2 matrix, its inverse may be found by using Formula (14).

We find D ⫽ (1)(36,000) ⫺ (1)(15,000) ⫽ 21,000, so

X ⫽ A⫺1B

A⫺1 ⫽ 1

21,000

 c 36,000 ⫺1

⫺15,000

1d ⫽ c

36,000
21,000
⫺15,000
21,000

21,000

⫺ 1
1

21,000d

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.6 THE INVERSE OF A SQUARE MATRIX

317

Thus,

X ⫽ c

12
7
⫺5
7

⫺ 1
1

21,000

21,000d c n
bd

a. Here, n ⫽ 800 and b ⫽ 18,000,000, so

X ⫽ A⫺1B ⫽ c

12
7
⫺5
7

⫺ 1
1

21,000

21,000d c

800

18,000,000d ⬇ c 514.3
285.7d

Therefore, 514 compact cars and 286 full-size cars will be acquired in this case.

b. Here, n ⫽ 1000 and b ⫽ 21,000,000, so

X ⫽ A⫺1B ⫽ c

12
7
⫺5
7

⫺ 1
1

21,000

21,000d c

1000

21,000,000d ⬇ c 714.3
285.7d

Therefore, 714 compact cars and 286 full-size cars will be purchased in this
case.

5.6 Self-Check Exercises

1. Find the inverse of the matrix

2
1

A ⫽ £

1 ⫺1
1 ⫺1
3

§

⫺1 ⫺2

if it exists.

2. Solve the system of linear equations
 2x ⫹ y ⫺ z ⫽ b1
  x ⫹ y ⫺ z ⫽ b2
⫺x ⫺ 2y ⫹ 3z ⫽ b3

5.6 Concept Questions

1. What is the inverse of a matrix A?

2. Explain how you would find the inverse of a nonsingular

matrix.

3. Give the formula for the inverse of the 2 ⫻ 2 matrix

A ⫽ c a

c

b

dd

5.6 Exercises

where (a) b1 ⫽ 5, b2 ⫽ 4, b3 ⫽ ⫺8 and (b) b1 ⫽ 2, b2 ⫽ 0, 
b3 ⫽ 5, by finding the inverse of the coefficient matrix.

3. Grand Canyon Tours offers air and ground scenic tours of
the Grand Canyon. Tickets for the 7ᎏ1
ᎏ-hour tour cost $169 
2
for an adult and $129 for a child, and each tour group is
limited to 19 people. On three recent fully booked tours,
total receipts were $2931 for the first tour, $3011 for the
second tour, and $2771 for the third tour. Determine how
many adults and how many children were in each tour.

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 5.6 can be found on 
page 320.

4. Explain how the inverse of a matrix can be used to solve a
system of n linear equations in n unknowns. Can the method
work for a system of m linear equations in n unknowns with
m ⫽ n? Explain.

In  Exercises  1–4,  show  that  the  matrices  are  inverses  of  each
other by showing that their product is the identity matrix I.

1.

c 1 ⫺3
1 ⫺2d

and

c ⫺2

⫺1

3

1d

2.

c 4

2

3. £

3
2
2

5

3d

2
2
1

and

3
1
1

§

c

3
2
⫺1

⫺5
2

2d

and

£

⫺1
3
0
2
3

⫺1
4
3
3
1 ⫺1
⫺2
3

⫺1
3

§

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

318

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

4.

£

⫺4 ⫺6

2

3

4 ⫺2
1
5 ⫺1

§

and

£

1
2
⫺1
2
⫺1

⫺3 ⫺4
3
2

2
1

§

In Exercises 5–16, find the inverse of the matrix, if it exists. Verify
your answer.

5.

7.

9.

11.

13.

15.

5

1

c 2
3d
c 3 ⫺3
2d

⫺2

£

£

£

2 ⫺3 ⫺4
0 ⫺1
0
1 ⫺2
1

4

2
⫺1 ⫺3
3 ⫺1

1
2
⫺1

4⫺1
3⫺2
2

2
4
6

3

§

§

§

≥

1 ⫺1
1
1
1
2
2
0
1
2 ⫺1 ⫺1

1
0
1
3

¥

6.

8.

10.

12.

14.

16.

3

c 2
c 4

6

3

5d
3d

2

£

£

£

1 ⫺1
2
1
⫺2 ⫺2

1
⫺3
⫺5

2
4⫺2
0⫺2

⫺2

3 ⫺2
1
6 ⫺5

3
2
1

0

7
4
8

§

§

§

≥

1
2
0
1

1
3
2⫺1
2

2
0⫺1
1

1

3

1

¥

In Exercises 17–24, (a) write a matrix equation that is equivalent
to the system of linear equations, and (b) solve the system using
the inverses found in Exercises 5–16.
17.

18.

2x ⫹ 5y ⫽ 3
x ⫹ 3y ⫽ 2
(See Exercise 5.)

2x ⫹ 3y ⫽ 5
3x ⫹ 5y ⫽ 8
(See Exercise 6.)

19.

21.

23.

24.

2x ⫺ 3y ⫺ 4z ⫽ 4
⫺z ⫽ 3
x ⫺ 2y ⫹ z ⫽ ⫺8
(See Exercise 9.)

  x ⫹ 4y ⫺ z ⫽  3
 2x ⫹ 3y ⫺ 2z ⫽  1
⫺x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 3z ⫽ 7
(See Exercise 13.)

20.

22.

x1 ⫺ x2 ⫹ 3x3 ⫽ 2
2x1 ⫹ x2 ⫹ 2x3 ⫽ 2
⫺2x1 ⫺ 2x2 ⫹ x3 ⫽ 3
(See Exercise 10.)

3x1 ⫺ 2x2 ⫹ 7x3 ⫽ 6
⫺2x1 ⫹ x2 ⫹ 4x3 ⫽ 4
6x1 ⫺ 5x2 ⫹ 8x3 ⫽ 4

(See Exercise 14.)

x1 ⫹ x2 ⫺ x3 ⫹ x4 ⫽ 6
2x1 ⫹ x2 ⫹ x3
⫽ 4
⫹ x4 ⫽ 7
2x1 ⫹ x2
2x1 ⫺ x2 ⫺ x3 ⫹ 3x4 ⫽ 9
(See Exercise 15.)

x1 ⫹ x2 ⫹ 2x3 ⫹ 3x4 ⫽ 4
2x1 ⫹ 3x2
⫺ x4 ⫽ 11
2x2 ⫺ x3 ⫹ x4 ⫽ 7
x1 ⫹ 2x2 ⫹ x3 ⫹ x4 ⫽ 6
(See Exercise 16.)

In Exercises 25–32, (a) write each system of equations as a matrix
equation,  and  (b)  solve  the  system  of  equations  by  using  the
inverse of the coefficient matrix.
25.

x ⫹ 2y ⫽ b1
2x ⫺ y ⫽ b2

where
and

(i) b1 ⫽ 14, b2 ⫽ 5
(ii) b1 ⫽ 4, b2 ⫽ ⫺1

3x ⫺ 2y ⫽ b1
4x ⫹ 3y ⫽ b2

where
and

(i) b1 ⫽ ⫺6, b2 ⫽ 10
(ii) b1 ⫽ 3, b2 ⫽ ⫺2

where
and

where
and

where
and

x ⫹ 2y ⫹ z ⫽ b1
x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⫽ b2
3x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⫽ b3
(i) b1 ⫽ 7, b2 ⫽ 4, b3 ⫽ 2
(ii) b1 ⫽ 5, b2 ⫽ ⫺3, b3 ⫽ ⫺1

x1 ⫹ x2 ⫹ x3 ⫽ b1
x1 ⫺ x2 ⫹ x3 ⫽ b2
x1 ⫺ 2x2 ⫺ x3 ⫽ b3

(i) b1 ⫽ 5, b2 ⫽ ⫺3, b3 ⫽ ⫺1
(ii) b1 ⫽ 1, b2 ⫽ 4, b3 ⫽ ⫺2
3x ⫹ 2y ⫺ z ⫽ b1
2x ⫺ 3y ⫹ z ⫽ b2
x ⫺ y ⫺ z ⫽ b3
(i) b1 ⫽ 2, b2 ⫽ ⫺2, b3 ⫽ 4
(ii) b1 ⫽ 8, b2 ⫽ ⫺3, b3 ⫽ 6

 2x1 ⫹ x2 ⫹ x3 ⫽ b1
  x1 ⫺ 3x2 ⫹ 4x3 ⫽ b2
 ⫺x1
⫹ x3 ⫽ b3

where
and

(i) b1 ⫽ 1, b2 ⫽ 4, b3 ⫽ ⫺3
(ii) b1 ⫽ 2, b2 ⫽ ⫺5, b3 ⫽ 0

x1 ⫹ x2 ⫹ x3 ⫹ x4 ⫽ b1
x1 ⫺ x2 ⫺ x3 ⫹ x4 ⫽ b2
x2 ⫹ 2x3 ⫹ 2x4 ⫽ b3
x1 ⫹ 2x2 ⫹ x3 ⫺ 2x4 ⫽ b4

where
and

(i) b1 ⫽ 1, b2 ⫽ ⫺1, b3 ⫽ 4, b4 ⫽ 0
(ii) b1 ⫽ 2, b2 ⫽ 8, b3 ⫽ 4, b4 ⫽ ⫺1

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

x1 ⫹ x2 ⫹ 2x3 ⫹ x4 ⫽ b1
4x1 ⫹ 5x2 ⫹ 9x3 ⫹ x4 ⫽ b2
3x1 ⫹ 4x2 ⫹ 7x3 ⫹ x4 ⫽ b3
2x1 ⫹ 3x2 ⫹ 4x3 ⫹ 2x4 ⫽ b4
(i) b1 ⫽ 3, b2 ⫽ 6, b3 ⫽ 5, b4 ⫽ 7
(ii) b1 ⫽ 1, b2 ⫽ ⫺1, b3 ⫽ 0, b4 ⫽ ⫺4

where
and

33. Let

A ⫽ c 2

⫺4 ⫺5d

3

a. Find A⫺1.
b. Show that 1A⫺12⫺1 ⫽ A.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

34. Let

A ⫽ c 6 ⫺4

⫺4

3d   and  B ⫽ c 3 ⫺5
4 ⫺7d

a. Find AB, A⫺1, and B⫺1.
b. Show that 1AB2 ⫺1 ⫽ B⫺1A⫺1.

35. Let

A ⫽ c 2 ⫺5
1 ⫺3d

B ⫽ c 4

1

3

1d

C ⫽ c 2

⫺2

3

1d

a. Find ABC, A⫺1, B⫺1, and C⫺1.
b. Show that 1ABC2 ⫺1 ⫽ C⫺1B⫺1A⫺1.

36. Find the matrix A if

c 2

⫺1
37. Find the matrix A if

1

3d  A ⫽ c 3

1

2

4d

2

Ac 1
3 ⫺1d ⫽ c 2

3 ⫺2d

1

38. TICKET REVENUES Rainbow Harbor Cruises charges $16/adult
and $8/child for a round-trip ticket. The records show that, on
a certain weekend, 1000 people took the cruise on Saturday,
and 800 people took the cruise on Sunday. The total receipts
for Saturday were $12,800, and the total receipts for Sunday
were $9,600. Determine how many adults and children took
the cruise on Saturday and on Sunday.

39. PRICING BelAir Publishing publishes a deluxe leather edi-
tion and a standard edition of its daily organizer. The com-
pany’s marketing department estimates that x copies of the
deluxe edition and y copies of the standard edition will be
demanded per month when the unit prices are p dollars and
q dollars, respectively, where x, y, p, and q are related by
the following system of linear equations:

5x ⫹ y ⫽ 1000170 ⫺ p2
x ⫹ 3y ⫽ 1000140 ⫺ q2

Find  the  monthly  demand  for  the  deluxe  edition  and  the
standard edition when the unit prices are set according to
the following schedules:
a. p ⫽ 50 and q ⫽ 25
b. p ⫽ 45 and q ⫽ 25
c. p ⫽ 45 and q ⫽ 20

40. NUTRITION/DIET PLANNING Bob, a nutritionist who works for
the  University  Medical  Center,  has  been  asked  to  prepare
special  diets  for  two  patients,  Susan  and  Tom.  Bob  has
decided that Susan’s meals should contain at least 400 mg of
calcium, 20 mg of iron, and 50 mg of vitamin C, whereas
Tom’s  meals  should  contain  at  least  350  mg  of  calcium,
15 mg of iron, and 40 mg of vitamin C. Bob has also decided
that  the  meals  are  to  be  prepared  from  three  basic  foods:
Food A, Food B, and Food C. The special nutritional con-
tents  of  these  foods  are  summarized  in  the  accompanying
table. Find how many ounces of each type of food should be
used in a meal so that the minimum requirements of calcium,
iron, and vitamin C are met for each patient’s meals.

5.6 THE INVERSE OF A SQUARE MATRIX

319

Calcium

Contents (mg/oz)

Iron

Vitamin C

Food A
Food B
Food C

30
25
20

1
1
2

2
5
4

41. AGRICULTURE Jackson Farms has allotted a certain amount
of land for cultivating soybeans, corn, and wheat. Cultivat-
ing 1 acre of soybeans requires 2 labor-hours, and cultivat-
ing 1 acre of corn or wheat requires 6 labor-hours. The cost
of seeds for 1 acre of soybeans is $12, the cost for 1 acre
of corn is $20, and the cost for 1 acre of wheat is $8. If all
resources  are  to  be  used,  how  many  acres  of  each  crop
should be cultivated if the following hold?
a. 1000  acres  of  land  are  allotted,  4400  labor-hours  are

available, and $13,200 is available for seeds.

b. 1200  acres  of  land  are  allotted,  5200  labor-hours  are

available, and $16,400 is available for seeds.

42. MIXTURE PROBLEM—FERTILIZER Lawnco  produces 

three
grades of commercial fertilizers. A 100-lb bag of grade A
fertilizer contains 18 lb of nitrogen, 4 lb of phosphate, and
5 lb of potassium. A 100-lb bag of grade B fertilizer con-
tains  20  lb  of  nitrogen  and  4  lb  each  of  phosphate  and
potassium.  A  100-lb  bag  of  grade  C  fertilizer  contains 
24 lb of nitrogen, 3 lb of phosphate, and 6 lb of potassium.
How many 100-lb bags of each of the three grades of fer-
tilizers should Lawnco produce if
a. 26,400 lb of nitrogen, 4900 lb of phosphate, and 6200 lb
of  potassium  are  available  and  all  the  nutrients  are 
used?

b. 21,800 lb of nitrogen, 4200 lb of phosphate, and 5300 lb
of potassium are available and all the nutrients are used?

43. INVESTMENT CLUBS A  private  investment  club  has  a  certain
amount  of  money  earmarked  for  investment  in  stocks.  To
arrive at an acceptable overall level of risk, the stocks that
management is considering have been classified into three
categories:  high-risk,  medium-risk,  and  low-risk.  Manage-
ment estimates that high-risk stocks will have a rate of return
of  15%/year;  medium-risk  stocks,  10%/year;  and  low-risk
stocks, 6%/year. The members have decided that the invest-
ment in low-risk stocks should be equal to the sum of the
investments in the stocks of the other two categories. Deter-
mine how much the club should invest in each type of stock
in each of the following scenarios. (In all cases, assume that
the entire sum available for investment is invested.)
a. The  club  has  $200,000  to  invest,  and  the  investment 
goal  is  to  have  a  return  of  $20,000/year  on  the  total
investment.

b. The  club  has  $220,000  to  invest,  and  the  investment 
goal  is  to  have  a  return  of  $22,000/year  on  the  total
investment.

c. The  club  has  $240,000  to  invest,  and  the  investment 
goal  is  to  have  a  return  of  $22,000/year  on  the  total
investment.

44. RESEARCH FUNDING The Carver Foundation funds three non-
profit organizations engaged in alternative-energy research
activities. From past data, the proportion of funds spent by

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

320

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

each organization in research on solar energy, energy from
harnessing the wind, and energy from the motion of ocean
tides is given in the accompanying table.

Organization I
Organization II
Organization III

Solar
0.6
0.4
0.2

Proportion of Money Spent

Wind
0.3
0.3
0.6

Tides
0.1
0.3
0.2

Find the amount awarded to each organization if the total
amount spent by all three organizations on solar, wind, and
tidal research is
a. $9.2 million, $9.6 million, and $5.2 million, respectively.
b. $8.2 million, $7.2 million, and $3.6 million, respectively.

45. Find the value(s) of k such that

A ⫽ c 1

k

2

3d

has an inverse. What is the inverse of A?
Hint: Use Formula (14).

46. Find the value(s) of k such that

A ⫽ £

1
⫺2
⫺1

0
1
2

1
k

k2§

has an inverse.
Hint: Find the value(s) of k such that the augmented matrix 
[A 앚 I] can be reduced to the form [I 앚 B].

47. Find conditions on a and d such that the matrix

A ⫽ c a

0

0

dd

has  an  inverse.  A  square  matrix  is  said  to  be  a diagonal
matrix if all the entries not lying on the main diagonal are

5.6 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. We form the augmented matrix

2
1

1 ⫺1
1 ⫺1
3

 

†  

1
0
0

0
1
0

0
0
1

§

⫺1 ⫺2

and row-reduce as follows:

£

£

1 ⫺1
 
1 ⫺1
3

1 ⫺1
 
1 ⫺1
3

†  

†  

1
0
0

0
1
0

0
1
0

1
0
0

0
0
1

0
0
1

§

§

R1 4 R2⎯⎯→

R2 ⫺ 2R1⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫹ R1

⫺1 ⫺2

⫺1 ⫺2

£

2
1

1
2

zero. Discuss the existence of the inverse matrix of a diag-
onal matrix of size 

n   ⫻   n

.

48. Find conditions a, b, and d such that the 

2   ⫻   2

upper tri-

angular matrix

A ⫽ c a

0

b

dd

has an inverse. A square matrix is said to be an upper tri-
angular matrix if all its entries below the main diagonal are
zero. Discuss the existence of the inverse of an upper tri-
angular matrix of size n ⫻ n.

In Exercises 49–51, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
49. If A is a square matrix with inverse A⫺1 and c is a nonzero

real number, then

50. The matrix

1cA2 ⫺1 ⫽ a1

cb A⫺1

A ⫽ c a

c

b

dd

has an inverse if and only if ad ⫺ bc ⫽ 0.

51. If A⫺1 does not exist, then the system AX ⫽ B of n linear
equations in n unknowns does not have a unique solution.

52. Let

A ⫽ c a

c

b

dd

a. Find A⫺1 if it exists.
b. Find a necessary condition for A to be nonsingular.
c. Verify that AA⫺1 ⫽ A⫺1A ⫽ I.

1
0 ⫺1
0 ⫺1

1 ⫺1
 
1
2

†  

1
0
1 ⫺2
0
1

0
1⫺1
0

0

 

1

†  

1 ⫺1
2
3

⫺1
⫺1

R1 ⫹ R2⎯⎯→
R3 ⫺ R2

⫺R2

R2 ⫹ R3⎯⎯→

0
0
1

0
0
1

§

§

0
1
0

 

0
0
1

†  

1 ⫺1
5
3

⫺2
⫺1

0
1
1

§

£

£

£

1
0
0

1
0
0

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

From the preceding results, we see that

A⫺1 ⫽ £

1 ⫺1
5
3

⫺2
⫺1

0
1
1

§

2. a. We write the systems of linear equations in the matrix

form

where

AX ⫽ B1

2
1

A ⫽ £

1 ⫺1
1 ⫺1
3

§

X ⫽ £

x
y
z

§

B1 ⫽ £

5
4
⫺8

§

⫺1 ⫺2

Now, using the results of Exercise 1, we have

X ⫽ £

x
y
z

§ ⫽ A⫺1B1 ⫽ £

1 ⫺1
5
3

⫺2
⫺1

0
1
1

§ £

5
4
⫺8

§ ⫽ £

1
2
⫺1

§

Therefore, x ⫽ 1, y ⫽ 2, and z ⫽ ⫺1.

b. Here, A and X are as in part (a), but

B2 ⫽ £

2
0
5

§

Therefore,

X ⫽ £

x
y
z

§ ⫽ A⫺1B2 ⫽ £

1 ⫺1
5
3

⫺2
⫺1

0
1
1

§ £

2
0
5

§ ⫽ £

2
1
3

§

or x ⫽ 2, y ⫽ 1, and z ⫽ 3.

3. Let x denote the number of adults, and let y denote the num-
ber of children on a tour. Since the tours are filled to capac-
ity, we have

x ⫹ y ⫽ 19

Next, since the total receipts for the first tour were $2931,
we have

169x ⫹ 129y ⫽ 2931

Therefore, the number of adults and the number of children
in the first tour are found by solving the system of linear
equations

x ⫹

y ⫽ 19
169x ⫹ 129y ⫽ 2931

(a)

5.6 THE INVERSE OF A SQUARE MATRIX

321

Similarly, we see that the number of adults and the number
of children in the second and third tours are found by solv-
ing the systems

x ⫹

y ⫽ 19
169x ⫹ 129y ⫽ 3011
y ⫽ 19
169x ⫹ 129y ⫽ 2771

x ⫹

(b)

(c)

These systems may be written in the form

AX ⫽ B1

AX ⫽ B2

AX ⫽ B3

where

1

1
169

129d     X ⫽ c x
yd

 A ⫽ c
 B1 ⫽ c
To solve these systems, we first find A⫺1. Using Formula
(14) with D ⫽ (1)(129) ⫺ (1)(169) ⫽ ⫺40, we obtain

3011d     B3 ⫽ c

2931d     B2 ⫽ c

2771d

19

19

19

A⫺1 ⫽ ⫺ 1

40c 129 ⫺1

⫺169

1d ⫽ c ⫺129

40
169
40

1
40
⫺ 1

40d

Then, solving each system, we find

40
169
40

1
40
⫺ 1

yd ⫽ A⫺1B1
40d  c
yd ⫽ A⫺1B2
40d  c

X ⫽ c x
 ⫽ c ⫺129
X ⫽ c x
 ⫽ c ⫺129
 ⫽ c 14
5d

1
40
⫺ 1

40
169
40

X ⫽ c x
 ⫽ c ⫺129

yd ⫽ A⫺1B3
40d  c

1
40
⫺ 1

40
169
40

19

2931d ⫽ c 12
7d

19

3011d

19

2771d ⫽ c 8
11d

(a)

(b)

(c)

We conclude that there were:
a. 12 adults and 7 children on the first tour.
b. 14 adults and 5 children on the second tour.
c. 8 adults and 11 children on the third tour.

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Finding the Inverse of a Square Matrix

Graphing Utility
A graphing utility can be used to find the inverse of a square matrix.

(continued)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

322

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

EXAMPLE 1 Use a graphing utility to find the inverse of

£

1
⫺2
5

3
2
1

5
4
3

§

Solution We first enter the given matrix as

1
⫺2
5
Then, recalling the matrix A and using the

A ⫽ £

3
2
1
x⫺1

§

5
4
3
key, we find

A⫺1 ⫽ £

0.1 ⫺0.2
0.1
1.3 ⫺1.1 ⫺0.7
0.4

0.7

⫺0.6

§

EXAMPLE 2 Use a graphing utility to solve the system

x ⫹ 3y ⫹ 5z ⫽ 4
⫺2x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 4z ⫽ 3
5x ⫹ y ⫹ 3z ⫽ 2

by using the inverse of the coefficient matrix.

Solution The given system can be written in the matrix form AX ⫽ B, where

A ⫽ £

1
⫺2
5

3
2
1

5
4
3

§     X ⫽ £

x
y
z

§     B ⫽ £

4
3
2

§

The solution is X ⫽ A⫺1B. Entering the matrices A and B in the graphing utility and
using the matrix multiplication capability of the utility gives the output shown in
Figure T1—that is, x ⫽ 0, y ⫽ 0.5, and z ⫽ 0.5.

FIGURE T1
The TI-83/84 screen showing A⫺1B

[A]-1 [B]

Ans 

[[0]

[.5]
[.5]]

Excel
We use the function MINVERSE to find the inverse of a square matrix using Excel.

EXAMPLE 3 Find the inverse of

A ⫽ £

1
⫺2
5

3
2
1

5
4
3

§

Note: Boldfaced words/characters enclosed in a box (for example, 
required. Words/characters printed blue (for example, Chart sub-type:) indicate words/characters on the screen. Words/charac-
ters printed in a monospace font (for example, =(—2/3)*A2+2) indicate words/characters that need to be typed and entered.

) indicate that an action (click, select, or press) is

Enter

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Solution

5.6 THE INVERSE OF A SQUARE MATRIX

323

1. Enter the elements of matrix A onto a spreadsheet (Figure T2).
2. Compute the inverse of the matrix A: Highlight the cells that will contain the

inverse matrix A⫺1, type = MINVERSE(, highlight the cells containing matrix A,
type ), and press 
spreadsheet (Figure T2).

. The desired matrix will appear in your

Ctrl-Shift-Enter

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

A

B

Matrix A

C

1
-2
5

0.1
1.3
-0.6

3
2
1

Matrix A-1
-0.2
-1.1
0.7

5
4
3

0.1
-0.7
0.4

EXAMPLE 4 Solve the system

x ⫹ 3y ⫹ 5z ⫽ 4
⫺2 x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 4z ⫽ 3
5 x ⫹ y ⫹ 3z ⫽ 2

by using the inverse of the coefficient matrix.

Solution The given system can be written in the matrix form AX ⫽ B, where

A ⫽ £

1
⫺2
5

3
2
1

5
4
3

§

X ⫽ £

x
y
z

§

B ⫽ £

4
3
2

§

The solution is X ⫽ A⫺1B.
1. Enter the matrix B on a spreadsheet.
2. Compute A⫺1B. Highlight the cells that will contain the matrix X, and then type
=MMULT(, highlight the cells in the matrix A⫺1, type ,, highlight the cells in the
. (Note: The matrix A⫺1 was found
matrix B, type ), and press 
in Example 3.) The matrix X shown in Figure T3 will appear on your spread-
sheet. Thus, x ⫽ 0, y ⫽ 0.5, and z ⫽ 0.5.

Ctrl-Shift-Enter

FIGURE T2
Matrix A and its inverse, matrix A⫺1

A

Matrix X
5.55112E-17
0.5
0.5

12
13
14
15

FIGURE T3
Matrix X gives the solution to the 
problem.

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

In Exercises 1–6, find the inverse of the matrix. Round your an-
swers to two decimal places.

2.

£

3.7

4.2
4.6
2.1 ⫺1.3 ⫺2.3
7.6 ⫺2.3
1.8

§

1.

£

1.2
3.4
⫺1.2

3.1 ⫺2.1
2.6
7.3
3.4 ⫺1.3

§

3. ≥

1.1
1.6
4.2
1.6

2.3
3.2
1.6
2.1

3.1
1.8
1.4
2.8

4.2
2.9
3.2
7.2

¥

4.

≥

2.1
6.2
2.3
⫺2.1

3.2 ⫺1.4 ⫺3.2
8.4
7.3
1.6
2.4 ⫺1.3
7.1
3.1
4.6
3.7

¥

2 ⫺1
3
3
2
3

3
2 ⫺1
2
6
1 ⫺1
2
4

5.E

4
2
4
1
4 ⫺1
4
2
5

6U

(continued)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

324

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

1
6
4
⫺1

1.1

4
2.4
1
2⫺3
2.2

2
5
2
4
3

3
1.2
3

2
5.1

1.4
3
1.2

4 U

6.

E

In  Exercises  7–10,  solve  the  system  of  linear  equations  by  first
writing  the  system  in  the  form  AX ⫽ B and  then  solving  the
resulting system by using Aⴚ1. Round your answers to two deci-
mal places.
7. 2x ⫺ 3y ⫹ 4z ⫽ 2.4
3x ⫹ 2y ⫺ 7z ⫽ ⫺8.1
x ⫹ 4y ⫺ 2z ⫽ 10.2

8. 3.2x ⫺ 4.7y ⫹ 3.2z ⫽ 7.1
2.1x ⫹ 2.6y ⫹ 6.2z ⫽ 8.2
5.1x ⫺ 3.1y ⫺ 2.6z ⫽ ⫺6.5

9. 3x1 ⫺ 2x2 ⫹ 4x3 ⫺ 8x4 ⫽ 8
2x1 ⫹ 3x2 ⫺ 2x3 ⫹ 6x4 ⫽ 4
3x1 ⫹ 2x2 ⫺ 6x3 ⫺ 7x4 ⫽ ⫺2
4x1 ⫺ 7x2 ⫹ 4x3 ⫹ 6x4 ⫽ 22

10. 1.2x1 ⫹ 2.1x2 ⫺ 3.2x3 ⫹ 4.6x4 ⫽ 6.2
3.1x1 ⫺ 1.2x2 ⫹ 4.1x3 ⫺ 3.6x4 ⫽ ⫺2.2
1.8x1 ⫹ 3.1x2 ⫺ 2.4x3 ⫹ 8.1x4 ⫽ 6.2
2.6x1 ⫺ 2.4x2 ⫹ 3.6x3 ⫺ 4.6x4 ⫽ 3.6

CHAPTER 5

Summary of Principal Formulas and Terms

FORMULAS

1. Laws for matrix addition

a. Commutative law
b. Associative law

2. Laws for matrix multiplication

a. Associative law
b. Distributive law

3. Inverse of a 2 ⫻ 2 matrix

A ⫹ B ⫽ B ⫹ A

1A ⫹ B2 ⫹ C ⫽ A ⫹ 1B ⫹ C2
1AB)C ⫽ A1BC2
A1B ⫹ C2 ⫽ AB ⫹ AC

If

A ⫽ c a

c

b

dd

and D ⫽ ad ⫺ bc ⫽ 0

then

A⫺1 ⫽ 1
D

 c d ⫺b
ad

⫺c

4. Solution of system AX ⫽ B

X ⫽ A⫺1B

(A nonsingular)

TERMS

system of linear equations (248)
solution of a system of linear equations

(248)

parameter (249)
dependent system (250)
inconsistent system (250)
Gauss–Jordan elimination method (256)
equivalent system (256)
coefficient matrix (258)

augmented matrix (258)
row-reduced form of a matrix (259)
row operations (260)
unit column (260)
pivoting (261)
size of a matrix (283)
matrix (283)
row matrix (283)
column matrix (283)

square matrix (283)
transpose of a matrix (287)
scalar (288)
scalar product (288)
matrix product (296)
identity matrix (299)
inverse of a matrix (310)
nonsingular matrix (311)
singular matrix (311)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

REVIEW EXERCISES

325

CHAPTER 5

Concept Review Questions

Fill in the blanks.
1. a. Two lines in the plane can intersect at (a) exactly _____

point, (b) infinitely _____ points, or (c) _____ point.

b. A system of two linear equations in two variables can
have  (a)  exactly  _____  solution,  (b)  infinitely  _____
solutions, or (c) _____ solution.

2. To find the point(s) of intersection of two lines, we solve

the system of _____ describing the two lines.

3. The row operations used in the Gauss–Jordan elimination
method are denoted by _____, _____, and _____. The use
of each of these operations does not alter the _____ of the
system of linear equations.

4. a. A system of linear equations with fewer equations than

variables cannot have a/an _____ solution.

b. A system of linear equations with at least as many equa-
tions  as  variables  may  have  _____ solution,  _____
_____ solutions, or a _____ solution.

5. Two matrices are equal provided they have the same _____

and their corresponding _____ are equal.

7. The transpose of a/an _____ matrix with elements aij is the

matrix of size _____ with entries _____.

8. The  scalar  product  of  a  matrix  A by  the  scalar  c is  the
matrix _____ obtained by multiplying each entry of A by
_____.

9. a. For  the  product  AB of  two  matrices  A and  B to  be
defined, the number of _____ of A must be equal to the
number of _____ of B.

b. If A is an m ⫻ n matrix and B is an n ⫻ p matrix, then 

the size of AB is _____.

10. a. If the products and sums are defined for the matrices A,
B,  and  C,  then  the  associative  law  states  that  (AB)C ⫽
_____;  the  distributive  law  states  that  A(B ⫹ C)  ⫽
_____.

b. If I is an identity matrix of size n, then IA ⫽ A if A is

any matrix of size _____.

11. A matrix A is nonsingular if there exists a matrix A⫺1 such
that _____ ⫽ _____ ⫽ I. If A⫺1 does not exist, then A is
said to be _____.

6. Two matrices may be added (subtracted) if they both have
the same _____. To add or subtract two matrices, we add
or subtract their _____ entries.

12. A system of n linear equations in n variables written in the
form AX ⫽ B has a unique solution given by X ⫽ _____ if
A has an inverse.

CHAPTER 5

Review Exercises

In Exercises 1–4, perform the operations if possible.

£

1
⫺1
2

c ⫺1

3

3 ⫺3

1.

2.

3.

4.

c 1

⫺1

2
3
1

§ ⫹ £

1
0
1

0
1
2

§

2

4d ⫺ c 1

5 ⫺2d  

2

1
0
1

§

14 £

2

3d £

2
⫺1
2

1
4
2

§

2

3
2

In Exercises 5–8, find the values of the variables.

7.

£

3
⫺1
c ⫹ 1

a ⫹ 3

b
d

§ ⫽ £

3
e ⫹ 2
⫺1

6
4
2

§

8.

c x

0

3
y

1

2d £

1
3
4

1
z
2

§ ⫽ c 12

2

4

2d

In  Exercises  9–16,  compute  the  expressions  if  possible,  given
that

 A ⫽ £

1
⫺2
4

3
1
0

1
3
2

§

 B ⫽ £

1

2

3
⫺2 ⫺1 ⫺1
2

1

4

§

5.

6.

y

c 1
c 3

y

x

2

3d ⫽ c z
3d c 1

3 wd
2d ⫽ c 7
4d

x

 C ⫽ £

3 ⫺1
6
1
2
1

2
4
3

§

9. 2A ⫹ 3B

11. 213A2

10. 3A ⫺ 2B

12. 213A ⫺ 4B2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

326

CHAPTER 5 SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS AND MATRICES

13. A1B ⫺ C2
15. A1BC2

14. AB ⫹ AC

16.

1

2 1CA ⫺ CB2

In Exercises 17–24, solve the system of linear equations using the
Gauss–Jordan elimination method.
17. 2x ⫺ 3y ⫽ 5
3x ⫹ 4y ⫽ ⫺1

18. 3x ⫹ 2y ⫽ 3
2x ⫺ 4y ⫽ ⫺14

19.

x ⫺ y ⫹ 2z ⫽ 5
3x ⫹ 2y ⫹ z ⫽ 10
2x ⫺ 3y ⫺ 2z ⫽ ⫺10

20. 3x ⫺ 2y ⫹ 4z ⫽ 16
2x ⫹ y ⫺ 2z ⫽ ⫺1
x ⫹ 4y ⫺ 8z ⫽ ⫺18

21. 3x ⫺ 2y ⫹ 4z ⫽ 11
2x ⫺ 4y ⫹ 5z ⫽ 4
x ⫹ 2y ⫺ z ⫽ 10

22.

x ⫺ 2y ⫹ 3z ⫹ 4w ⫽ 17
2x ⫹ y ⫺ 2z ⫺ 3w ⫽ ⫺9
3x ⫺ y ⫹ 2z ⫺ 4w ⫽ 0
4x ⫹ 2y ⫺ 3z ⫹ w ⫽ ⫺2

23. 3x ⫺ 2y ⫹ z ⫽ 4
x ⫹ 3y ⫺ 4z ⫽ ⫺3
2x ⫺ 3y ⫹ 5z ⫽ 7
x ⫺ 8y ⫹ 9z ⫽ 10

24. 2x ⫺ 3y ⫹ z ⫽ 10
3x ⫹ 2y ⫺ 2z ⫽ ⫺2
x ⫺ 3y ⫺ 4z ⫽ ⫺7
4x ⫹ y ⫺ z ⫽ 4

In Exercises 25–32, find the inverse of the matrix (if it exists).

25.

27.

1

A ⫽ c 3
A ⫽ c 3

2

1

2d
2d

4

26.

28.

4

1

A ⫽ c 2
A ⫽ c 2

6d
1 ⫺2d

4

29.

A ⫽ £

31.

A ⫽ £

2
3
1 ⫺1
1
2

1
3
1

2
1
0⫺6

1
2
1

4
2

§

§

30.

A ⫽ £

32.

A ⫽ £

1
2
⫺1

2
1
3

2
1
0

1⫺3
2⫺4
1⫺2

4
3
2

§

§

In Exercises 33–36, compute the value of the expressions if pos-
sible, given that

⫺1

A ⫽ c 1
1A⫺1B2 ⫺1
12A ⫺ C2 ⫺1

33.

35.

2

2d

B ⫽ c 3

4

34.

36.

C ⫽ c 1

⫺1

1

2d
1ABC2 ⫺1
1A ⫹ B2 ⫺1

1

2d

In Exercises 37–40, write each system of linear equations in the
form AX ⫽ C. Find A⫺1 and use the result to solve the system.
37. 2x ⫹ 3y ⫽ ⫺8
x ⫺ 2y ⫽ 3

x ⫺ 3y ⫽ ⫺1
2x ⫹ 4y ⫽ 8

38.

41. GASOLINE SALES Gloria  Newburg  operates  three  self-
service  gasoline  stations  in  different  parts  of  town.  On  a
certain day, station A sold 600 gal of premium, 800 gal of
super, 1000 gal of regular gasoline, and 700 gal of diesel
fuel; station B sold 700 gal of premium, 600 gal of super,
1200 gal of regular gasoline, and 400 gal of diesel fuel; sta-
tion C sold 900 gal of premium, 700 gal of super, 1400 gal
of regular gasoline, and 800 gal of diesel fuel. Assume that
the price of gasoline was $3.70/gal for premium, $3.48/gal
for super, and $3.30/gal for regular and that diesel fuel sold
for $3.60/gal. Use matrix algebra to find the total revenue
at each station.

42. COMMON STOCK TRANSACTIONS Jack  Worthington  bought
10,000  shares of Stock X, 20,000 shares of Stock Y, and
30,000 shares of Stock Z at a unit price of $20, $30, and $50
per share, respectively. Six months later, the closing prices
of Stocks  X,  Y,  and  Z were  $22,  $35,  and  $51  per  share,
respectively. Jack made no other stock transactions during
the period in question. Compare the value of Jack’s stock
holdings at the time of purchase and 6 months later.

43. INVESTMENTS William’s  and  Michael’s  stock  holdings  are

given in the following table:

William
Michael

BAC
800
600

GM
1200
1400

IBM
400
600

TRW
1500
2000

The prices (in dollars per share) of the stocks of BAC, GM,
IBM, and TRW at the close of the stock market on a cer-
tain day are $50.26, $31.00, $103.07, and $38.67, respec-
tively.
a. Write  a  2  ⫻ 4  matrix  A giving  the  stock  holdings  of

William and Michael.

b. Write a 4 ⫻ 1 matrix B giving the closing prices of the

stocks of BAC, GM, IBM, and TRW.

c. Use matrix multiplication to find the total value of the
stock  holdings  of  William  and  Michael  at  the  market
close.

44. INVESTMENT PORTFOLIOS The following table gives the num-
ber  of  shares  of  certain  corporations  held  by  Olivia  and
Max in their stock portfolios at the beginning of September
and at the beginning of October:

September
Google

500
600

October
Google

600
500

IBM
800
500

IBM
900
700

Boeing
1200
2000

Boeing
1000
2100

GM
1500
800

GM
1200
900

Olivia
Max

Olivia
Max

39.

x ⫺ 2y ⫹ 4z ⫽ 13
2x ⫹ 3y ⫺ 2z ⫽ 0
x ⫹ 4y ⫺ 6z ⫽ ⫺15

40. 2x ⫺ 3y ⫹ 4z ⫽ 17
x ⫹ 2y ⫺ 4z ⫽ ⫺7
3x ⫺ y ⫹ 2z ⫽ 14

a. Write  matrices  A and  B giving  the  stock  portfolios  of
Olivia  and  Max  at  the  beginning  of  September  and  at
the beginning of October, respectively.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

b. Find a matrix C reflecting the change in the stock port-
folios of Olivia and Max between the beginning of Sep-
tember and the beginning of October.

45. MACHINE SCHEDULING Desmond Jewelry wishes to produce
three types of pendants: Type A, Type B, and Type C. To
manufacture a Type A pendant requires 2 min on Machines
I  and  II  and  3  min  on  Machine  III.  A  Type  B pendant
requires 2 min on Machine I, 3 min on Machine II, and 4
min on Machine III. A Type C pendant requires 3 min on
Machine I, 4 min on Machine II, and 3 min on Machine III.
There are 
hr available on
Machine II, and 5 hr available on Machine III. How many
pendants of each type should Desmond make to use all the
available time?

hr available on Machine I, 

3 

1
2

4 

1
2

BEFORE MOVING ON . . .

327

46. PETROLEUM PRODUCTION Wildcat Oil Company has two re-
fineries, one located in Houston and the other in Tulsa. The
Houston refinery ships 60% of its petroleum to a Chicago
distributor and 40% of its petroleum to a Los Angeles dis-
tributor. The Tulsa refinery ships 30% of its petroleum to
the Chicago distributor and 70% of its petroleum to the Los
Angeles  distributor.  Assume  that,  over  the  year,  the
Chicago distributor received 240,000 gal of petroleum and
the Los Angeles distributor received 460,000 gal of petro-
leum. Find the amount of petroleum produced at each of
Wildcat’s refineries.

CHAPTER 5

Before Moving On . . .

1. Solve the following system of linear equations, using the

4. Let

Gauss–Jordan elimination method:

2x ⫹ y ⫺ z ⫽ ⫺1
x ⫹ 3y ⫹ 2z ⫽ 2
3x ⫹ 3y ⫺ 3z ⫽ ⫺5

2. Find  the  solution(s),  if  it  exists,  of  the  system  of  linear
equations  whose  augmented  matrix  in  reduced  form  fol-
lows.

£

1
0
0

£

1
0
0

c 1

0

a.

c.

e.

0
1
0

0
1
0

0
 
0
1

0
 
3
0

†  

2
⫺3
1

§

†  

2
1
0

§

0⫺1
1

 

2

`   2
3d

b.

d.

£

1
0
0

≥

1
0
0
0

0
1
0

0
1
0
0

 

0
0
0

†  

3
0
1

§

0
0
1
0

 

0
0
0
1

∞  

0
0
0
0

¥

3. Solve  each  system  of  linear  equations  using  the  Gauss–

Jordan elimination method.
b.
a.

x ⫹ 2y ⫽ 3
3x ⫺ y ⫽ ⫺5
4x ⫹ y ⫽ ⫺2

x ⫺ 2y ⫹ 4z ⫽ 2
3x ⫹ y ⫺ 2z ⫽ 1

A ⫽ c 1 ⫺2

3

0

4

1d

B ⫽ £

1 ⫺1
3
2

2
1 ⫺1
1
0

§

C ⫽ £

2 ⫺2
1
1
4
3

§

Find (a) AB, (b) (A ⫹ CT)B, and (c) CTB ⫺ ABT.

5. Find A⫺1 if

A ⫽ £

2
1
0 ⫺1
1
1

2
3
0

§

6. Solve the system

⫹ z ⫽ 4
2x
2x ⫹ y ⫺ z ⫽ ⫺1
3x ⫹ y ⫺ z ⫽ 0

by first writing it in the matrix form AX ⫽ B and then find-
ing A⫺1.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6

LINEAR
PROGRAMMING

Aya73aya/Shutterstock.com

MANY PRACTICAL PROBLEMS involve maximizing or

minimizing a function subject to certain constraints.

For example, we may wish to maximize a profit function subject to

certain limitations on the amount of material and labor available.

Maximization or minimization problems that can be formulated in

terms of a linear objective function and constraints in the form of

linear inequalities are called linear programming problems. In this

chapter, we first look at linear programming problems involving

two variables. These problems are amenable to geometric analysis,

and the method of solution introduced here will shed much light

on the basic nature of a linear programming problem. Solving

linear programming problems involving more than two variables

requires algebraic techniques. One such technique, the simplex

method, was developed by George Dantzig in the late 1940s and

remains in wide use to this day.

How many souvenirs should Ace Novelty

make to maximize its profit? The

company produces two types of

souvenirs, each of which requires a

certain amount of time on each of two

different machines. Each machine can

be operated for only a certain number of

hours per day. In Example 1, page 338,

we show how this production problem

can be formulated as a linear

programming problem, and in 

Example 1, page 349, we solve this

linear programming problem.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

329

330

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

6.1 Graphing Systems of Linear Inequalities in Two Variables

Graphing Linear Inequalities
In Chapter 2, we saw that a linear equation in two variables x and y

ax ⫹ by ⫹ c ⫽ 0

a, b not both equal to zero

has a solution set that may be exhibited graphically as points on a straight line in the
xy-plane. We now show that there is also a simple graphical representation for linear
inequalities in two variables:

ax ⫹ by ⫹ c ⬍ 0
ax ⫹ by ⫹ c ⬎ 0

ax ⫹ by ⫹ c ⱕ 0
ax ⫹ by ⫹ c ⱖ 0

Before turning to a general procedure for graphing such inequalities, let’s con-

sider a specific example. Suppose we wish to graph

2x ⫹ 3y ⬍ 6

(1)

We first graph the equation 2x ⫹ 3y ⫽ 6, which is obtained by replacing the given
inequality “⬍” with an equality “⫽” (Figure 1).

L

y

2x + 3y = 6

5

Upper half-plane

P(x, y)

Q  x, − x + 2

2
3

−5

x

5

x

FIGURE 1
A straight line divides the xy-plane into
two half-planes.

Lower half-plane

−5

Observe  that  this  line  divides  the  xy-plane  into  two  half-planes:  an  upper  half-
plane and a lower half-plane. Let’s show that the upper half-plane is the graph of the
linear inequality

2x ⫹ 3y ⬎ 6

whereas the lower half-plane is the graph of the linear inequality

2x ⫹ 3y ⬍ 6

To see this, let’s write Inequalities (2) and (3) in the equivalent forms

and

y ⬎ ⫺2
3

 x ⫹ 2

y ⬍ ⫺2
3

 x ⫹ 2

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

6.1 GRAPHING SYSTEMS OF LINEAR INEQUALITIES IN TWO VARIABLES

331

The equation of the line itself is

y ⫽ ⫺2
3

 x ⫹ 2

(6)

Now pick any point P(x, y) lying above the line L. Let Q be the point lying on 
L and directly below P (see Figure 1). Since Q lies on L, its coordinates must satisfy
Equation (6). In other words,  Q has representation  QÓx,  ⫺ ᎏ2
ᎏ x ⫹ 2Ô. Comparing the 
y-coordinates of P and Q and recalling that P lies above Q, so that its y-coordinate
must be larger than that of Q, we have

3

y ⬎ ⫺2
3

 x ⫹ 2

But this inequality is just Inequality (4) or, equivalently, Inequality (2). Similarly, we
can  show  that  every  point  lying  below  L must  satisfy  Inequality  (5)  and  there-
fore Inequality (3).

This analysis shows that the lower half-plane provides a solution to our problem
(Figure 2). (By convention, we draw the line as a dashed line to show that the points
on L do not belong to the solution set.) Observe that the two half-planes in question
are disjoint; that is, they do not have any points in common.

y

5

2x + 3y < 6

2x + 3y = 6

−5

x

5

Alternatively, there is a simpler method for determining the half-plane that pro-
vides the solution to the problem. To determine the required half-plane, let’s pick any
point lying in one of the half-planes. For simplicity, pick the origin (0, 0), which lies
in the lower half-plane. Substituting x ⫽ 0 and y ⫽ 0 (the coordinates of this point)
into the given Inequality (1), we find

2102 ⫹ 3102 ⬍ 6

or 0 ⬍ 6, which is certainly true. This tells us that the required half-plane is the one
containing the test point—namely, the lower half-plane.

Next, let’s see what happens if we choose the point (2, 3), which lies in the upper

half-plane. Substituting x ⫽ 2 and y ⫽ 3 into the given inequality, we find

2122 ⫹ 3132 ⬍ 6

or 13 ⬍ 6, which is false. This tells us that the upper half-plane is not the required half-
plane, as expected. Note, too, that no point P(x, y) lying on the line constitutes a solu-
tion to our problem, given the strict inequality ⬍.

This discussion suggests the following procedure for graphing a linear inequality

in two variables.

FIGURE 2
The set of points lying below the dashed
line satisfies the given inequality.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

332

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

Procedure for Graphing Linear Inequalities
1. Draw the graph of the equation obtained for the given inequality by replac-
ing the inequality sign with an equal sign. Use a dashed or dotted line if the
problem involves a strict inequality, ⬍ or ⬎. Otherwise, use a solid line to
indicate that the line itself constitutes part of the solution.

2. Pick a test point (a, b) lying in one of the half-planes determined by the line
sketched in Step 1 and substitute the numbers a and b for the values of x and
y in the given inequality. For simplicity, use the origin whenever possible.

3. If the inequality is satisfied, the graph of the solution to the inequality is the
half-plane containing the test point. Otherwise, the solution is the half-plane
not containing the test point.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 1 Determine the solution set for the inequality 2x ⫹ 3y ⱖ 6.

Solution Replacing the inequality ⱖ with an equality ⫽, we obtain the equation 
2x ⫹ 3y ⫽ 6, whose graph is the straight line shown in Figure 3. 

y

5

2x + 3y ⱖ 6

2x + 3y = 6

– 5

x

5

FIGURE 3
The set of points lying on the line and in
the upper half-plane satisfies the given
inequality.

Instead of a dashed line as before, we use a solid line to show that all points on the
line are also solutions to the inequality. Picking the origin as our test point, we find
2(0) ⫹ 3(0) ⱖ 6, or 0 ⱖ 6, which is false. So we conclude that the solution set is
made up of the half-plane that does not contain the origin, including (in this case)
the line given by 2x ⫹ 3y ⫽ 6.

y

EXAMPLE 2 Graph x ⱕ ⫺1.

x ≤ –1

Solution The graph of x ⫽ ⫺1 is the vertical line shown in Figure 4. Picking the
origin (0, 0) as a test point, we find 0 ⱕ ⫺1, which is false. Therefore, the required
solution is the left half-plane, which does not contain the origin.

x

EXAMPLE 3 Graph x ⫺ 2y ⬎ 0.

x = –1

FIGURE 4
The set of points lying on the line 
x ⫽ ⫺1 and in the left half-plane satisfies
the given inequality.

Solution We first graph the equation x ⫺ 2y ⫽ 0, or 
origin lies on the line, we may not use it as a test point. (Why?) Let’s pick (1, 2) 
as a test point. Substituting x ⫽ 1 and y ⫽ 2 into the given inequality, we find 
1 ⫺ 2(2) ⬎ 0, or ⫺3 ⬎ 0, which is false. Therefore, the required solution is the half-
plane that does not contain the test point—namely, the lower half-plane.

(Figure 5). Since the

y ⫽ 1
2 x

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

6.1 GRAPHING SYSTEMS OF LINEAR INEQUALITIES IN TWO VARIABLES

333

y

5

x – 2y = 0

–5

x

5

–5

FIGURE 5
The set of points in the lower half-plane
satisfies x ⫺ 2y ⬎ 0.

Exploring with

y ⫽ 2 ⫺ 2
3 x

TECHNOLOGY
A graphing utility can be used to plot the graph of a linear inequality. For 
example, to plot the solution set for Example 1, first rewrite the equation 
2x ⫹ 3y ⫽ 6 in the form 
the calculator, and move the cursor to the left of Y1. Then press 
ENTER
repeatedly, and select the icon that indicates the shading option desired 
(see Figure a). The required graph follows (see Figure b).

. Next, enter this expression for Y1 in 

Plot1  Plot2  Plot3
 Y1=2–(2/3)X
\Y2=
\Y3=
\Y4=
\Y5=
\Y6=
\Y7=

_5

7

_3

5

FIGURE a
TI 83/84 screen

FIGURE b
Graph of the inequality 2x ⫹ 3y ⱖ 6

Graphing Systems of Linear Inequalities
By the solution set of a system of linear inequalities in the two variables x and y, we
mean the set of all points (x, y) satisfying each inequality of the system. The graphi-
cal solution of such a system may be obtained by graphing the solution set for each
inequality independently and then determining the region in common with each solu-
tion set.

EXAMPLE 4 Determine the solution set for the system

4x ⫹ 3y ⱖ 12
x ⫺ y ⱕ 0

Solution Proceeding as in the previous examples, you should have no difficulty
locating the half-planes determined by each of the linear inequalities that make up
the system. These half-planes are shown in Figure 6. The intersection of the two
half-planes is the shaded region. A point in this region is an element of the solution
set for the given system. The point P, the intersection of the two straight lines deter-
mined by the equations, is found by solving the simultaneous equations

4x ⫹ 3y ⫽ 12
x ⫺ y ⫽ 0

y

2

4x + 3y = 12

– 3

x – y = 0

12 12
77,P

x

3

FIGURE 6
The set of points in the shaded area satis-
fies the system

4x ⫹ 3y ⱖ 12
x ⫺ y ⱕ 0

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

334

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 5 Sketch the solution set for the system

 x ⱖ 0
 y ⱖ 0
x ⫹ y ⫺ 6 ⱕ 0
2x ⫹ y ⫺ 8 ⱕ 0

Solution The first inequality in the system defines the right half-plane—all 
points to the right of the y-axis plus all points lying on the y-axis itself. The second
inequality in the system defines the upper half-plane, including the x-axis. The 
half-planes defined by the third and fourth inequalities are indicated by arrows in
Figure 7. Thus, the required region—the intersection of the four half-planes defined
by the four inequalities in the given system of linear inequalities—is the shaded
region. The point P is found by solving the simultaneous equations x ⫹ y ⫺ 6 ⫽ 0
and 2x ⫹ y ⫺ 8 ⫽ 0.

y

10

x + y – 6 = 0

2x + y – 8 = 0

5

P(2, 4)

FIGURE 7
The set of points in the shaded region,
including the x- and y-axes, satisfies the
given inequalities.

–10

– 5

5

x

10

The solution set found in Example 5 is an example of a bounded set. Observe that
the set can be enclosed by a circle. For example, if you draw a circle of radius 10 with
center at the origin, you will see that the set lies entirely inside the circle. On the other
hand, the solution set of Example 4 cannot be enclosed by a circle and is said to be
unbounded.

Bounded and Unbounded Solution Sets
The  solution  set  of  a  system  of  linear  inequalities  is  bounded if  it  can  be
enclosed by a circle. Otherwise, it is unbounded.

EXAMPLE 6 Determine the graphical solution set for the following system of linear
inequalities:

2 x ⫹ y ⱖ 50
x ⫹ 2y ⱖ 40
 x ⱖ 0
 y ⱖ 0

Solution The required solution set is the unbounded region shown in Figure 8.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

6.1 GRAPHING SYSTEMS OF LINEAR INEQUALITIES IN TWO VARIABLES

335

2x + y = 50

x + 2y = 40

y

50

10

P(20, 10)

x

FIGURE 8
The solution set is an unbounded region.

– 50

– 10

10

50

6.1 Self-Check Exercises

1. Determine  graphically  the  solution  set  for  the  following

2. Determine  graphically  the  solution  set  for  the  following

system of inequalities:

system of inequalities:

x ⫹ 2y ⱕ 10
5x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 30
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

5x ⫹ 3y ⱖ 30
x ⫺ 3y ⱕ 0
 x ⱖ 2

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 6.1 can be found on 
page 337.

6.1 Concept Questions

1. a. What is the difference, geometrically, between the
solution set of ax ⫹ by ⬍ c and the solution set of
ax ⫹ by ⱕ c?

b. Describe the set that is obtained by intersecting the

solution set of ax ⫹ by ⱕ c with the solution set
of ax ⫹ by ⱖ c.

6.1 Exercises

In Exercises 1–10, find the graphical solution of each inequality.
1. 4x ⫺ 8 ⬍ 0

2. 3y ⫹ 2 ⬎ 0

3. x ⫺ y ⱕ 0

5. x ⱕ ⫺3

7. 2x ⫹ y ⱕ 4

4. 3x ⫹ 4y ⱕ ⫺2

6. y ⱖ ⫺1

8. ⫺3x ⫹ 6y ⱖ 12

9. 4x ⫺ 3y ⱕ ⫺24

10. 5x ⫺ 3y ⱖ 15

2. a. What is the solution set of a system of linear inequal-

ities?

b. How  do  you  find  the  solution  of  a  system  of  linear

inequalities graphically?

In  Exercises  11–18,  write  a  system  of  linear  inequalities  that
describes the shaded region.
11.

y

y = 4

y = 2

x

x = 1

x = 5

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

336

12.

13.

14.

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

y

x + y = 3

3

y = x
y = 4

x

x

3

2x – y = 2

7

x = 4

5x + 7y = 35

y

5

y

10

8

x

x + 2y = 8

5x + 2y = 20

15.

y

x – y = –10

20

10

y

18

16.

x

x + 3y = 30

10 20

30

7x + 4y = 140

2

2

x + y = 2

x

20
3x + 5y = 60

9x + 5y = 90

17.

y

x = 2

5

18.

y

y = 7

y = 3

x + y = 7

x

5

4x + y = 16

 

 

4

4

x
x + 5y  = 20

5x + 4y  = 40

In  Exercises  19–36,  determine  graphically  the  solution  set  for
each system of inequalities and indicate whether the solution set
is bounded or unbounded.
19.

20.

 3x ⫺ 2y ⬎ ⫺13
 ⫺x ⫹ 2y ⬎ 5

 2x ⫹ 4y ⬎ 16
 ⫺x ⫹ 3y ⱖ 7

21.

x ⫺ y ⱕ 0
2x ⫹ 3y ⱖ 10

23.

x ⫹ 2y ⱖ 3
2x ⫹ 4y ⱕ ⫺2

25.

27.

29.

31.

33.

 x ⫹ y ⱕ 6
 0 ⱕ x ⱕ 3
 y ⱖ 0

  3x ⫺ 6y ⱕ 12
 ⫺x ⫹ 2y ⱕ   4
 x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

3x ⫺ 7y ⱖ ⫺24
x ⫹ 3y ⱖ 8
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

 x ⫹ 2y ⱖ 3
 5x ⫺ 4y ⱕ 16
 0 ⱕ y ⱕ 2
 x ⱖ   0

6x ⫹ 5y ⱕ 30
3x ⫹ y ⱖ 6
x ⫹ y ⱖ 4
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

22.

x ⫹ y ⱖ ⫺2
3x ⫺ y ⱕ 6

24.

2x ⫺ y ⱖ 4
4x ⫺ 2y ⬍ ⫺2

26.

28.

30.

32.

34.

4x ⫺ 3y ⱕ 12
5x ⫹ 2y ⱕ 10
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

 x ⫹ y ⱖ 20
 x ⫹ 2y ⱖ 40
 x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

 3x ⫹ 4y ⱖ  12
 2x ⫺ y ⱖ  ⫺2
  0 ⱕ y ⱕ  3
 x ⱖ  0

 x ⫹ y ⱕ 4
 2x ⫹ y ⱕ 6
 2x ⫺ y ⱖ ⫺1
 x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

 6x ⫹ 7y ⱕ 84
 12x ⫺ 11y ⱕ 18
 6x ⫺ 7y ⱕ 28
 x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

6.1 GRAPHING SYSTEMS OF LINEAR INEQUALITIES IN TWO VARIABLES

337

39. The solution set of a system of linear inequalities in two

variables is bounded if it can be enclosed by a rectangle.

40. The solution set of the system

ax ⫹ by ⱕ e
cx ⫹ dy ⱕ f
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

where  a,  b,  c,  d,  e,  and  f are  positive  real  numbers,  is  a
bounded set.

35.

 x ⫺ y ⱖ  ⫺6
 x ⫺ 2y ⱕ  ⫺2
 x ⫹ 2y ⱖ  6
 x ⫺ 2y ⱖ  ⫺14
 x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

36.

 x ⫺ 3y ⱖ ⫺18
 3x ⫺ 2y ⱖ 2
 x ⫺ 3y ⱕ ⫺4
 3x ⫺ 2y ⱕ 16
 x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

In Exercises 37–40, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
37. The solution set of a linear inequality involving two vari-

ables is either a half-plane or a straight line.

38. The solution set of the inequality ax ⫹ by ⫹ c ⱕ 0 is either

a left half-plane or a lower half-plane.

6.1 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. The required solution set is shown in the following figure:

2. The required solution set is shown in the following figure:

y

10

x + 2y = 10

5x + 3y = 30

P冢30, 20冣
77

x

10

5x + 3y = 30

y

x = 2

10

20
2,
3Q

x − 3y = 0

P 5, 5
3
10 

x

20

The point P is found by solving the system of equations

To find the coordinates of P, we solve the system

x ⫹ 2y ⫽ 10
5x ⫹ 3y ⫽ 30

5x ⫹ 3y ⫽ 30
x ⫺ 3y ⫽ 0

Solving the first equation for x in terms of y gives

x ⫽ 10 ⫺ 2y

Substituting this value of x into the second equation of the
system gives

5110 ⫺ 2y2 ⫹ 3y ⫽ 30
 50 ⫺ 10y ⫹ 3y ⫽ 30
 ⫺7y ⫽ ⫺20

y ⫽ 20
7 .

so 
for x found earlier, we obtain

Substituting this value of y into the expression

Solving the second equation for x in terms of y and substi-
tuting this value of x in the first equation gives

513y2 ⫹ 3y ⫽ 30

y ⫽ 5
3.

or 
Substituting this value of y into the second equa-
tion gives x ⫽ 5. Next, the coordinates of Q are found by
solving the system

5x ⫹ 3y ⫽ 30
x ⫽ 2

yielding x ⫽ 2 and y ⫽ 20
3 .

x ⫽ 10 ⫺ 2a 20

7 b ⫽ 30
7
giving the point of intersection as 130
7 2.
7 , 20

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

338

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

6.2

Linear Programming Problems

In many business and economic problems, we are asked to optimize (maximize or min-
imize) a function subject to a system of equalities or inequalities. The function to be
optimized is called the objective function. Profit functions and cost functions are
examples of objective functions. The system of equalities or inequalities to which the
objective function is subjected reflects the constraints (for example, limitations on
resources such as materials and labor) imposed on the solution(s) to the problem. Prob-
lems of this nature are called mathematical programming problems. In particular,
problems in which both the objective function and the constraints are expressed as lin-
ear equations or inequalities are called linear programming problems.

Linear Programming Problem
A linear programming problem consists of a linear objective function to be
maximized  or  minimized  subject  to  certain  constraints  in  the  form  of  linear
equations or inequalities.

A Maximization Problem
As an example of a linear programming problem in which the objective function is to
be maximized, let’s consider the following simplified version of a production problem
involving two variables.

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 1 A Production Problem Ace Novelty wishes to pro-
duce two types of souvenirs: Type A and Type B. Each Type A souvenir
will result in a profit of $1, and each Type B souvenir will result in a profit of
$1.20. To manufacture a Type A souvenir requires 2 minutes on Machine I and 
1 minute on Machine II. A Type B souvenir requires 1 minute on Machine I and 
3 minutes on Machine II. There are 3 hours available on Machine I and 5 hours
available on Machine II. How many souvenirs of each type should Ace make to
maximize its profit?

Solution As a first step toward the mathematical formulation of this problem,
we tabulate the given information (see Table 1).

TABLE 1

Machine I
Machine II
Profit/Unit

Type A

Type B

Time Available

2 min
1 min

$1

1 min
3 min
$1.20

180 min
300 min

Let x be the number of Type A souvenirs and y the number of Type B sou-

venirs to be made. Then, the total profit P (in dollars) is given by

P ⫽ x ⫹ 1.2y
which is the objective function to be maximized.

The total amount of time that Machine I is used is given by 2x ⫹ y minutes

and must not exceed 180 minutes. Thus, we have the inequality

2x ⫹ y ⱕ 180

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.2 LINEAR PROGRAMMING PROBLEMS

339

Similarly, the total amount of time that Machine II is used is x ⫹ 3y minutes and
cannot exceed 300 minutes, so we are led to the inequality

x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 300

Finally, neither x nor y can be negative, so
x ⱖ 0
y ⱖ 0

To summarize, the problem at hand is one of maximizing the objective func-

tion P ⫽ x ⫹ 1.2y subject to the system of inequalities

2 x ⫹ y ⱕ 180
x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 300

 x ⱖ 0
 y ⱖ 0

The solution to this problem will be completed in Example 1, Section 6.3.

Minimization Problems
In  the  following  linear  programming  problem,  the  objective  function  is  to  be
minimized.

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 2 A Nutrition Problem A nutritionist advises an 
individual who is suffering from iron and vitamin B deficiency to take 
at least 2400 milligrams (mg) of iron, 2100 mg of vitamin B1 (thiamine), and
1500 mg of vitamin B2 (riboflavin) over a period of time. Two vitamin 
pills are suitable, Brand A and Brand B. Each Brand A pill costs 6 cents and
contains 40 mg of iron, 10 mg of vitamin B1, and 5 mg of vitamin B2. Each
Brand B pill costs 8 cents and contains 10 mg of iron and 15 mg each of vita-
mins B1 and B2 (Table 2). What combination of pills should the individual 
purchase to meet the minimum iron and vitamin requirements at the lowest
cost?

TABLE 2

Iron
Vitamin B1
Vitamin B2
Cost/Pill

Brand A

Brand B

Minimum Requirement

40 mg
10 mg
5 mg
6¢

10 mg
15 mg
15 mg

8¢

2400 mg
2100 mg
1500 mg

Solution Let x be the number of Brand A pills to be purchased, and let y be the
number of Brand B pills. The cost C (in cents) is given by

C ⫽ 6x ⫹ 8y

and is the objective function to be minimized.

The amount of iron contained in x Brand A pills and y Brand B pills is given
by 40x ⫹ 10y mg, and this must be greater than or equal to 2400 mg. This trans-
lates into the inequality

40x ⫹ 10y ⱖ 2400

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

340

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

Similar considerations involving the minimum requirements of vitamins B1 and
B2 lead to the inequalities

10x ⫹ 15y ⱖ 2100
5x ⫹ 15y ⱖ 1500

respectively. Thus, the problem here is to minimize C ⫽ 6x ⫹ 8y subject to

40x ⫹ 10y ⱖ 2400
10x ⫹ 15y ⱖ 2100
5x ⫹ 15y ⱖ 1500
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

The solution to this problem will be completed in Example 2, Section 6.3.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 3 A Transportation Problem Curtis-Roe Aviation 
Industries has two plants, I and II, that produce the Zephyr jet engines 
used in their light commercial airplanes. There are 100 units of the engines in
Plant I and 110 units in Plant II. The engines are shipped to two of Curtis-Roe’s
main assembly plants, A and B. The shipping costs (in dollars) per engine from
Plants I and II to the Main Assembly Plants A and B are as follows:

To Assembly Plant

From

Plant I
Plant II

A

100
120

B

60
70

In a certain month, Assembly Plant A needs 80 engines, whereas Assembly Plant
B needs 70 engines. Find how many engines should be shipped from each plant
to each main assembly plant if shipping costs are to be kept to a minimum.

Solution Let x denote the number of engines shipped from Plant I to Assembly
Plant A, and let y denote the number of engines shipped from Plant I to Assembly
Plant B. Since the requirements of Assembly Plants A and B are 80 and 70
engines, respectively, the number of engines shipped from Plant II to Assembly
Plants A and B are (80 ⫺ x) and (70 ⫺ y), respectively. These numbers may be
displayed in a schematic. With the aid of the accompanying schematic (Figure 9)
and the shipping cost schedule, we find that the total shipping cost incurred by
Curtis-Roe is given by

C ⫽ 100x ⫹ 60y ⫹ 120180 ⫺ x2 ⫹ 70170 ⫺ y2
 ⫽ 14,500 ⫺ 20x ⫺ 10y

Next, the production constraints on Plants I and II lead to the inequalities

 x ⫹ y ⱕ 100
180 ⫺ x2 ⫹ 170 ⫺ y2 ⱕ 110

The last inequality simplifies to

x ⫹ y ⱖ 40

Also, the requirements of the two main assembly plants lead to the inequalities

x ⱖ 0

y ⱖ 0

80 ⫺ x ⱖ 0

70 ⫺ y ⱖ 0

The last two may be written as x ⱕ 80 and y ⱕ 70.

Plant I

x

y

A

B

(80

–

x)

y )

–

0

( 7

Plant II

FIGURE 9

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

TABLE 3

Plant

I
II

A

20
12

Warehouse

B

8
22

C

10
18

6.2 LINEAR PROGRAMMING PROBLEMS

341

Summarizing, we have the following linear programming problem: Minimize

the objective (cost) function C ⫽ 14,500 ⫺ 20x ⫺ 10y subject to the constraints

x ⫹ y ⱖ 40
x ⫹ y ⱕ 100
 x ⱕ 80
 y ⱕ 70

where x ⱖ 0 and y ⱖ 0.

You will be asked to complete the solution to this problem in Exercise 47,

Section 6.3.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 4 A Warehouse Problem Acrosonic manufactures its
Brentwood loudspeaker systems in two separate locations, Plant I and

Plant II. The output at Plant I is at most 400 per month, whereas the output at
Plant II is at most 600 per month. These loudspeaker systems are shipped to three
warehouses that serve as distribution centers for the company. For the ware-
houses to meet their orders, the minimum monthly requirements of Warehouses
A, B, and C are 200, 300, and 400 systems, respectively. Shipping costs from
Plant I to Warehouses A, B, and C are $20, $8, and $10 per loudspeaker system,
respectively, and shipping costs from Plant II to each of these warehouses are
$12, $22, and $18, respectively. What should the shipping schedule be if
Acrosonic wishes to meet the requirements of the distribution centers and at the
same time keep its shipping costs to a minimum?

Solution The respective shipping costs (in dollars) per loudspeaker system may
be tabulated as in Table 3. Letting x1 denote the number of loudspeaker systems
shipped from Plant I to Warehouse A, x2 the number shipped from Plant I to
Warehouse B, and so on leads to Table 4.

TABLE 4

Plant

I
II
Min. Req.

A

x1
x4
200

Warehouse

B

x2
x5
300

C

x3
x6
400

Max. Prod.

400
600

From Tables 3 and 4, we see that the cost of shipping x1 loudspeaker systems
from Plant I to Warehouse A is $20x1, the cost of shipping x2 loudspeaker sys-
tems from Plant I to Warehouse B is $8x2, and so on. Thus, the total monthly
shipping cost (in dollars) incurred by Acrosonic is given by

C ⫽ 20x1 ⫹ 8x2 ⫹ 10x3 ⫹ 12x4 ⫹ 22x5 ⫹ 18x6

Next, the production constraints on Plants I and II lead to the inequalities

x1 ⫹ x2 ⫹ x3 ⱕ 400
x4 ⫹ x5 ⫹ x6 ⱕ 600

(see Table 4). Also, the minimum requirements of each of the three warehouses
lead to the three inequalities

x1 ⫹ x4 ⱖ 200
x2 ⫹ x5 ⱖ 300
x3 ⫹ x6 ⱖ 400

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

342

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

Summarizing, we have the following linear programming problem:
Minimize C ⫽ 20x1 ⫹ 8x2 ⫹ 10x3 ⫹ 12x4 ⫹ 22x5 ⫹ 18x6
subject to

 x1 ⫹ x2 ⫹ x3 ⱕ 400
 x4 ⫹ x5 ⫹ x6 ⱕ 600
 x1 ⫹ x4 ⱖ 200
 x2 ⫹ x5 ⱖ 300
 x3 ⫹ x6 ⱖ 400

 x1 ⱖ 0, x2 ⱖ 0, . . . , x6 ⱖ 0

The solution to this problem will be completed in Example 5, Section 6.5.

6.2 Self-Check Exercise

Gino  Balduzzi,  proprietor  of  Luigi’s  Pizza  Palace,  allocates
$9000 a month for advertising in two newspapers, the City Tri-
bune and the Daily News. The City Tribune charges $300 for a
certain  advertisement,  whereas  the  Daily  News charges  $100
for the same ad. Gino has stipulated that the ad is to appear in
at least 15 but no more than 30 editions of the Daily News per
month. The City Tribune has a daily circulation of 50,000, and
the Daily News has a circulation of 20,000. Under these condi-

tions,  determine  how  many  ads  Gino  should  place  in  each
newspaper  to  reach  the  largest  number  of  readers.  Formulate
but do not solve the problem. (The solution to this problem can
be  found  in  Exercise  3  of  Solutions  to  Self-Check  Exercises
6.3.)

The solution to Self-Check Exercise 6.2 can be found on 
page 346.

6.2 Concept Questions

1. What is a linear programming problem?

2. Suppose you are asked to formulate a linear programming
problem in two variables x and y. How would you express
the fact that x and y are nonnegative? Why are these con-
ditions often required in practical problems?

6.2 Exercises

Formulate but do not solve each of the following exercises as a
linear programming problem. You will be asked to solve these
problems later.
1. MANUFACTURING—PRODUCTION SCHEDULING A company man-
ufactures two products, A and B, on two machines, I and II.
It  has  been  determined  that  the  company  will  realize  a
profit of $3 on each unit of Product A and a profit of $4 on
each unit of Product B. To manufacture a unit of Product A
requires 6 min on Machine I and 5 min on Machine II. To
manufacture a unit of Product B requires 9 min on Machine
I and 4 min on Machine II. There are 5 hr of machine time
available on Machine I and 3 hr of machine time available
on Machine II in each work shift. How many units of each
product should be produced in each shift to maximize the
company’s profit?

3. What is the difference between a maximization linear pro-
gramming  problem  and  a  minimization  linear  program-
ming problem?

2. MANUFACTURING—PRODUCTION SCHEDULING National  Busi-
ness Machines manufactures two models of fax machines:
A  and  B.  Each  model  A  costs  $100  to  make,  and  each
model B costs $150. The profits are $30 for each model A
and $40 for each model B fax machine. If the total number
of  fax  machines  demanded  per  month  does  not  exceed
2500  and  the  company  has  earmarked  no  more  than
$600,000/month for manufacturing costs, how many units
of each model should National make each month to maxi-
mize its monthly profit?

3. MANUFACTURING—PRODUCTION SCHEDULING Kane  Manufac-
turing has a division that produces two models of fireplace
grates,  model  A  and  model  B.  To  produce  each  model  A
grate requires 3 lb of cast iron and 6 min of labor. To pro-

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

duce each model B grate requires 4 lb of cast iron and 3 min
of labor. The profit for each model A grate is $2.00, and the
profit for each model B grate is $1.50. If 1000 lb of cast iron
and 20 hr of labor are available for the production of grates
per day, how many grates of each model should the division
produce per day to maximize Kane’s profits?

4. MANUFACTURING—PRODUCTION SCHEDULING Refer  to  Exer-
cise 3. Because of a backlog of orders on model A grates,
the  manager  of  Kane  Manufacturing  has  decided  to  pro-
duce at least 150 of these grates a day. Operating under this
additional  constraint,  how  many  grates  of  each  model
should Kane produce to maximize profit?

5. MANUFACTURING—PRODUCTION SCHEDULING A  division  of
the  Winston  Furniture  Company  manufactures  dining
tables  and  chairs.  Each  table  requires  40  board  feet  of
wood and 3 labor-hours. Each chair requires 16 board feet
of wood and 4 labor-hours. The profit for each table is $45,
and the profit for each chair is $20. In a certain week, the
company has 3200 board feet of wood available and 520
labor-hours. How many tables and chairs should Winston
manufacture to maximize its profits? 

6. MANUFACTURING—PRODUCTION SCHEDULING Refer  to  Exer-
cise 5. If the profit for each table is $50 and the profit for
each chair is $18, how many tables and chairs should Win-
ston manufacture to maximize its profits?

7. FINANCE—ALLOCATION OF FUNDS Madison  Finance  has  a
total of $20 million earmarked for homeowner loans and
auto loans. On the average, homeowner loans have a 10%
annual  rate  of  return,  whereas  auto  loans  yield  a  12%
annual rate of return. Management has also stipulated that
the  total  amount  of  homeowner  loans  should  be  greater
than  or  equal  to  4  times  the  total  amount  of  automobile
loans.  Determine  the  total  amount  of  loans  of  each  type
Madison  should  extend  to  each  category  to  maximize  its
returns.

8. INVESTMENTS—ASSET ALLOCATION A  financier  plans 

to
invest  up  to  $500,000  in  two  projects.  Project  A yields  a
return of 10% on the investment whereas Project B yields
a return of 15% on the investment. Because the investment
in Project B is riskier than the investment in Project A, the
financier  has decided  that  the  investment  in  Project  B
should not exceed 40% of the total investment. How much
should she invest in each project to maximize the return on
her investment?

9. MANUFACTURING—PRODUCTION SCHEDULING Acoustical Com-
pany manufactures a CD storage cabinet that can be bought
fully  assembled  or  as  a  kit.  Each  cabinet  is  processed  in 
the fabrication department and the assembly department.
If  the  fabrication  department  manufactures  only  fully
assembled cabinets, it can produce 200 units/day; and if it
manufactures only kits, it can produce 200 units/day. If
the assembly department produces only fully assembled
cabinets, it can produce 100 units/day; but if it produces
only kits, then it can produce 300 units/day. Each fully
assembled  cabinet  contributes  $50  to  the  profits  of  the

6.2 LINEAR PROGRAMMING PROBLEMS

343

company, whereas each kit contributes $40 to its profits.
How  many  fully  assembled  units  and  how  many  kits
should  the  company  produce  per  day  to  maximize  its
profits?

10. AGRICULTURE—CROP PLANNING A farmer plans to plant two
crops, A and B. The cost of cultivating Crop A is $40/acre,
whereas  the  cost  of  cultivating  Crop  B is  $60/acre.  The
farmer has a maximum of $7400 available for land culti-
vation. Each acre of Crop A requires 20 labor-hours, and
each  acre  of  Crop  B requires  25  labor-hours.  The  farmer
has  a  maximum  of  3300  labor-hours  available.  If  she
expects  to  make  a  profit  of  $150/acre  on  Crop  A,  and
$200/acre on Crop B, how many acres of each crop should
she plant to maximize her profit?

11. MINING—PRODUCTION Perth  Mining  Company  operates
two  mines  for  the  purpose  of  extracting  gold  and  silver.
The  Saddle  Mine  costs  $14,000/day  to  operate,  and  it
yields 50 oz of gold and 3000 oz of silver each day. The
Horseshoe Mine costs $16,000/day to operate, and it yields
75  oz  of  gold  and  1000  oz  of  silver  each  day.  Company
management has set a target of at least 650 oz of gold and
18,000 oz of silver. How many days should each mine be
operated so that the target can be met at a minimum cost?
12. TRANSPORTATION Deluxe  River  Cruises  operates  a  fleet  of
river vessels. The fleet has two types of vessels: A type A
vessel  has  60  deluxe  cabins  and  160  standard  cabins,
whereas a type B vessel has 80 deluxe cabins and 120 stan-
dard  cabins.  Under  a  charter  agreement  with  Odyssey
Travel Agency, Deluxe River Cruises is to provide Odyssey
with a minimum of 360 deluxe and 680 standard cabins for
their  15-day  cruise  in  May.  It  costs  $44,000  to  operate  a
type A vessel and $54,000 to operate a type B vessel for that
period.  How  many  of  each  type  vessel  should  be  used  to
keep the operating costs to a minimum?

13. WATER SUPPLY The water-supply manager for a Midwest-
ern  city  needs  to  supply  the  city  with  at  least  10  million
gallons  of  potable  (drinkable)  water  per  day.  The  supply
may be drawn from the local reservoir or from a pipeline
to an adjacent town.  The local reservoir has a maximum
daily yield of 5 million gallons of potable water, and the
pipeline has a maximum daily yield of 10 million gallons.
By contract, the pipeline is required to supply a minimum
of 6 million gallons/day. If the cost for 1 million gallons of
reservoir water is $300 and that for pipeline water is $500,
how much water should the manager get from each source
to minimize daily water costs for the city? 

14. MANUFACTURING—PRODUCTION SCHEDULING Ace  Novelty
manufactures  Giant  Pandas  and  Saint  Bernards.  Each
Panda  requires  1.5  yd2 of  plush,  30  ft3 of  stuffing,  and 
5  pieces  of  trim;  each  Saint  Bernard  requires  2  yd2 of
plush, 35 ft3 of stuffing, and 8 pieces of trim. The profit 
for each Panda is $10 and the profit for each Saint Bernard
is  $15.  If  3600  yd2 of  plush,  66,000  ft3 of  stuffing  and
13,600 pieces of trim are available, how many of each of
the  stuffed  animals  should  the  company  manufacture  to
maximize profit?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

344

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

15. NUTRITION—DIET PLANNING A  nutritionist  at  the  Medical
Center has been asked to prepare a special diet for certain
patients. She has decided that the meals should contain a
minimum of 400 mg of calcium, 10 mg of iron, and 40 mg
of vitamin C. She has further decided that the meals are to
be prepared from Foods A and B. Each ounce of Food A
contains 30 mg of calcium, 1 mg of iron, 2 mg of vitamin
C, and 2 mg of cholesterol. Each ounce of Food B contains
25 mg of calcium, 0.5 mg of iron, 5 mg of vitamin C, and
5 mg of cholesterol. Find how many ounces of each type of
food should be used in a meal so that the cholesterol con-
tent  is  minimized  and  the  minimum  requirements  of  cal-
cium, iron, and vitamin C are met.

16. SOCIAL PROGRAMS PLANNING AntiFam,  a  hunger-relief  or-
ganization,  has  earmarked  between  $2  million  and  $2.5
million (inclusive) for aid to two African countries, Coun-
try A and Country B. Country A is to receive between $1
million and $1.5 million (inclusive), and Country  B is to
receive  at  least  $0.75  million.  It  has  been  estimated  that
each dollar spent in Country A will yield an effective return
of $0.60, whereas a dollar spent in Country B will yield an
effective return of $0.80. How should the aid be allocated
if the money is to be utilized most effectively according to
these criteria?
Hint: If x and y denote the amount of money to be given to Coun-
try A and Country B, respectively, then the objective function to
be maximized is P ⫽ 0.6x ⫹ 0.8y.

17. ADVERTISING Everest Deluxe World Travel has decided to
advertise in the Sunday editions of two major newspapers
in town. These advertisements are directed at three groups
of potential customers. Each advertisement in Newspaper I
is seen by 70,000 Group A customers, 40,000 Group B cus-
tomers,  and  20,000  Group  C customers.  Each  advertise-
ment in Newspaper II is seen by 10,000 Group A, 20,000
Group B, and 40,000 Group C customers. Each advertise-
ment in Newspaper I costs $1000, and each advertisement
in Newspaper II costs $800. Everest would like their adver-
tisements  to  be  read  by  at  least  2  million  people  from
Group A, 1.4 million people from Group B, and 1 million
people  from  Group  C.  How  many  advertisements  should
Everest place in each newspaper to achieve its advertise-
ment goals at a minimum cost?

18. MANUFACTURING—SHIPPING COSTS TMA  manufactures 
37-in.  high-definition  LCD  televisions  in  two  separate
locations: Location I and Location II. The output at Loca-
tion I is at most 6000 televisions/month, whereas the out-
put at Location II is at most 5000 televisions/month. TMA
is the main supplier of televisions to Pulsar Corporation, its
holding  company,  which  has  priority in having all its
requirements met. In a certain month, Pulsar placed orders
for 3000 and 4000 televisions to be shipped to two of its
factories  located  in  City  A and  City  B,  respectively.  The
shipping  costs  (in  dollars)  per  television  from  the  two
TMA plants to the two Pulsar factories are as follows:

From TMA
Location I
Location II

To Pulsar Factories

City A

City B

$6
$8

$4
$10

Find  a  shipping  schedule  that  meets  the  requirements  of
both companies while keeping costs to a minimum.

19. INVESTMENTS—ASSET ALLOCATION A  financier  plans 

to
invest up to $2 million in three projects. She estimates that
Project  A will  yield  a  return  of  10%  on  her  investment, 
Project B will yield a return of 15% on her investment, and
Project  C will  yield  a  return  of  20%  on  her  investment.
Because of the risks associated with the investments, she
decided to put not more than 20% of her total investment
in  Project  C.  She  also  decided  that  her  investments  in 
Projects B and C should not exceed 60% of her total invest-
ment. Finally, she decided that her investment in Project A
should be at least 60% of her investments in Projects B and
C. How much should the financier invest in each project if
she  wishes  to  maximize  the  total  returns  on  her  invest-
ments?

20. INVESTMENTS—ASSET ALLOCATION Ashley has earmarked at
most  $250,000  for  investment  in  three  mutual  funds:  a
money  market  fund,  an  international  equity  fund,  and 
a growth-and-income fund. The money market fund has a
rate of return of 6%/year, the international equity fund has
a rate of return of 10%/year, and the growth-and-income
fund has a rate of return of 15%/year. Ashley has stipulated
that no more than 25% of her total portfolio should be in
the growth-and-income fund and that no more than 50% of
her  total  portfolio  should  be  in  the  international  equity
fund.  To  maximize  the  return  on  her  investment,  how
much should Ashley invest in each type of fund?

21. MANUFACTURING—PRODUCTION SCHEDULING A company man-
ufactures Products A, B, and C. Each product is processed
in  three  departments:  I,  II,  and  III.  The  total  available
labor-hours per week for Departments I, II, and III are 900,
1080,  and  840,  respectively.  The  time  requirements  (in
hours per unit) and profit per unit for each product are as
follows:

Product

A
2
3
2
$18

Product

B
1
1
2
$12

Product

C
2
2
1
$15

Dept. I
Dept. II
Dept. III
Profit

How many units of each product should the company pro-
duce to maximize its profit?

22. ADVERTISING As part of a campaign to promote its annual
clearance sale, the Excelsior Company decided to buy tele-
vision  advertising  time  on  Station  KAOS.  Excelsior’s
advertising  budget  is  $102,000.  Morning  time  costs
$3000/minute,  afternoon  time  costs  $1000/minute,  and
evening  (prime)  time  costs  $12,000/minute.  Because  of
previous  commitments,  KAOS  cannot  offer  Excelsior
more  than  6  min  of  prime  time  or  more  than  a  total  of 
25 min of advertising time over the 2 weeks in which the
commercials are to be run. KAOS estimates that morning
commercials are seen by 200,000 people, afternoon com-
mercials  are  seen  by  100,000  people,  and  evening  com-

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

mercials are seen by 600,000 people. How much morning,
afternoon, and evening advertising time should Excelsior
buy to maximize exposure of its commercials?

1 

1
4

1 

1
2

23. MANUFACTURING—PRODUCTION SCHEDULING Custom  Office
Furniture Company is introducing a new line of executive
desks made from a specially selected grade of walnut. Ini-
tially, three different models—A, B, and C—are to be mar-
keted.  Each  model  A  desk  requires 
hr  for  fabrication, 
1  hr  for  assembly,  and  1  hr  for  finishing;  each  model  B 
hr for fabrication, 1 hr for assembly, and
desk requires 
1 hr for finishing; each model C desk requires 
hr,  hr, 
and 
hr for fabrication, assembly, and finishing, respec-
tively. The profit on each model A desk is $26, the profit
on each model B desk is $28, and the profit on each model
C desk is $24. The total time available in the fabrication
department, the assembly department, and the finishing de-
partment in the first month of production is 310 hr, 205 hr,
and  190  hr,  respectively.  To  maximize  Custom’s  profit,
how  many  desks  of  each  model  should  be  made  in  the
month?

 3
4

 1
2

1 

1
2

24. MANUFACTURING—SHIPPING COSTS Acrosonic of Example 4
also manufactures a model G loudspeaker system in plants
I and II. The output at Plant I is at most 800 systems/month
whereas the output at Plant II is at most 600/month. These
loudspeaker systems are also shipped to three warehouses—
A, B, and C—whose minimum monthly requirements are
500, 400, and 400, respectively. Shipping costs from Plant
I  to  Warehouse  A,  Warehouse  B,  and  Warehouse  C are
$16, $20, and $22 per system, respectively, and shipping
costs  from  Plant  II  to  each  of  these  warehouses  are  $18,
$16,  and  $14  per  system,  respectively.  What  shipping
schedule  will  enable  Acrosonic  to  meet  the  warehouses’
requirements and at the same time keep its shipping costs
to a minimum?

25. MANUFACTURING—SHIPPING COSTS Steinwelt Piano manufac-
tures upright and console pianos in two plants, Plant I and
Plant II. The output of Plant I is at most 300/month, whereas
the output of Plant II is at most 250/month. These pianos are
shipped to three warehouses, which serve as distribution cen-
ters  for  the  company.  To  fill  current  and  projected  future
orders,  Warehouse  A requires  at  least  200  pianos/month,
Warehouse B requires at least 150 pianos/month, and Ware-
house  C requires  at  least  200  pianos/month.  The  shipping
cost of each piano from Plant I to Warehouse A, Warehouse
B, and Warehouse C is $60, $60, and $80, respectively, and
the shipping cost of each piano from Plant II to Warehouse
A,  Warehouse  B,  and  Warehouse  C is  $80,  $70,  and  $50,
respectively. What shipping schedule will enable Steinwelt to
meet the warehouses’ requirements while keeping shipping
costs to a minimum?

26. MANUFACTURING—PREFABRICATED HOUSING

PRODUCTION
Boise Lumber has decided to enter the lucrative prefabri-
cated  housing  business.  Initially,  it  plans  to  offer  three
models: standard, deluxe, and luxury. Each house is pre-
fabricated and partially assembled in the factory, and the

6.2 LINEAR PROGRAMMING PROBLEMS

345

final assembly is completed on site. The dollar amount of
building material required, the amount of labor required in
the  factory  for  prefabrication  and  partial  assembly,  the
amount of on-site labor required, and the profit per unit are
as follows:

Material
Factory Labor (hr)
On-site Labor (hr)
Profit

Standard

Model
$6,000
240
180
$3,400

Deluxe
Model
$8,000
220
210
$4,000

Luxury
Model
$10,000
200
300
$5,000

For  the  first  year’s  production,  a  sum  of  $8.2  million  is
budgeted  for  the  building  material;  the  number  of  labor-
hours available for work in the factory (for prefabrication
and partial assembly) is not to exceed 218,000 hr; and the
amount of labor for on-site work is to be less than or equal
to  237,000  labor-hours.  Determine  how  many  houses  of
each type Boise should produce (market research has con-
firmed that there should be no problems with sales) to max-
imize its profit from this new venture.

27. PRODUCTION—JUICE PRODUCTS CalJuice  Company  has
decided to introduce three fruit juices made from blending
two or more concentrates. These juices will be packaged in
2-qt (64-oz) cartons. One carton of pineapple–orange juice
requires 8 oz each of pineapple and orange juice concen-
trates. One carton of orange–banana juice requires 12 oz of
orange juice concentrate and 4 oz of banana pulp concen-
trate.  Finally,  one  carton  of  pineapple–orange–banana
juice requires 4 oz of pineapple juice concentrate, 8 oz of
orange  juice  concentrate,  and  4  oz  of  banana  pulp.  The
company has decided to allot 16,000 oz of pineapple juice
concentrate,  24,000  oz  of  orange  juice  concentrate,  and
5000 oz of banana pulp concentrate for the initial produc-
tion run. The company has also stipulated that the produc-
tion of pineapple–orange–banana juice should not exceed
800 cartons. Its profit on one carton of pineapple–orange
juice  is  $1.00,  its  profit  on  one  carton  of  orange–banana
juice  is  $0.80,  and  its  profit  on  one  carton  of  pineapple–
orange–banana  juice  is  $0.90.  To  realize  a  maximum
profit,  how  many  cartons  of  each  blend  should  the  com-
pany produce?

28. MANUFACTURING—COLD FORMULA PRODUCTION Beyer  Phar-
maceutical produces three kinds of cold formulas: Formula I,
Formula II, and Formula III. It takes 2.5 hr to produce 1000
bottles of Formula I, 3 hr to produce 1000 bottles of Formula
II, and 4 hr to produce 1000 bottles of Formula III. The prof-
its for each 1000 bottles of Formula I, Formula II, and For-
mula III are $180, $200, and $300, respectively. For a certain
production run, there are enough ingredients on hand to make
at most 9000 bottles of Formula I, 12,000 bottles of Formula
II, and 6000 bottles of Formula III. Furthermore, the time for
the production run is limited to a maximum of 70 hr. How
many bottles of each formula should be produced in this pro-
duction run so that the profit is maximized?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

346

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

In Exercises 29 and 30, determine whether the statement is true
or  false.  If  it  is  true,  explain  why  it  is  true.  If  it  is  false,  give  an
example to show why it is false.
29. The problem

30. The problem

Maximize P ⫽ xy
subject to

2x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 12
2x ⫹  y ⱕ 8
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

is a linear programming problem.

6.2 Solution to Self-Check Exercise

Minimize C ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3y
subject to 2x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 6
x ⫺ y ⫽ 0
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

is a linear programming problem.

Let x denote the number of ads to be placed in the City Tribune,
and let y denote the number to be placed in the Daily News. The
total cost for placing x ads in the City Tribune and y ads in the
Daily News is 300x ⫹ 100y dollars, and since the monthly bud-
get is $9000, we must have

Finally, the objective function to be maximized is

P ⫽ 50,000x ⫹ 20,000y

To  summarize,  we  have  the  following  linear  programming
problem:

300x ⫹ 100y ⱕ 9000

Next, the condition that the ad must appear in at least 15 but no
more  than  30  editions  of  the  Daily  News translates  into  the
inequalities

y ⱖ 15
y ⱕ 30

Maximize P ⫽ 50,000x ⫹ 20,000y
subject to

300x ⫹ 100y ⱕ 9000

 y ⱖ 15
 y ⱕ 30
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

6.3 Graphical Solution of Linear Programming Problems

The Graphical Method
Linear programming problems in two variables have relatively simple geometric inter-
pretations.  For  example,  the  system  of  linear  constraints  associated  with  a  two-
dimensional linear programming problem, unless it is inconsistent, defines a planar
region or a line segment whose boundary is composed of straight-line segments and/or
half-lines. Such problems are therefore amenable to graphical analysis.

Consider the following two-dimensional linear programming problem:

Maximize P ⫽ 3x ⫹ 2y
2x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 12
subject to
2x ⫹ y ⱕ 8
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

(7)

The system of linear inequalities in (7) defines the planar region S shown in Figure 10.
Each point in S is a candidate for the solution of the problem at hand and is referred
to as a feasible solution. The set S itself is referred to as a feasible set. Our goal is to
find, from among all the points in the set S, the point(s) that optimize(s) the objective
function P. Such a feasible solution is called an optimal solution and constitutes the
solution to the linear programming problem under consideration.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

FIGURE 10
Each point in the feasible set S is a candi-
date for the optimal solution.

FIGURE 11
A family of parallel lines that intersect the
feasible set S

6.3 GRAPHICAL SOLUTION OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING PROBLEMS

347

y

10

5

2x + y = 8

P(3, 2)

S

2x + 3y = 12

5

x

10

As was noted earlier, each point P(x, y) in S is a candidate for the optimal solu-
tion to the problem at hand. For example, the point (1, 3) is easily seen to lie in S and
is therefore in the running. The value of the objective function P at the point (1, 3) is
given by P ⫽ 3(1) ⫹ 2(3) ⫽ 9. Now, if we could compute the value of P correspond-
ing to each point in S, then the point(s) in S that gave the largest value to P would con-
stitute the solution set sought. Unfortunately, in most problems, the number of candi-
dates either is too large or, as in this problem, is infinite. Therefore, this method is at
best unwieldy and at worst impractical.

Let’s turn the question around. Instead of asking for the value of the objective
function P at a feasible point, let’s assign a value to the objective function P and ask
whether  there  are  feasible  points  that  would  correspond  to  the  given  value  of  P.
Toward this end, suppose we assign a value of 6 to P. Then the objective function P
becomes 3x ⫹ 2y ⫽ 6, a linear equation in x and y; thus, it has a graph that is a straight
line L1 in the plane. In Figure 11, we have drawn the graph of this straight line super-
imposed on the feasible set S.

y

L2

L1

5

The line farthest
from the origin
that intersects S

P

(3, 2)

S

5

x

It is clear that each point on the straight-line segment given by the intersection of
the straight line L1 and the feasible set S corresponds to the given value, 6, of P. For
this reason, the line L1 is called an isoprofit line. Let’s repeat the process, this time
assigning a value of 10 to P. We obtain the equation 3x ⫹ 2y ⫽ 10 and the line L2 (see
Figure 11), which suggests that there are feasible points that correspond to a larger
value of P. Observe that the line L2 is parallel to the line L1 because both lines have
slope equal to 
which is easily seen by casting the corresponding equations in the
slope-intercept form.

⫺3
2,

In  general,  by  assigning  different  values  to  the  objective  function,  we  obtain  a
Furthermore,  a  line  corre-
family  of  parallel  lines,  each  with  slope  equal  to 
sponding  to  a  larger  value  of  P lies  farther  away  from  the  origin  than  one  with  a
smaller value of P. The implication is clear. To obtain the optimal solution(s) to the
problem at hand, find the straight line, from this family of straight lines, that is farthest
from the origin and still intersects the feasible set S. The required line is the one that

⫺3
2.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

348

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

passes through the point P(3, 2) (see Figure 11), so the solution to the problem is given
by x ⫽ 3, y ⫽ 2, resulting in a maximum value of P ⫽ 3(3) ⫹ 2(2) ⫽ 13.

That the optimal solution to this problem was found to occur at a vertex of the fea-
sible set S is no accident. In fact, the result is a consequence of the following basic the-
orem on linear programming, which we state without proof.

THEOREM 1
Linear Programming
If a linear programming problem has a solution, then it must occur at a vertex, or
corner point, of the feasible set S associated with the problem. 

Furthermore, if the objective function P is optimized at two adjacent ver-
tices of S, then it is optimized at every point on the line segment joining these
vertices, in which case there are infinitely many solutions to the problem.

Theorem  1  tells  us  that  our  search  for  the  solution(s)  to  a  linear  programming
problem may be restricted to the examination of the set of vertices of the feasible set
S associated with the problem. Since a feasible set S has finitely many vertices, the
theorem suggests that the solution(s) to the linear programming problem may be found
by inspecting the values of the objective function P at these vertices.

Although Theorem 1 sheds some light on the nature of the solution of a linear 
programming problem, it does not tell us when a linear programming problem has a
solution.  The  following  theorem  states  conditions  that  guarantee  when  a  solution
exists.

THEOREM 2
Existence of a Solution
Suppose we are given a linear programming problem with a feasible set S and
an objective function P ⫽ ax ⫹ by.
a. If S is bounded, then P has both a maximum and a minimum value on S.
b. If S is unbounded and both a and b are nonnegative, then P has a minimum
value on S provided that the constraints defining S include the inequalities 
x ⱖ 0 and y ⱖ 0.

c. If S is the empty set, then the linear programming problem has no solution;

that is, P has neither a maximum nor a minimum value.

The method of corners, a simple procedure for solving linear programming prob-

lems based on Theorem 1, follows.

The Method of Corners
1. Graph the feasible set.
2. Find the coordinates of all corner points (vertices) of the feasible set.
3. Evaluate the objective function at each corner point.
4. Find the vertex that renders the objective function a maximum (minimum). If
there is only one such vertex, then this vertex constitutes a unique solution to
the problem. If the objective function is maximized (minimized) at two adja-
cent corner points of S, there are infinitely many optimal solutions given by
the points on the line segment determined by these two vertices.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.3 GRAPHICAL SOLUTION OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING PROBLEMS

349

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 1 Maximizing Profit We are now in a position to 
complete the solution to the production problem posed in Example 1,

Section 6.2. Recall that the mathematical formulation led to the following linear
programming problem:

Maximize P ⫽ x ⫹ 1.2y
subject to

2 x ⫹ y ⱕ 180
x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 300
  x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

Solution The feasible set S for the problem is shown in Figure 12.

y

FIGURE 12
The corner point that yields the maxi-
mum profit is C(48, 84).

100

C(48, 84)

D(0, 100)

S

x + 3y = 300

B (90, 0)

A(0, 0)

100

200

300

x

2x + y = 180

The vertices of the feasible set are A(0, 0), B(90, 0), C(48, 84), and D(0, 100).
The values of P at these vertices may be tabulated as follows:

Vertex

A(0, 0)
B(90, 0)
C(48, 84)
D(0, 100)

P ⴝ x ⴙ 1.2y

0
90
148.8
120

From the table, we see that the maximum of P ⫽ x ⫹ 1.2y occurs at the vertex 
(48, 84) and has a value of 148.8. Recalling what the symbols x, y, and P repre-
sent, we conclude that Ace Novelty would maximize its profit ($148.80) by pro-
ducing 48 Type A souvenirs and 84 Type B souvenirs.

Explore & Discuss
Consider the linear programming problem

Maximize P ⫽ 4x ⫹ 3y
subject to

2 x ⫹ y ⱕ 10
2 x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 18
 x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

1. Sketch the feasible set S for the linear programming problem.
2. Draw the isoprofit lines superimposed on S corresponding to P ⫽ 12, 16, 20, and 24, and

show that these lines are parallel to each other.

3. Show that the solution to the linear programming problem is x ⫽ 3 and y ⫽ 4. Is this result

the same as that found by using the method of corners?

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

350

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 2 A Nutrition Problem Complete the solution of the
nutrition problem posed in Example 2, Section 6.2.

Solution Recall that the mathematical formulation of the problem led to the fol-
lowing linear programming problem in two variables:

Minimize C ⫽ 6x ⫹ 8y
subject to

40x ⫹ 10y ⱖ 2400
10x ⫹ 15y ⱖ 2100
5x ⫹ 15y ⱖ 1500
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

The feasible set S defined by the system of constraints is shown in Figure 13.

40x + 10y = 2400

y

300

200

10x + 15y = 2100

5x + 15y = 1500

100

A(0, 240)

S

B(30, 120)

C(120, 60)

FIGURE 13
The corner point that yields the minimum
cost is B(30, 120).

100 

200 

D(300, 0)
300

x

The vertices of the feasible set S are A(0, 240), B(30, 120), C(120, 60), and
D(300, 0). The values of the objective function C at these vertices are given in
the following table:

Vertex

C ⴝ 6x ⴙ 8y

A(0, 240)
B(30, 120)
C(120, 60)
D(300, 0)

1920
1140
1200
1800

From the table, we can see that the minimum for the objective function 
C ⫽ 6x ⫹ 8y occurs at the vertex B(30, 120) and has a value of 1140. Thus, 
the individual should purchase 30 Brand A pills and 120 Brand B pills at a 
minimum cost of $11.40.

EXAMPLE 3 A Linear Programming Problem with Multiple Solutions Find the maxi-
mum and minimum of P ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3y subject to the following system of linear
inequalities:

2 x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 30
⫺x ⫹ y ⱕ 5
x ⫹ y ⱖ 5
 x ⱕ 10
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

6.3 GRAPHICAL SOLUTION OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING PROBLEMS

351

Solution The feasible set S is shown in Figure 14. The vertices of the feasible set
S are A(5, 0), B(10, 0), 
D(3, 8), and E(0, 5). The values of the objective
function P at these vertices are given in the following table:

C110, 10
3 2,

Vertex

P ⴝ 2x ⴙ 3y

A(5, 0)
B(10, 0)

C110, 10
3 2

D(3, 8)
E(0, 5)

10
20
30
30
15

From the table, we see that the maximum for the objective function P ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3y
occurs at the vertices 
segment joining the points 
each of these points is 30. From the table, it is also clear that P is minimized at the
point (5, 0), where it attains a value of 10.

and D(3, 8). This tells us that every point on the line

C110, 10
3 2
C110, 10
3 2

and D(3, 8) maximizes P. The value of P at

y

2x + 3y = 30

10

x + y = 5

5

E(0, 5)

FIGURE 14
Every point lying on the line segment
joining C and D maximizes P.

– x + y = 5

x = 10

D(3, 8)

S

A(5, 0)

5

C  10, 10
3

B(10, 0)

15

x

Explore & Discuss
Consider the linear programming problem

subject to

Maximize P ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3y
 2 x ⫹ y ⱕ 10
 2 x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 18
 x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

1. Sketch the feasible set S for the linear programming problem.
2. Draw the isoprofit lines superimposed on S corresponding to P ⫽ 6, 8, 12, and 18, and

show that these lines are parallel to each other.

3. Show that there are infinitely many solutions to the problem. Is this result as predicted by

the method of corners?

We close this section by examining two situations in which a linear programming

problem has no solution.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

352

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

y

−2x + y = 4

S

x − 3y = 3

C(0, 4)

A(0, 0)

B

(3, 0)

FIGURE 15
This maximization problem has no 
solution because the feasible set is
unbounded.

y

4

2 x + 3y = 12

4

x + 2y = 4

FIGURE 16
This problem is inconsistent because
there is no point that satisfies all of the
given inequalities.

EXAMPLE 4 An Unbounded Linear Programming Problem with No Solution
Solve the following linear programming problem:
Maximize P ⫽ x ⫹ 2y
subject to

 ⫺2x ⫹ y ⱕ 4
 x ⫺ 3y ⱕ 3
 x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

x

Solution The feasible set S for this problem is shown in Figure 15. Since the 
set S is unbounded (both x and y can take on arbitrarily large positive values), we
see that we can make P as large as we please by choosing x and y large enough.
This problem has no solution. The problem is said to be unbounded.

EXAMPLE 5 An Infeasible Linear Programming Problem Solve the following linear
programming problem:

Maximize P ⫽ x ⫹ 2y
subject to

x ⫹ 2y ⱕ 4
2x ⫹ 3y ⱖ 12
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

x

Solution The half-planes described by the constraints (inequalities) have no points
in common (Figure 16). Hence, there are no feasible points, and the problem has no
solution. In this situation, we say that the problem is infeasible, or inconsistent.

The situations described in Examples 4 and 5 are unlikely to occur in well-posed

problems arising from practical applications of linear programming.

The method of corners is particularly effective in solving two-variable linear pro-
gramming problems with a small number of constraints, as the preceding examples have
amply demonstrated. However, its effectiveness decreases rapidly as the number of vari-
ables and/or constraints increases. For example, it may be shown that a linear program-
ming problem in three variables and five constraints may have up to ten feasible corner
points.  The  determination  of  the  feasible  corner  points  calls  for  the  solution  of  ten 
3 ⫻ 3 systems of linear equations and then the verification—by the substitution of each
of these solutions into the system of constraints—to see whether it is, in fact, a feasible
point. When the number of variables and constraints goes up to five and ten, respectively
(still a very small system from the standpoint of applications in economics), the number
of vertices to be found and checked for feasible corner points increases dramatically to
252, and each of these vertices is found by solving a 5 ⫻ 5 linear system! For this rea-
son, the method of corners is seldom used to solve linear programming problems; its
redeeming value lies in the fact that much insight is gained into the nature of the solu-
tions of linear programming problems through its use in solving two-variable problems.

6.3 Self-Check Exercises

1. Use  the  method  of  corners  to  solve  the  following  linear

2. Use  the  method  of  corners  to  solve  the  following  linear

programming problem:

programming problem:

Maximize P ⫽ 4x ⫹ 5y
x ⫹ 2y ⱕ 10
subject to
5x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 30
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

Minimize C ⫽ 5x ⫹ 3y
5x ⫹ 3y ⱖ 30
subject to
x ⫺ 3y ⱕ 0
x ⱖ 2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

6.3 GRAPHICAL SOLUTION OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING PROBLEMS

353

3. Gino  Balduzzi,  proprietor  of  Luigi’s  Pizza  Palace,  allo-
cates $9000 a month for advertising in two newspapers, the
City Tribune and the Daily News. The City Tribune charges
$300 for a certain advertisement, whereas the Daily News
charges $100 for the same ad. Gino has stipulated that the
ad is to appear in at least 15 but no more than 30 editions
of the Daily News per month. The City Tribune has a daily

circulation of 50,000, and the Daily News has a circulation
of  20,000.  Under  these  conditions,  determine  how  many
ads  Gino  should  place  in  each  newspaper  to  reach  the
largest number of readers.

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 6.3 can be found on 
page 358.

6.3 Concept Questions

1. a. What  is  the  feasible  set  associated  with  a  linear  pro-

c. What is an optimal solution of a linear programming prob-

gramming problem?

b. What is a feasible solution of a linear programming prob-

lem?

lem?

2. Describe the method of corners.

6.3 Exercises

In Exercises 1–6, find the maximum and/or minimum value(s) of
the objective function on the feasible set S.
1. Z ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3y

3. Z ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3y

2. Z ⫽ 3x ⫺ y

(4, 9)

y

(2, 8)

S

(8, 

5)

(1, 1)

x

y

(2, 6)

(2, 2)

(7, 9)

S

(10, 1)

x

4. Z ⫽ 7x ⫹ 9y

y
(0, 20)

S

(3, 10)

(4, 6)

y

(0, 7)

(1, 5)

S

(4, 2)

x

(9, 0)

x

(8, 0)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

354

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

5. Z ⫽ x ⫹ 4y

16. Minimize C ⫽ 2x ⫹ 4y subject to the constraints of Exer-

y

(4, 10)

(0, 6)

S

cise 15.

subject to

17. Minimize C ⫽ 3x ⫹ 6y
 x ⫹ 2y ⱖ 40
 x ⫹ y ⱖ 30
 x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

(12, 8)

18. Minimize C ⫽ 3x ⫹ y subject to the constraints of Exer-

x

(15, 0)

6. Z ⫽ 3x ⫹ 2y

y

(3, 6)

(1, 4)

S

(5, 

4)

cise 17.

subject to

19. Minimize C ⫽ 2x ⫹ 10y
 5x ⫹ 2y ⱖ 40
 x ⫹ 2y ⱖ 20
 y ⱖ 3, x ⱖ 0

subject to

20. Minimize C ⫽ 2x ⫹ 5y
 4x ⫹ y ⱖ 40
 2x ⫹ y ⱖ 30
 x ⫹ 3y ⱖ 30
 x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

subject to

21. Minimize C ⫽ 10x ⫹ 15y
 x ⫹ y ⱕ 10
 3x ⫹ y ⱖ 12
 ⫺2x ⫹ 3y ⱖ 3
 x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

(3, 1)

x

cise 21.

22. Maximize P ⫽ 2x ⫹ 5y subject to the constraints of Exer-

In  Exercises  7–28,  solve  each  linear  programming  problem  by
the method of corners.
7. Maximize P ⫽ 3x ⫹ 2y
 x ⫹ y ⱕ 6
 x ⱕ 3
 x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

8. Maximize P ⫽ x ⫹ 2y
 x ⫹ y ⱕ 4
 2x ⫹ y ⱕ 5
 x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

subject to

subject to

9. Maximize P ⫽ 2x ⫹ y subject to the constraints of Exer-

cise 8.

subject to

10. Maximize P ⫽ 4x ⫹ 2y
 x ⫹ y ⱕ 8
 2x ⫹ y ⱕ 10
 x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

11. Maximize P ⫽ x ⫹ 8y subject to the constraints of Exer-

cise 10.

subject to

12. Maximize P ⫽ 3x ⫺ 4y
 x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 15
 4x ⫹ y ⱕ 16
 x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

subject to

14. Maximize P ⫽ 2x ⫹ 5y
 2x ⫹ y ⱕ 16
 2x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 24
 y ⱕ 6
 x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

subject to

13. Maximize P ⫽ x ⫹ 3y
 2x ⫹ y ⱕ 6
 x ⫹ y ⱕ 4
 x ⱕ 1
 x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

subject to

15. Minimize C ⫽ 2x ⫹ 5y
 x ⫹ y ⱖ 3
 x ⫹ 2y ⱖ 4
 x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

23. Maximize P ⫽ 3x ⫹ 4y

subject to

 x ⫹ 2y ⱕ 50
 5x ⫹ 4y ⱕ 145
 2x ⫹ y ⱖ 25
 y ⱖ 5, x ⱖ 0

24. Maximize P ⫽ 4x ⫺ 3y subject to the constraints of Exer-

cise 23.

25. Maximize P ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3y

subject to

 x ⫹ y ⱕ 48
 x ⫹ 3y ⱖ 60
 9x ⫹ 5y ⱕ 320
 x ⱖ 10, y ⱖ 0

26. Minimize C ⫽ 5x ⫹ 3y subject to the constraints of Exer-

cise 25.

27. Find  the  maximum  and  minimum  of  P ⫽ 8x ⫹ 5y sub-

ject to

5x ⫹ 2y ⱖ 63
x ⫹ y ⱖ 18
3x ⫹ 2y ⱕ 51
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

28. Find the maximum and minimum of P ⫽ 4x ⫹ 3y subject

to

3x ⫹ 5y ⱖ 20
3x ⫹ y ⱕ 16
⫺2x ⫹ y ⱕ 1
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

The  problems  in  Exercises  29–46  correspond  to  those  in  Exer-
cises 1–18, Section 6.2. Use the results of your previous work to
help you solve these problems.
29. MANUFACTURING—PRODUCTION SCHEDULING A company man-
ufactures two products, A and B, on two machines, I and II.
It  has  been  determined  that  the  company  will  realize  a
profit  of  $3/unit  of  Product  A and  a  profit  of  $4/unit  of
Product  B.  To  manufacture  a  unit  of  Product  A requires
6 min on Machine I and 5 min on Machine II. To manu-
facture a unit of Product B requires 9 min on Machine I and 
4 min on Machine II. There are 5 hr of machine time avail-
able on Machine I and 3 hr of machine time available on
Machine  II  in  each  work  shift.  How  many  units  of  each
product should be produced in each shift to maximize the
company’s profit? What is the optimal profit?

30. MANUFACTURING—PRODUCTION SCHEDULING National  Busi-
ness Machines manufactures two models of fax machines:
A  and  B.  Each  model  A  costs  $100  to  make,  and  each
model B costs $150. The profits are $30 for each model A
and $40 for each model B fax machine. If the total number
of  fax  machines  demanded  per  month  does  not  exceed
2500  and  the  company  has  earmarked  no  more  than
$600,000/month for manufacturing costs, how many units
of each model should National make each month to maxi-
mize its monthly profit? What is the optimal profit?

31. MANUFACTURING—PRODUCTION SCHEDULING Kane  Manufac-
turing has a division that produces two models of fireplace
grates, model A and model B. To produce each model A
grate requires 3 lb of cast iron and 6 min of labor. To pro-
duce  each  model  B  grate  requires  4  lb  of  cast  iron  and 
3 min of labor. The profit for each model A grate is $2.00,
and the profit for each model B grate is $1.50. If 1000 lb of
cast iron and 20 labor-hours are available for the produc-
tion of fireplace grates per day, how many grates of each
model  should  the  division  produce  to  maximize  Kane’s
profit? What is the optimal profit?

32. MANUFACTURING—PRODUCTION SCHEDULING Refer  to  Exer-
cise 31. Because of a backlog of orders for model A grates,
Kane’s  manager  had  decided  to  produce  at  least  150  of
these  models  a  day.  Operating  under  this  additional  con-
straint, how many grates of each model should Kane pro-
duce to maximize profit? What is the optimal profit?

33. MANUFACTURING—PRODUCTION SCHEDULING A  division  of
the  Winston  Furniture  Company  manufactures  dining
tables  and  chairs.  Each  table  requires  40  board  feet  of
wood and 3 labor-hours. Each chair requires 16 board feet
of wood and 4 labor-hours. The profit for each table is $45,
and the profit for each chair is $20. In a certain week, the
company has 3200 board feet of wood available and 520
labor-hours available. How many tables and chairs should
Winston manufacture to maximize its profit? What is the
maximum profit?

34. MANUFACTURING—PRODUCTION SCHEDULING Refer  to  Exer-
cise 33. If the profit for each table is $50 and the profit for
each chair is $18, how many tables and chairs should Win-

6.3 GRAPHICAL SOLUTION OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING PROBLEMS

355

ston manufacture to maximize its profit? What is the max-
imum profit?

35. FINANCE—ALLOCATION OF FUNDS Madison  Finance  has  a
total of $20 million earmarked for homeowner loans and
auto loans. On the average, homeowner loans have a 10%
annual  rate  of  return,  whereas  auto  loans  yield  a  12%
annual rate of return. Management has also stipulated that
the  total  amount  of  homeowner  loans  should  be  greater
than  or  equal  to  4  times  the  total  amount  of  automobile
loans.  Determine  the  total  amount  of  loans  of  each  type
that Madison should extend to each category to maximize
its returns. What are the optimal returns?

36. INVESTMENTS—ASSET ALLOCATION A  financier  plans 

to
invest  up  to  $500,000  in  two  projects.  Project  A yields  a
return of 10% on the investment, whereas Project B yields
a return of 15% on the investment. Because the investment
in Project B is riskier than the investment in Project A, the
financier  has  decided  that  the  investment  in  Project  B
should not exceed 40% of the total investment. How much
should she invest in each project to maximize the return on
her investment? What is the maximum return?

37. MANUFACTURING—PRODUCTION SCHEDULING Acoustical  man-
ufactures  a  CD  storage  cabinet  that  can  be  bought  fully
assembled or as a kit. Each cabinet is processed in the fabri-
cations department and the assembly department. If the fab-
rication department manufactures only fully assembled cabi-
nets, then it can produce 200 units/day; and if it manufactures
only  kits,  it  can  produce  200  units/day.  If  the  assembly
department produces only fully assembled cabinets, then it
can produce 100 units/day; but if it produces only kits, then
it can produce 300 units/day. Each fully assembled cabinet
contributes $50 to the profits of the company whereas each
kit contributes $40 to its profits. How many fully assembled
units  and  how  many  kits  should  the  company  produce  per
day to maximize its profit? What is the optimal profit?

38. AGRICULTURE—CROP PLANNING A farmer plans to plant two
crops, A and B. The cost of cultivating Crop A is $40/acre
whereas  the  cost  of  cultivating Crop  B is  $60/acre.  The
farmer has a maximum of $7400 available for land cultiva-
tion. Each acre of Crop A requires 20 labor-hours, and each
acre of Crop  B requires 25 labor-hours. The farmer has a
maximum of 3300 labor-hours available. If she expects to
make  a  profit  of  $150/acre  on  Crop  A and  $200/acre  on
Crop B, how many acres of each crop should she plant to
maximize her profit? What is the optimal profit?

39. MINING—PRODUCTION Perth  Mining  Company  operates
two  mines  for  the  purpose  of  extracting  gold  and  silver.
The  Saddle  Mine  costs  $14,000/day  to  operate,  and  it
yields 50 oz of gold and 3000 oz of silver each day. The
Horseshoe Mine costs $16,000/day to operate, and it yields
75  oz  of  gold  and  1000  oz  of  silver  each  day.  Company
management has set a target of at least 650 oz of gold and
18,000 oz of silver. How many days should each mine be
operated so that the target can be met at a minimum cost?
What is the minimum cost?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

356

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

40. TRANSPORTATION Deluxe  River  Cruises  operates  a  fleet  of
river vessels. The fleet has two types of vessels: A type A
vessel has 60 deluxe cabins and 160 standard cabins, whereas
a type B vessel has 80 deluxe cabins and 120 standard cab-
ins. Under a charter agreement with Odyssey Travel Agency,
Deluxe River Cruises is to provide Odyssey with a minimum
of 360 deluxe and 680 standard cabins for their 15-day cruise
in  May.  It  costs  $44,000  to  operate  a  type  A  vessel  and
$54,000 to operate a type B vessel for that period. How many
of each type vessel should be used to keep the operating costs
to a minimum? What is the minimum cost?

41. WATER SUPPLY The water-supply manager for a Midwestern
city needs to supply the city with at least 10 million gallons
of  potable  (drinkable)  water  per  day.  The  supply  may  be
drawn from the local reservoir or from a pipeline to an adja-
cent town. The local reservoir has a maximum daily yield of 
5 million gal of potable water, and the pipeline has a maxi-
mum  daily  yield  of  10  million  gallons.  By  contract,  the
pipeline is required to supply a minimum of 6 million gal-
lons/day. If the cost for 1 million gallons of reservoir water
is $300 and that for pipeline water is $500, how much water
should the manager get from each source to minimize daily
water costs for the city? What is the minimum daily cost?

42. MANUFACTURING—PRODUCTION SCHEDULING Ace  Novelty
manufactures  Giant  Pandas  and  Saint  Bernards.  Each
Panda  requires  1.5  yd2 of  plush,  30  ft3 of  stuffing,  and 
5  pieces  of  trim;  each  Saint  Bernard  requires  2  yd2 of
plush, 35 ft3 of stuffing, and 8 pieces of trim. The profit for
each Panda is $10, and the profit for each Saint Bernard is
$15. If 3600 yd2 of plush, 66,000 ft3 of stuffing, and 13,600
pieces  of  trim  are  available,  how  many  of  each  of  the
stuffed animals should the company manufacture to maxi-
mize profit? What is the maximum profit?

43. NUTRITION—DIET PLANNING A  nutritionist  at  the  Medical
Center has been asked to prepare a special diet for certain
patients. She has decided that the meals should contain a
minimum of 400 mg of calcium, 10 mg of iron, and 40 mg
of vitamin C. She has further decided that the meals are to
be prepared from Foods A and B. Each ounce of Food A
contains 30 mg of calcium, 1 mg of iron, 2 mg of vitamin
C, and 2 mg of cholesterol. Each ounce of Food B contains
25 mg of calcium, 0.5 mg of iron, 5 mg of vitamin C, and
5 mg of cholesterol. Find how many ounces of each type of
food should be used in a meal so that the cholesterol con-
tent  is  minimized  and  the  minimum  requirements  of  cal-
cium, iron, and vitamin C are met.

44. SOCIAL PROGRAMS PLANNING AntiFam,  a  hunger-relief  or-
ganization,  has  earmarked  between  $2  and  $2.5  million
(inclusive) for aid to two African countries, Country A and
Country B. Country A is to receive between $1 million and
$1.5 million (inclusive), and Country B is to receive at least
$0.75 million. It has been estimated that each dollar spent in
Country A will yield an effective return of $0.60, whereas a
dollar spent in Country B will yield an effective return of
$0.80. How should the aid be allocated if the money is to be
utilized most effectively according to these criteria?
Hint: If x and y denote the amount of money to be given to Coun-
try A and Country B, respectively, then the objective function to
be maximized is P ⫽ 0.6x ⫹ 0.8y.

45. ADVERTISING Everest  Deluxe  World  Travel  has  decided  to
advertise in the Sunday editions of two major newspapers
in town. These advertisements are directed at three groups
of potential customers. Each advertisement in Newspaper I
is  seen  by  70,000  Group  A customers,  40,000  Group  B
customers, and 20,000 Group C customers. Each advertise-
ment in Newspaper II is seen by 10,000 Group A, 20,000
Group B, and 40,000 Group C customers. Each advertise-
ment in Newspaper I costs $1000, and each advertisement
in Newspaper II costs $800. Everest would like their adver-
tisements to be read by at least 2 million people from Group
A, 1.4 million people from Group B, and 1 million people
from Group  C. How many advertisements should Everest
place in each newspaper to achieve its advertising goals at
a minimum cost? What is the minimum cost?
Hint: Use different scales for drawing the feasible set.

46. MANUFACTURING—SHIPPING COSTS TMA  manufactures 
37-in.  high  definition  LCD  televisions  in  two  separate
locations, Locations I and II. The output at Location I is at
most 6000 televisions/month, whereas the output at Loca-
tion II is at most 5000 televisions/month. TMA is the main
supplier of televisions to the Pulsar Corporation, its hold-
ing company, which has priority in having all its require-
ments  met.  In  a  certain  month,  Pulsar  placed  orders  for
3000 and 4000 televisions to be shipped to two of its fac-
tories located in City A and City B, respectively. The ship-
ping  costs  (in  dollars)  per  television  from  the  two  TMA
plants to the two Pulsar factories are as follows:

From TMA
Location I
Location II

To Pulsar Factories
City A
City B

$6
$8

$4
$10

Find  a  shipping  schedule  that  meets  the  requirements  of
both companies while keeping costs to a minimum.

47. Complete the solution to Example 3, Section 6.2.

48. MANUFACTURING—PRODUCTION SCHEDULING Bata  Aerobics
manufactures two models of steppers used for aerobic exer-
cises. Manufacturing each luxury model requires 10 lb of
plastic and 10 min of labor. Manufacturing each standard
model  requires  16  lb  of  plastic  and  8  min  of  labor.  The
profit for each luxury model is $40, and the profit for each
standard model is $30. If 6000 lb of plastic and 60 labor-
hours  are  available  for  the  production  of  the  steppers  per
day, how many steppers of each model should Bata produce
each day to maximize its profit? What is the optimal profit?

49. INVESTMENT PLANNING Patricia  has  at  most  $30,000  to
invest in securities in the form of corporate stocks. She has
narrowed  her  choices  to  two  groups  of  stocks:  growth
stocks that she assumes will yield a 15% return (dividends
and  capital  appreciation)  within  a  year  and  speculative
stocks that she assumes will yield a 25% return (mainly in
capital appreciation) within a year. Determine how much
she should invest in each group of stocks to maximize the
return on her investments within a year if she has decided
to  invest  at  least  3  times  as  much  in  growth  stocks  as  in
speculative stocks. What is the maximum return?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

50. VETERINARY SCIENCE A  veterinarian  has  been  asked  to  pre-
pare a diet for a group of dogs to be used in a nutrition study
at the School of Animal Science. It has been stipulated that
each serving should be no larger than 8 oz and must contain
at least 29 units of Nutrient I and 20 units of Nutrient II. The
vet  has  decided  that  the  diet  may  be  prepared  from  two
brands of dog food: Brand A and Brand B. Each ounce of
Brand A contains 3 units of Nutrient I and 4 units of Nutri-
ent II. Each ounce of Brand B contains 5 units of Nutrient I
and 2 units of Nutrient II. Brand A costs 3 cents/ounce, and
Brand B costs 4 cents/ounce. Determine how many ounces
of  each  brand  of  dog  food  should  be  used  per  serving  to
meet the given requirements at a minimum cost.

51. MARKET RESEARCH Trendex,  a  telephone  survey  company,
has been hired to conduct a television-viewing poll among
urban and suburban families in the Los Angeles area. The
client has stipulated that a maximum of 1500 families is to
be interviewed. At least 500 urban families must be inter-
viewed,  and  at  least  half  of  the  total  number  of  families
interviewed must be from the suburban area. For this ser-
vice,  Trendex  will  be  paid  $6000  plus  $8  for  each  com-
pleted  interview.  From  previous  experience,  Trendex  has
determined that it will incur an expense of $4.40 for each
successful interview with an urban family and $5 for each
successful  interview  with  a  suburban  family.  How  many
urban and suburban families should Trendex interview to
maximize its profit? What is the optimal profit?

In Exercises 52–55, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
52. An optimal solution of a linear programming problem is a
feasible  solution,  but  a  feasible  solution  of  a  linear  pro-
gramming problem need not be an optimal solution.

53. An optimal solution of a linear programming problem can

occur inside the feasible set of the problem.

54. If a maximization problem has no solution, then the feasi-
ble  set  associated  with  the  linear  programming  problem
must be unbounded.

55. Suppose you are given the following linear programming
problem: Maximize P ⫽ ax ⫹ by on the unbounded feasi-
ble set S shown in the accompanying figure.

y

S

x

a. If a ⬎ 0 or b ⬎ 0, then the linear programming problem

has no optimal solution.

b. If a ⱕ 0 and b ⱕ 0, then the linear programming prob-

lem has at least one optimal solution.

6.3 GRAPHICAL SOLUTION OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING PROBLEMS

357

56. Suppose you are given the following linear programming
problem: Maximize P ⫽ ax ⫹ by, where a ⬎ 0 and b ⬎ 0,
on the feasible set S shown in the accompanying figure.

y

Q

S

x

Explain, without using Theorem 1, why the optimal solu-
tion of the linear programming problem cannot occur at the
point Q.

57. Suppose you are given the following linear programming
problem: Maximize P ⫽ ax ⫹ by, where a ⬎ 0 and b ⬎ 0,
on the feasible set S shown in the accompanying figure.

y

A

S

Q

B

x

Explain, without using Theorem 1, why the optimal solu-
tion of the linear programming problem cannot occur at the
point  Q unless  the  problem  has  infinitely  many  solutions
lying along the line segment joining the vertices A and B.
Hint: Let A1x1, y12 and B1x2, y22. Then let Q be the point 1x, y2,
where 
0 ⬍ t ⬍ 1. Study the value of P at and near Q.
58. Consider the linear programming problem

y ⫽ y1 ⫹ 1y2 ⫺ y12t

x ⫽  x1 ⫹

1x2 ⫺ x12t

and 

with 

Maximize P ⫽ 2x ⫹ 7y
 2x ⫹ y ⱖ 8
subject to
 x ⫹ y ⱖ 6
 x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

a. Sketch the feasible set S.
b. Find the corner points of S.
c. Find the values of P at the corner points of S found in 

part (b).

d. Show that the linear programming problem has no (opti-

mal) solution. Does this contradict Theorem 1?

59. Consider the linear programming problem

Minimize C ⫽ ⫺2x ⫹ 5y
 x ⫹ y ⱕ 3
subject to
 2x ⫹ y ⱕ 4
 5x ⫹ 8y ⱖ 40
 x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

a. Sketch the feasible set.
b. Find the solution(s) of the linear programming problem,

if it exists.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

358

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

6.3 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. The feasible set S for the problem was graphed in the solu-
tion  to  Exercise  1,  Self-Check  Exercises  6.1.  It  is  repro-
duced in the following figure.

Vertex

A15, 5
32
B12, 20
3 2

C ⴝ 5x ⴙ 3y

30

30

y

D(0, 5)

C

30, 20
7
7

S

A(0, 0)

B(6, 0)

x

The values of the objective function P at the vertices of S
are summarized in the following table:

Vertex
A(0, 0)
B(6, 0)
C130
7 2
7 , 20
D(0, 5)

P ⴝ 4x ⴙ 5y

0
24
⫽ 313
7
25

220
7

From the table, we see that the maximum for the objective
. Therefore, the
function P is attained at the vertex   
solution to the problem is 

7 2
C130
7 , 20
7 , y ⫽ 20
7 ,

P ⫽ 313
7.

x ⫽ 30

and 

2. The feasible set S for the problem was graphed in the solu-
tion  to  Exercise  2,  Self-Check  Exercises  6.1.  It  is  repro-
duced in the following figure.

y

10

S

B

2,

20
3

A

5,

5
3

x

10

We conclude that (i) the objective function is minimized at
every  point  on  the  line  segment  joining  the  points 
and 

, and (ii) the minimum value of C is 30.

32
15, 5

12, 20
3 2

3. Refer to Self-Check Exercise 6.2. The problem is to maxi-

mize P ⫽ 50,000x ⫹ 20,000y subject to

300x ⫹ 100y ⱕ 9000

 y ⱖ 15
 y ⱕ 30
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

The feasible set S for the problem is shown in the follow-
ing figure:

y

D

(0, 30)

C(20, 30)

S

A(0, 15)

B(25, 15)

10 

20 

30

y = 30

y = 15

x

Evaluating the objective function P ⫽ 50,000x ⫹ 20,000y
at each vertex of S, we obtain the following table:

Vertex
A(0, 15)
B(25, 15)
C(20, 30)
D(0, 30)

P ⴝ 50,000x ⴙ 20,000y

300,000
1,550,000
1,600,000
600,000

Evaluating the objective function C ⫽ 5x ⫹ 3y at each cor-
ner point, we obtain the following table:

From the table, we see that P is maximized when x ⫽ 20
and y ⫽ 30. Therefore, Gino should place 20 ads in the City 
Tribune and 30 in the Daily News.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

6.4

The Simplex Method: Standard Maximization Problems

6.4 THE SIMPLEX METHOD: STANDARD MAXIMIZATION PROBLEMS

359

The Simplex Method
As was mentioned earlier, the method of corners is not suitable for solving linear pro-
gramming problems when the number of variables or constraints is large. Its major
shortcoming is that a knowledge of all the corner points of the feasible set S associ-
ated with the problem is required. What we need is a method of solution that is based
on a judicious selection of the corner points of the feasible set S, thereby reducing the
number of points to be inspected. One such technique, called the simplex method, was
developed  in  the  late  1940s  by  George  Dantzig  and  is  based  on  the  Gauss–Jordan
elimination method. The simplex method is readily adaptable to the computer, which
makes  it  ideally  suitable  for  solving  linear  programming  problems  involving  large
numbers of variables and constraints.

Basically, the simplex method is an iterative procedure; that is, it is repeated over
and over again. Beginning at some initial feasible solution (a corner point of the fea-
sible set S, usually the origin), each iteration brings us to another corner point of S,
usually with an improved (but certainly no worse) value of the objective function. The
iteration is terminated when the optimal solution is reached (if it exists).

In this section, we describe the simplex method for solving a large class of prob-

lems that are referred to as standard maximization problems.

Before stating a formal procedure for solving standard linear programming prob-
lems  based  on  the  simplex  method,  let’s  consider  the  following  analysis  of  a  two-
variable problem. The ensuing discussion will clarify the general procedure and at the
same time enhance our understanding of the simplex method by examining the moti-
vation that led to the steps of the procedure.

A Standard Linear Programming Problem
A standard maximization problem is one in which
1. The objective function is to be maximized.
2. All the variables involved in the problem are nonnegative.
3. All other linear constraints may be written so that the expression involving

the variables is less than or equal to a nonnegative constant.

y

D(0, 4)

S

A(0, 0)

C

(3, 2)

B(4, 0)

x

FIGURE 17
The optimal solution occurs at C(3, 2).

Consider the linear programming problem presented at the beginning of Section 6.3:
(8)

(9)

Maximize
subject to

P ⫽ 3x ⫹ 2y
2x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 12
2x ⫹ y ⱕ 8
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

You can easily verify that this is a standard maximization problem. The feasible
set S associated with this problem is reproduced in Figure 17, where we have labeled
the four feasible corner points A(0, 0), B(4, 0), C(3, 2), and D(0, 4). Recall that the
optimal solution to the problem occurs at the corner point C(3, 2).

To solve this problem using the simplex method, we first replace the system of
inequality constraints (9) with a system of equality constraints. This may be accom-
plished by using nonnegative variables called slack variables. Let’s begin by consid-
ering the inequality

2x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 12

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

360

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

Observe that the left-hand side of this equation is always less than or equal to the right-
hand side. Therefore, by adding a nonnegative variable u to the left-hand side to com-
pensate for this difference, we obtain the equality

For example, if x ⫽ 1 and y ⫽ 1, then u ⫽ 7, because

2x ⫹ 3y ⫹ u ⫽ 12

2112 ⫹ 3112 ⫹ 7 ⫽ 12

(You can see by referring to Figure 1 that the point (1, 1) is a feasible point of S.)
If x ⫽ 2 and y ⫽ 1, then u ⫽ 5, because

2122 ⫹ 3112 ⫹ 5 ⫽ 12

(So the point (2, 1) is also a feasible point of S.) The variable u is a slack variable.
Similarly,  the  inequality  2x ⫹ y ⱕ 8  is  converted  into  the  equation  2x ⫹ y ⫹
√ ⫽ 8 through the introduction of the slack variable √. System (9) of linear inequali-
ties may now be viewed as the system of linear equations

2x ⫹ 3y ⫹ u
2x ⫹ y
where x, y, u, and √ are all nonnegative.

⫽ 12
⫹ √ ⫽ 8

Finally, rewriting the objective function (8) in the form ⫺3x ⫺ 2y ⫹ P ⫽ 0, where

the coefficient of P is ⫹1, we are led to the following system of linear equations:

2x ⫹ 3y ⫹ u
2x ⫹ y
⫺3x ⫺ 2y

⫹ √

⫽ 12
⫽ 8
⫹ P ⫽ 0

(10)

Since System (10) consists of three linear equations in the five variables x, y, u,
√, and P, we may solve for three of the variables in terms of the other two. Thus,
there are infinitely many solutions to this system expressible in terms of two param-
eters. Our linear programming problem is now seen to be equivalent to the follow-
ing: From among all the solutions of System (10) for which x, y, u, and √ are non-
negative  (such  solutions  are  called  feasible  solutions),  determine  the  solution(s)
that maximizes P.

The augmented matrix associated with System (10) is

Nonbasic variables 

앗 앗 앗 앗 앗
x
2
2

y u √ P
3 1 0 0
1 0 1 0
⫺3 ⫺2 0 0 1

冤

冨

Basic variables

Column of constants

(11)

冥

앗

12
8
0

Observe that each of the u-, √-, and P-columns of the augmented matrix (11) is a unit
column (see page 261). The variables associated with unit columns are called basic
variables; all other variables are called nonbasic variables.
Now, the configuration of the augmented matrix (11) suggests that we solve 
for  the  basic  variables  u,  √,  and  P in  terms  of  the  nonbasic  variables  x and  y, 
obtaining

u ⫽ 12 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 3y
√ ⫽ 8 ⫺ 2x ⫺ y
P ⫽
3x ⫹ 2y

(12)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.4 THE SIMPLEX METHOD: STANDARD MAXIMIZATION PROBLEMS

361

Of the infinitely many feasible solutions that are obtainable by assigning arbitrary
nonnegative values to the parameters x and y, a particular solution is obtained by let-
ting x ⫽ 0 and y ⫽ 0. In fact, this solution is given by

x ⫽ 0

y ⫽ 0

u ⫽ 12

√ ⫽ 8

P ⫽ 0

Such a solution, obtained by setting the nonbasic variables equal to zero, is called a
basic solution of the system. This particular solution corresponds to the corner point
A(0, 0) of the feasible set associated with the linear programming problem (see Fig-
ure 17). Observe that P ⫽ 0 at this point.

Now, if the value of P cannot be increased, we have found the optimal solution to
the problem at hand. To determine whether the value of P can in fact be improved,
let’s turn our attention to the objective function in Equation (8). Since the coefficients
of both x and y are positive, the value of P can be improved by increasing x and/or y—
that is, by moving away from the origin. Note that we arrive at the same conclusion
by observing that the last row of the augmented matrix (11) contains entries that are
negative. (Compare the original objective function, P ⫽ 3x ⫹ 2y, with the rewritten
objective function, ⫺3x ⫺ 2y ⫹ P ⫽ 0.)

Continuing our quest for an optimal solution, our next task is to determine whether
it is more profitable to increase the value of x or that of y (increasing x and y simultane-
ously is more difficult). Since the coefficient of x is greater than that of y, a unit increase
in the x-direction will result in a greater increase in the value of the objective function 
P than will a unit increase in the y-direction. Therefore, we should increase the value 
of x while holding y constant. How much can x be increased while holding y ⫽ 0? Upon
setting y ⫽ 0 in the first two equations of System (12), we see that

u ⫽ 12 ⫺ 2x
√ ⫽ 8 ⫺ 2x

(13)

Since u must be nonnegative, the first equation of System (13) implies that x can-
, or 6. The second equation of System (13) and the nonnegativity of √ imply

not exceed 
that x cannot exceed  , or 4. Thus, we conclude that x can be increased by at most 4.

12
2

8
2

Now, if we set y ⫽ 0 and x ⫽ 4 in System (12), we obtain the solution

x ⫽ 4

y ⫽ 0

u ⫽ 4

√ ⫽ 0

P ⫽ 12

which is a basic solution to System (10), this time with y and √ as nonbasic variables.
(Recall  that  the  nonbasic  variables  are  precisely  the  variables  that  are  set  equal  to
zero.)
Let’s see how this basic solution may be found by working with the augmented
matrix of the system. Since x is to replace √ as a basic variable, our aim is to find an
augmented  matrix  that  is  equivalent  to  the  matrix  (11)  and  has  a  configuration  in
which the x-column is in the unit form

0

1冤

冥

0

replacing what is presently the form of the √-column in augmented matrix (11). This
may be accomplished by pivoting about the circled number 2.

x
2
2

y
3
1
⫺3 ⫺2

£

u
1
0
0

√ P Const.
12
0
§
8
1
0
0

  †  

0
0
1

1
2

R2⎯→

x
2
1

y
3
1
2
⫺3 ⫺2

£

u
1
0
0

√ P Const.
12
0
§
1
4
2
0
0

  †  

0
0
1

(14)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

y

D(0, 4)

S

A(0, 0)

B(4, 0)

x

FIGURE 18
One iteration has taken us from A(0, 0),
where P ⫽ 0, to B(4, 0), where P ⫽ 12.

362

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

x
0
1
0

£

y
2
1
2
⫺1
2

u
1
0
0

R1 ⫺ 2R2
⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫹ 3R2

√ P Const.
§

4
4
12

⫺1
 1
2
3
2

0
0
1

(15)

Using System (15), we now solve for the basic variables x, u, and P in terms of

the nonbasic variables y and √, obtaining

1
 x ⫽ 4 ⫺ 1
2   √
2  y ⫺  
 u ⫽ 4 ⫺ 2 y ⫹  √
3
 P ⫽ 12 ⫹ 1
2   √
2  y ⫺  

Setting the nonbasic variables y and √ equal to zero gives
√ ⫽ 0

u ⫽ 4

x ⫽ 4

y ⫽ 0

P ⫽ 12

C

(3, 2)

as before.

We have now completed one iteration of the simplex procedure, and our search
has brought us from the feasible corner point A(0, 0), where P ⫽ 0, to the feasible cor-
ner point B(4, 0), where P attained a value of 12, which is certainly an improvement!
(See Figure 18.)

Before going on, let’s introduce the following terminology. In what follows, refer to
the augmented matrix (16), which is reproduced from the first augmented matrix in (14):

Pivot row →

£

x
2
2

y
3
1
⫺3 ⫺2

↑

u
1
0
0

√ P Const.
0
 §
1
0

12
8
0

  †  

0
0
1

Ratio

12
2

⫽ 6

8
2

⫽ 4
—

(smallest ratio)

(16)

Pivot column

(the negative number in the last row to the left 
of the vertical line with the largest absolute value)

The circled element 2 in the augmented matrix (16), which is to be converted into
a 1, is called a pivot element. The column containing the pivot element is called the
pivot column. The pivot column is associated with a nonbasic variable that is to be
converted to a basic variable. Note that the last entry in the pivot column is the nega-
tive  number  to  the  left  of  the  vertical  line  in  the  last  row  with  the  largest  absolute
value—precisely the criterion for choosing the direction of maximum increase in P.
The row containing the pivot element is called the pivot row. The pivot row can
also be found by dividing each positive number in the pivot column into the corre-
sponding number in the last column (the column of constants). The pivot row is the
one with the smallest ratio. In augmented matrix (16), the pivot row is the second row
because the ratio  , or 4, is less than the ratio 
, or 6. (Compare this with the earlier
analysis pertaining to the determination of the largest permissible increase in the value
of x.) Then pivoting about the pivot element, we obtain the second tableau in (14).
The following is a summary of the procedure for selecting the pivot element.

12
2

8
2

Selecting the Pivot Element
1. Select  the  pivot  column: Locate  the  most  negative  entry  to  the  left  of  the 
vertical  line  in  the  last  row.  The  column  containing  this  entry  is  the pivot 
column. (If there is more than one such column, choose any one.)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

6.4 THE SIMPLEX METHOD: STANDARD MAXIMIZATION PROBLEMS

363

2. Select the pivot row: Divide each positive entry in the pivot column into its
corresponding  entry  in  the  column  of  constants.  The pivot row is  the  row
corresponding to the smallest ratio thus obtained. (If there is more than one
such entry, choose any one.)

3. The pivot element is the element common to both the pivot column and the

pivot row.

Continuing with the solution to our problem, we observe that the last row of the
augmented matrix (15) contains a negative number—namely, 
. This indicates that
P is not maximized at the feasible corner point B(4, 0), so another iteration is required.
Without  once  again  going  into  a  detailed  analysis,  we  proceed  immediately  to  the
selection of a pivot element. In accordance with the rules, we perform the necessary
row operations as follows:

⫺1
2

冤

冤
冤

Pivot 씮
row

1
2

R1⎯→

1
2

R2 ⫺ R1
⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫹ R1

1
2

√ P
0
0
1

1 ⫺1
ᎏ1
0
ᎏ
2
ᎏ3
0
ᎏ
2

x
y u
0
2
ᎏ1
1
ᎏ
2
0 ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ
2
앖
Pivot
column

x
y
0
1
ᎏ1
1
ᎏ
2
0 ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ
2

√ P
u
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ1
0
ᎏ
2
2
ᎏ1
0
0
ᎏ
2
ᎏ3
0
1
ᎏ
2
√ P
0
0
1

u
y
ᎏ1
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ1
1
ᎏ
2
2
0⫺ ᎏ1
ᎏ3
ᎏ
ᎏ
4
4
ᎏ5
ᎏ1
0
ᎏ
ᎏ
4
4

x
0
1
0

Ratio
4
⫽ 2
2
4
⫽ 8
1/2

冥

4
4
12

冥
冥

2
4
12

2
3
13

Interpreting the last augmented matrix in the usual fashion, we find the basic solu-
tion x ⫽ 3, y ⫽ 2, and P ⫽ 13. Since there are no negative entries in the last row, the
solution is optimal, and P cannot be increased further. The optimal solution is the fea-
sible corner point C(3, 2) (Figure 19). Observe that this agrees with the solution we
found using the method of corners in Section 6.3.

Having seen how the simplex method works, let’s list the steps involved in the

procedure. The first step is to set up the initial simplex tableau.

Setting Up the Initial Simplex Tableau
1. Transform the system of linear inequalities into a system of linear equations

by introducing slack variables.
2. Rewrite the objective function

in the form

P ⫽ c1x1 ⫹ c2x2 ⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⫹c nxn

⫺c1x1 ⫺ c2x2 ⫺ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⫺c nxn ⫹ P ⫽ 0

where all the variables are on the left and the coefficient of P is ⫹1. Write
this equation below the equations of Step 1.

3. Write the tableau associated with this system of linear equations.

y

D(0, 4)

S

A(0, 0)

C

(3, 2)

B(4, 0)

x

FIGURE 19
The next iteration has taken us from 
B(4, 0), where P ⫽ 12, to C(3, 2), where 
P ⫽ 13.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

364

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

EXAMPLE 1 Set up the initial simplex tableau for the linear programming problem
posed in Example 1, Section 6.2.

Solution The problem at hand is to maximize

or, equivalently,

subject to

P ⫽ x ⫹ 1.2y

P ⫽ x ⫹ 6
5

 y

2x ⫹ y ⱕ 180
x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 300
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

(17)

This is a standard maximization problem and may be solved by the simplex

method. Since System (17) has two linear inequalities (other than x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0), we
introduce the two slack variables u and √ to convert it to a system of linear equations:

2x ⫹ y ⫹ u
x ⫹ 3y

⫽ 180
⫹ √ ⫽ 300

Next, by rewriting the objective function in the form

⫺x ⫺ 6
5

 y ⫹ P ⫽ 0

where the coefficient of P is ⫹1, and placing it below the system of equations, we
obtain the system of linear equations

2x ⫹ y ⫹ u
x ⫹ 3y

⫹ √

⫽ 180
⫽ 300

⫺x ⫺ y

6
5

⫹ P ⫽ 0

The initial simplex tableau associated with this system is

x

2
1

y

1
3

u √ P Constant
1
0

180
300

0
1

0
0

⫺1 ⫺ᎏ6
ᎏ
5

0

0

1

0

Before completing the solution to the problem posed in Example 1, let’s summarize
the main steps of the simplex method.

The Simplex Method
1. Set up the initial simplex tableau.
2. Determine whether the optimal solution has been reached by examining all

entries in the last row to the left of the vertical line.
a. If all the entries are nonnegative, the optimal solution has been reached.

Proceed to Step 4.

b. If there are one or more negative entries, the optimal solution has not been

reached. Proceed to Step 3.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.4 THE SIMPLEX METHOD: STANDARD MAXIMIZATION PROBLEMS

365

3. Perform the pivot operation. Locate the pivot element and convert it to a 1
by dividing all the elements in the pivot row by the pivot element. Using row
operations, convert the pivot column into a unit column by adding suitable
multiples of the pivot row to each of the other rows as required. Return to
Step 2.

4. Determine  the  optimal  solution(s). The  value  of  the  variable  heading  each
unit column is given by the entry lying in the column of constants in the row
containing the 1. The variables heading columns not in unit form are assigned
the value zero.

EXAMPLE 2 Complete the solution to the problem discussed in Example 1.

Solution The first step in our procedure, setting up the initial simplex tableau, was
completed in Example 1. We continue with Step 2.

Step 2 Determine whether the optimal solution has been reached. First, refer to the

initial simplex tableau:

x

2
1

y

1
3

⫺1 ⫺ᎏ6
ᎏ
5

u

1
0

0

√ P Constant
0
1

180
300

0
0

0

1

0

(18)

Since there are negative entries in the last row of the initial simplex tableau,
the initial solution is not optimal. We proceed to Step 3.

Step 3 Perform the following iterations. First, locate the pivot element:

a. Since the entry 

is the most negative entry to the left of the vertical
line in the last row of the initial simplex tableau, the second column in
the tableau is the pivot column.

⫺6
5

b. Divide each positive number of the pivot column into the corresponding

entry in the column of constants, and compare the ratios thus obtained. We
see that the ratio 

so row 2 is the pivot row.

is less than the ratio 

180
1 ,

300
3

c. The entry 3 lying in the pivot column and the pivot row is the pivot element.

√ P Constant
0
1

180
300

0
0

0

1

0

Ratio
⫽ 180
⫽ 100

180
1
300
3

Pivot 씮
row

u

1
0

0

x

2
1

y

1
3

⫺1 ⫺ᎏ6
ᎏ
5
앖
Pivot
column

Next, we convert this pivot element into a 1 by multiplying all the

entries in the pivot row by  . Then, using elementary row operations, we
complete the conversion of the pivot column into a unit column. The details
of the iteration follow:

1
3

x

2
ᎏ1
ᎏ
3

y

1
1

u

1
0

1
3

R2⎯→

√ P Constant
0
ᎏ1
ᎏ
3

180
100

0
0

⫺1 ⫺ᎏ6
ᎏ
5

0 0

1

0

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

366

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

R1 ⫺ R2
⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫹ R2

6
5

y

x
ᎏ5
ᎏ
3
ᎏ1
ᎏ
3
⫺ᎏ3
ᎏ 0
5

0
1

u
1⫺ ᎏ1
ᎏ
3
ᎏ1
0
ᎏ
3
ᎏ2
ᎏ
5

0

√ P Constant

0
0

1

80
100

120

(19)

This completes one iteration. The last row of the simplex tableau contains a
negative number, so an optimal solution has not been reached. Therefore, we
repeat the iterative step once again, as follows:
√ P Constant

Pivot 씮
row

3
5

R1⎯→

1
3

R2 ⫺ R1
⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫹ R1

3
5

u
1⫺ ᎏ1
ᎏ
3
ᎏ1
0
ᎏ
3
ᎏ2
ᎏ
5

0

0
0

1

80
100

120

Ratio
⫽ 48
⫽ 300

80
5/3
100
1/3

0
1

x y
ᎏ5
ᎏ
3
ᎏ1
ᎏ
3
⫺ᎏ3
ᎏ
5
앖
Pivot
column

0

x

1
ᎏ1
ᎏ
3
⫺ᎏ3
ᎏ
5

x

1
0

0

y u
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ1
0 ᎏ3
ᎏ
5
5
ᎏ1
1
0
ᎏ
3
ᎏ2
ᎏ
5

0 0

√ P Constant

0
0

1

48
100

120

√ P Constant

y

u
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ3
0
ᎏ
5
5
ᎏ2
1 ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ
ᎏ
5
5
7
9
0
ᎏ 1
ᎏ
ᎏ
ᎏ
2
2
5
5

0
0

48
84
148ᎏ4
ᎏ
5

(20)

The last row of the simplex tableau (20) does not contain any negative num-
bers, so we conclude that the optimal solution has been reached.

Step 4 Determine the optimal solution. Locate the basic variables in the final tableau.

In this case, the basic variables (those heading unit columns) are x, y, and P.
The value assigned to the basic variable x is the number 48, which is the entry
lying in the column of constants and in row 1 (the row that contains the 1).

√ P Constant

x

1
0

0

y

u
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ3
0
ᎏ
5
5
ᎏ2
1 ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ
ᎏ
5
5
7
9
0
ᎏ 1
ᎏ
ᎏ
ᎏ
2
2
5
5

0
0

씯—
씯—

씯

48
84
148ᎏ4
ᎏ
5

Similarly, we conclude that y ⫽ 84 and P ⫽ 148.8. Next, we note that the
variables u and √ are nonbasic and are accordingly assigned the values u ⫽ 0
and √ ⫽ 0. These results agree with those obtained in Example 1, Section 6.3.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 3

Maximize P ⫽ 2x ⫹ 2y ⫹ z
subject to 2x ⫹ y ⫹ 2z ⱕ 14
2x ⫹ 4y ⫹ z ⱕ 26
x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 3z ⱕ 28
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.4 THE SIMPLEX METHOD: STANDARD MAXIMIZATION PROBLEMS

367

Solution Introducing the slack variables u, √, and w and rewriting the objective
function in the standard form gives the system of linear equations

2x ⫹ y ⫹ 2z ⫹ u
2x ⫹ 4y ⫹ z
x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 3z
⫺2x ⫺ 2y ⫺ z
The initial simplex tableau is given by

⫹ √

⫹ w

⫽ 14
⫽ 26
⫽ 28
⫹ P ⫽ 0

y
1
4
2

x
2
2
1

z
2
1
3
⫺2 ⫺2 ⫺1

√ w P Constant
0
1
0
0

0
0
0
0
1
0
0 1

14
26
28
0

u
1
0
0
0

Since the most negative entry in the last row (⫺2) occurs twice, we may choose either
the x- or the y-column as the pivot column. Choosing the x-column as the pivot column
and proceeding with the first iteration, we obtain the following sequence of tableaus:

Pivot 씮
row

1
2

R1⎯→

R2 ⫺ 2R1
⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫺ R1
R4 ⫹ 2R1

x
2
2
1

y
1
4
2

z
2
1
3
⫺2 ⫺2 ⫺1

√ w P Constant
0 0
1
0
0 1
0

0
0
0
0 1

14
26
28
0

u
1
0
0
0

Ratio
14
⫽ 7
2
⫽ 13

26
2

28
1

⫽ 28

앖
Pivot
column

y
ᎏ1
ᎏ
2
4
2

x
1
2
1

z
u
ᎏ1
1
ᎏ
2
1
0
3
0
⫺2 ⫺2 ⫺1
0
x
u
y
ᎏ1
ᎏ1
1
ᎏ
ᎏ
2
2
3 ⫺1 ⫺1
0
ᎏ3
2 ⫺ᎏ1
0
ᎏ
ᎏ
2
2
0 ⫺1
1
1

z
1

7
26
28
0

0
0
0
0 1

√ w P Constant
0
0
1
0
0 1
0
√ w P Constant
0
1
0
0

7
12
21
14

0
0
0
1

0
0
1
0

Since there is a negative number in the last row of the simplex tableau, we perform
another iteration, as follows:

Pivot 씮
row

1
3

R2⎯→

z
1

u
ᎏ1
ᎏ
2

√ w P Constant
y
x
ᎏ1
1
0
ᎏ
2
3 ⫺1 ⫺1 1
0
2 ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ3
0
0
ᎏ
ᎏ
2
2
0 ⫺1
1
1 0
앖
Pivot
column

7
12
21
14

0
0
0
1

0
0
1
0

Ratio

7
1/2
12
3

21
3/2

⫽ 14
⫽ 4
⫽ 14

z

x

1
0
0

y
u
ᎏ1
ᎏ1
1
ᎏ
ᎏ
2
2
1 ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ
3
3
ᎏ3
2 ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ
ᎏ
2
2
0 ⫺1

1

√ w P Constant
0
ᎏ1
ᎏ
3
0

7
4
21

0
0
1

0
0
0

1

0

0 1

14

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

368

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

1
2

R1 ⫺ R2
⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫺ R2
R4 ⫹ R2

3
2

x

1
0
0

0

y

u
z
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ7
ᎏ2
0
ᎏ
ᎏ
6
3
6
1⫺ ᎏ1
ᎏ1
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ
ᎏ
3
3
3
ᎏ5
0 ⫺ᎏ1
0
ᎏ
ᎏ
2
2
ᎏ1
ᎏ2
ᎏ2
ᎏ
ᎏ
ᎏ
3
3
3

0

√ w P Constant

0
0
1

0

0
0
0

1

5
4
15

18

All entries in the last row are nonnegative, so we have reached the optimal solution.
We conclude that x ⫽ 5, y ⫽ 4, z ⫽ 0, u ⫽ 0, √ ⫽ 0, w ⫽ 15, and P ⫽ 18.

Explore & Discuss
Consider the linear programming problem

Maximize P ⫽ x ⫹ 2y
subject to ⫺2x ⫹ y ⱕ 4
x ⫺ 3y ⱕ 3
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

1. Sketch the feasible set S for the linear programming problem and explain why the prob-

lem has an unbounded solution.

2. Use the simplex method to solve the problem as follows:

a. Perform one iteration on the initial simplex tableau. Interpret your result. Indicate the

point on S corresponding to this (nonoptimal) solution.

b. Show that the simplex procedure breaks down when you attempt to perform another

iteration by demonstrating that there is no pivot element.

c. Describe what happens if you violate the rule for finding the pivot element by allow-

ing the ratios to be negative and proceeding with the iteration.

The following example is constructed to illustrate the geometry associated with
the  simplex  method  when  used  to  solve  a  problem  in  three-dimensional  space.  We
sketch  the  feasible  set  for  the  problem  and  show  the  path  dictated  by  the  simplex
method in arriving at the optimal solution for the problem. The use of a calculator will
help in the arithmetic operations if you wish to verify the steps.

EXAMPLE 4 Geometric Illustration of Simplex Method in 3-Space

Maximize P ⫽ 20x ⫹ 12y ⫹ 18z
subject to 3x ⫹ y ⫹ 2z ⱕ 9
2x ⫹ 3y ⫹ z ⱕ 8
x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 3z ⱕ 7
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

Solution Introducing the slack variables u, √, and w and rewriting the objective
function in standard form give the following system of linear equations:

3x ⫹ y ⫹ 2z ⫹ u
2x ⫹ 3y ⫹ z
x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 3z
⫺20x ⫺ 12y ⫺ 18z

⫹ √

⫽ 9
⫽ 8
⫽ 7
⫹ P ⫽ 0

⫹ w

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.4 THE SIMPLEX METHOD: STANDARD MAXIMIZATION PROBLEMS

369

The initial simplex tableau is given by

x

y

z

3
2
1

1
3
2

2
1
3
⫺20 ⫺12 ⫺18

u

1
0
0

0

√ w P Constant
0
1
0

0
0
0

9
8
7

0
0
1

0

0

1

0

Since the most negative entry in the last row (⫺20) occurs in the x-column, we
choose the x-column as the pivot column. Proceeding with the first iteration, we
obtain the following sequence of tableaus:

x

y

z

u

√ w P Constant

Pivot 씮
row

1
3

R1⎯→

3
2
1

1
3
2

2
1
3
⫺20 ⫺12 ⫺18

앖
Pivot
column

x

y
ᎏ1
ᎏ
3
3
2

z
ᎏ2
ᎏ
3
1
3
⫺20 ⫺12 ⫺18

1
2
1

1 0
0 1
0
0

0

0

0
0
1

0

0
0
0

1

9
8
7

0

√ w P Constant
0
1
0

3
8
7

0
0
1

0
0
0

u
ᎏ1
ᎏ
3
0
0

씮

R2 ⫺ 2R1
⎯⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫺ R1
R4 ⫹ 20R1 Pivot
row

x

0

0

0

1

0
√ w P Constant
u
z
y
ᎏ1
ᎏ2
ᎏ1
1
0
ᎏ
ᎏ   
ᎏ
3
3
3
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ2
ᎏ7
1
0
ᎏ
3
3
3
ᎏ5
ᎏ7
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ1
0
0
ᎏ
ᎏ
3
3
3
ᎏ2
6ᎏ ⫺ᎏ1
0 ⫺ᎏ1
4ᎏ
0ᎏ 0
3
3
3
앖
Pivot
column

3
2
4

0
0
0

0
0
1

60

0

1

Ratio
9
⫽ 3
3

8
2

7
1

⫽ 4

⫽ 7

Ratio

9

6
7

12
5

Interpreting this tableau, we see that x ⫽ 3, y ⫽ 0, z ⫽ 0, and P ⫽ 60. Thus, after
one iteration, we are at the point B (3, 0, 0) with P ⫽ 60. (See Figure 20 on the fol-
lowing page.) 

Since the most negative entry in the last row is 

, we choose the y-column as

⫺16
3

the pivot column. Proceeding with this iteration, we obtain

x

y

z

u

√ w P Constant

3
7

R2⎯→

ᎏ1
ᎏ2
ᎏ1
1
0
ᎏ
ᎏ
ᎏ
3
3
3
1 ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ2
ᎏ3
0
ᎏ
ᎏ
7
7
7
ᎏ5
ᎏ7
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ1
0
0
ᎏ
ᎏ
3
3
3
ᎏ2
6ᎏ ⫺ᎏ1
0 ⫺ᎏ1
4ᎏ
0ᎏ 0
3
3
3

0
0
0 0
0
1

0

1

3
ᎏ6
ᎏ
7
4

60

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

370

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

1
3

5
3

R1 ⫺ R2
⎯⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫺ R2
R4 ⫹ R2

16
3

x

y

z

u

√ w P Constant

ᎏ ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ5
ᎏ3
1 0
ᎏ
ᎏ
7
7
7
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ2
0 1 ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ3
ᎏ
ᎏ
7
7
7
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ5
ᎏ1
ᎏ1
8ᎏ
0 0
ᎏ
7
7
7
ᎏ1
ᎏ3
6ᎏ
0 0 ⫺ᎏ3
8ᎏ
6ᎏ
7
7
7
앖
Pivot
column

씮

Pivot
row

0
0
0 0
1 0

0

1

Ratio

19
5
—
1

ᎏ1
9ᎏ
7
ᎏ6
ᎏ
7
ᎏ1
8ᎏ
7
64 ᎏ4
ᎏ
7

Interpreting this tableau, we see that 
second iteration brings us to the point 

x ⫽ 19
7 ,  y ⫽ 6
7, 02
C119
6
7 ,  

7,  z ⫽ 0  and  P ⫽ 64 4
7.
. (See Figure 20.) 

Thus, the 

z

F  0, 0,    7
3

S

A(0, 0, 0)

H(2, 1, 1)

5
E  0,    ,    
7

17
7

D  0,    , 08

3

y

C     ,    , 0

19
7

6
7

G     , 0,    12
7

13
7

B(3, 0, 0)

x

FIGURE 20
The simplex method brings us from the
point A to the point H, at which the objec-
tive function is maximized.

Since there is a negative number in the last row of the simplex tableau, we per-

form yet another iteration, as follows:

x

y

z

u

√

w P Constant

7
18

R3⎯→

ᎏ ⫺ ᎏ1
ᎏ5
ᎏ3
1 0
ᎏ
ᎏ
7
7
7
0 1 ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ3
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ2
ᎏ
ᎏ
7
7
7
5
1
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ
0 0
1
ᎏ
ᎏ
1
1
8
8
ᎏ1
ᎏ3
0 0 ⫺ᎏ3
8ᎏ
6ᎏ
6ᎏ
7
7
7

0
0
7
ᎏ
ᎏ
1
8
0

0
0
0

1

ᎏ1
9ᎏ
7
ᎏ6
ᎏ
7
1
64 ᎏ4
ᎏ
7

x

y

z

u

√

w P Constant

R1 ⫺ 5
7 R3
⎯⎯⎯⎯→
R2 ⫹ 1
7 R3
38
R4 ⫹ R3
7

0 0

5
1
7
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ
1
ᎏ
ᎏ
ᎏ
ᎏ
8
1
1
8
1
8
1
7
5
0 1 0 ⫺ᎏ
ᎏ
ᎏ
ᎏ
ᎏ
ᎏ
1
1
8
1
8
8
7
5
1
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ
0 0 1
ᎏ
ᎏ
ᎏ
ᎏ
1
8
1
8
1
8
ᎏ1
ᎏ7
ᎏ4
9ᎏ
9ᎏ
ᎏ
9
9
9

0 0 0

0
0
0

1

2
1
1

70

All entries in the last row are nonnegative, so we have reached the optimal solution
(corresponding to the point H(2, 1, 1)). We conclude that x ⫽ 2, y ⫽ 1, z ⫽ 1, u ⫽ 0,
√ ⫽ 0, w ⫽ 0, and P ⫽ 70.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

6.4 THE SIMPLEX METHOD: STANDARD MAXIMIZATION PROBLEMS

371

The feasible set S for the problem is the hexahedron shown in Figure 21. It is

the intersection of the half-spaces determined by the planes P1, P2, and P3 with
equations 3x ⫹ y ⫹ 2z ⫽ 9, 2x ⫹ 3y ⫹ z ⫽ 8, x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 3z ⫽ 7, respectively,
and the coordinate planes x ⫽ 0, y ⫽ 0, and z ⫽ 0. The portion of the figure
showing the feasible set S is shown in Figure 20. Observe that the first iteration 
of the simplex method brings us from A(0, 0, 0) with P ⫽ 0 to B(3, 0, 0) with 
P ⫽ 60. The second iteration brings us from B(3, 0, 0) to CÓᎏ ,  , 0Ô with 
P ⫽ 64 , and the third iteration brings us from CÓ
,  , 0Ô to the point H(2, 1, 1)
with an optimal value of 70 for P.

19
7

19
7

4
7

6
7

6
7

FIGURE 21
The feasible set S is obtained from the
intersection of the half-spaces deter-
mined by P1, P2, and P3 with the coordi-
nate planes x ⫽ 0, y ⫽ 0, and z ⫽ 0.

VIDEO

z

P2(2x + 3y + z = 8)

F  0, 0,    7
3

A(0, 0, 0)

12
G     , 0,    
7

13
7

S

5
E 0,    ,    
7

17
7
D 0,    , 08

3

P1(3x + y + 2z = 9)

y

H(2, 1, 1)

C     ,    , 0

19
7

6
7

B(3, 0, 0)
P3(x + 2y + 3z = 7)

x

APPLIED EXAMPLE 5 Production Planning Ace Novelty Company has
determined that the profit for each Type A, Type B, and Type C souvenir 
that it plans to produce is $6, $5, and $4, respectively. To manufacture a Type A
souvenir requires 2 minutes on Machine I, 1 minute on Machine II, and 2 minutes
on Machine III. A Type B souvenir requires 1 minute on Machine I, 3 minutes on
Machine II, and 1 minute on Machine III. A Type C souvenir requires 1 minute
on Machine I and 2 minutes on each of Machines II and III. Each day, there are 3
hours available on Machine I, 5 hours available on Machine II, and 4 hours avail-
able on Machine III for manufacturing these souvenirs. How many souvenirs of
each type should Ace Novelty make per day to maximize its profit? (Compare
with Example 1, Section 5.1.)

Solution The given information is tabulated as follows:

Type A

Type B

Type C

Machine I
Machine II
Machine III

Profit per Unit

$2
$1
$2

$6

$1
$3
$1

$5

$1
$2
$2

$4

Time Available

(min)

180
300
240

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

372

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

Let x, y, and z denote the respective numbers of Type A, Type B, and Type C sou-
venirs to be made. The total amount of time that Machine I is used is given by 
2x ⫹ y ⫹ z minutes and must not exceed 180 minutes. Thus, we have the inequality

2x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⱕ 180

Similar considerations on the use of Machines II and III lead to the inequalities

x ⫹ 3y ⫹ 2z ⱕ 300
2x ⫹ y ⫹ 2z ⱕ 240

The profit resulting from the sale of the souvenirs produced is given by

P ⫽ 6x ⫹ 5y ⫹ 4z

The  mathematical  formulation  of  this  problem  leads  to  the  following  standard
linear programming problem: Maximize the objective (profit) function P ⫽ 6x ⫹
5y ⫹ 4z subject to

2x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⱕ 180
x ⫹ 3y ⫹ 2z ⱕ 300
2x ⫹ y ⫹ 2z ⱕ 240
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

Introducing the slack variables u, √, and w gives the system of linear equations

2x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⫹ u

x ⫹ 3y ⫹ 2z
2x ⫹ y ⫹ 2z
⫺6x ⫺ 5y ⫺ 4z

⫹ √

⫽ 180
⫽ 300
⫽ 240
⫹ P ⫽ 0

⫹ w

The tableaus resulting from the use of the simplex algorithm are as follows:

Pivot 씮
row

1
2

R1⎯→

R2 ⫺ R1
⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫺ 2R1
R4 ⫹ 6R1

씮

Pivot
row

x

2
1
2

y

1
3
1

z

1
2
2

⫺6 ⫺5 ⫺4

앖
Pivot
column

x

1
1
2

y
ᎏ1
ᎏ
2
3
1

z
ᎏ1
ᎏ
2
2
2

⫺6 ⫺5 ⫺4

u

1
0
0

0

u
ᎏ1
ᎏ
2
0
0

0

x

1
0
0

y
ᎏ1
ᎏ
2
ᎏ5
ᎏ
2
0

u
z
ᎏ1
ᎏ1
ᎏ
ᎏ
2
2
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ3
ᎏ
2
2
1 ⫺1

√ w P Constant
0 0
1 0
0
1

180
300
240

0
0
0

0

0

1

0

√ w P Constant
0
0
1
0
0 1

90
300
240

0
0
0

0

1

0

0
√ w P Constant
0
1
0

90
210
60

0
0
1

0
0
0

3

0

0

1

540

0 ⫺2 ⫺1

앖
Pivot
column

Ratio
⫽ 90
⫽ 300

180
2

300
1

240
2

⫽ 120

Ratio
⫽ 180

90
1/2

210
5/2

⫽ 84

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.4 THE SIMPLEX METHOD: STANDARD MAXIMIZATION PROBLEMS

373

2
5

R2⎯→

x

1
0
0

y
ᎏ1
ᎏ
2
1
0

u
z
ᎏ1
ᎏ1
ᎏ
ᎏ
2
2
ᎏ3
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ
5
5
1 ⫺1

0 ⫺2 ⫺1

3

√ w P Constant
0
ᎏ2
ᎏ
5
0

90
84
60

0
0
1

0
0
0

1

0

540

0
√ w P Constant

R1 ⫺ 1
2 R2
⎯⎯⎯→
R4 ⫹ 2R2

x

1
0
0

0

u
y
z
ᎏ3
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ1
0 ᎏ1
ᎏ
ᎏ
5
5
5
1 ᎏ3
ᎏ2
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ
ᎏ
5
5
5
0 1 ⫺1
0
ᎏ1
3ᎏ
5

ᎏ1
ᎏ
5

ᎏ4
ᎏ
5

0

0
0
1

0

0
0
0

1

48
84
60

708

From the final simplex tableau, we read off the solution

z ⫽ 0

u ⫽ 0

y ⫽ 84

x ⫽ 48

P ⫽ 708
Thus, to maximize its profit, Ace Novelty should produce 48 Type A souvenirs,
84 Type B souvenirs, and no Type C souvenirs. The resulting profit is $708 per
day. The value of the slack variable w ⫽ 60 tells us that 1 hour of the available
time on Machine III is left unused.

w ⫽ 60

√ ⫽ 0

Let’s  compare  the  results  obtained  here  with  those
Interpreting  Our  Results
obtained in Example 7, Section 5.2. Recall that to use all available machine time on
each of the three machines, Ace Novelty had to produce 36 Type A, 48 Type B, and 
60 Type C souvenirs. This would have resulted in a profit of $696. Example 5 shows
how,  through  the  optimal  use  of  equipment,  a  company  can  boost  its  profit  while
reducing machine wear!

Problems with Multiple Solutions and Problems with No Solutions
As we saw in Section 6.3, a linear programming problem may have infinitely many solu-
tions. We also saw that a linear programming problem may have no solution. How do
we spot each of these phenomena when using the simplex method to solve a problem?
A linear programming problem will have infinitely many solutions if and only if
the last row to the left of the vertical line of the final simplex tableau has a zero in a
column that is not a unit column. Also, a linear programming problem will have no
solution if the simplex method breaks down at some stage. For example, if at some
stage there are no nonnegative ratios in our computation, then the linear programming
problem has no solution (see Exercise 50).

Explore & Discuss
Consider the linear programming problem

Maximize P ⫽ 4x ⫹ 6y
2x ⫹ y ⱕ 10
subject to
2x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 18
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

1. Sketch the feasible set for the linear programming problem.
2. Use the method of corners to show that there are infinitely many optimal solutions. What

are they?

(continued)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

374

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

3. Use the simplex method to solve the problem as follows.

a. Perform one iteration on the initial simplex tableau and conclude that you have

arrived at an optimal solution. What is the value of P, and where is it attained? Com-
pare this result with that obtained in Step 2.

b. Observe that the tableau obtained in part (a) indicates that there are infinitely many

solutions (see the comment above on multiple solutions). Now perform another itera-
tion on the simplex tableau using the x-column as the pivot column. Interpret the final
tableau.

6.4 Self-Check Exercises

1. Solve  the  following  linear  programming  problem  by  the

simplex method:

Maximize P ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3y ⫹ 6z
2x ⫹ 3y ⫹ z ⱕ 10
subject to
x ⫹ y ⫹ 2z ⱕ 8
2y ⫹ 3z ⱕ 6
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

2. The LaCrosse Iron Works makes two models of cast-iron
fireplace  grates:  model  A  and  model  B.  Producing  one
model  A  grate  requires  20  lb  of  cast  iron  and  20  min  of

6.4 Concept Questions

labor, whereas producing one model B grate requires 30 lb
of cast iron and 15 min of labor. The profit for a model A
grate is $6, and the profit for a model B grate is $8. There
are 7200 lb of cast iron and 100 labor-hours available each
week.  Because  of  a  surplus  from  the  previous  week,  the
proprietor has decided to make no more than 150 units of
model  A  grates  this  week.  Determine  how  many  of  each
model he should make to maximize his profit.

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 6.4 can be found on 
page 379.

1. Give the three characteristics of a standard maximization

linear programming problem.

b. If you are given a simplex tableau, how do you deter-

mine whether the optimal solution has been reached?

2. a. When  the  initial  simplex  tableau  is  set  up,  how  is  the
system of linear inequalities transformed into a system
of linear equations? How is the objective function P ⫽
c1x1 ⫹ c2x2 ⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⫹ cnxn rewritten?

3. In the simplex method, how is a pivot column selected? A

pivot row? A pivot element?

6.4 Exercises

In Exercises 1–6, (a) write the linear programming problem as a
standard maximization problem if it is not already in that form,
and (b) write the initial simplex tableau.
1. Maximize 

subject to the constraints

P ⫽ 2x ⫹ 4y

x ⫹ 4y ⱕ 12
x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 10
x ⱖ 0,  y ⱖ 0

2. Maximize 

P ⫽ 3x ⫹ 5y

subject to the constraints

      x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 12
⫺ 2x ⫺ 3y ⱖ ⫺18

x ⱖ 0,  y ⱖ 0

3. Maximize 

P ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3y

subject to the constraints

    x ⫹ y ⱕ 10
⫺ x ⫺ 2y ⱖ ⫺12
2x ⫹ y ⱕ 12
x ⱖ 0,  y ⱖ 0

4. Maximize 

P ⫽ 2x ⫹ 5y

subject to the constraints

3x ⫹ 8y ⱕ 1
4x ⫺ 5y ⱕ 4
2x ⫹ 7y ⱕ 6
x ⱖ 0,  y ⱖ 0

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.4 THE SIMPLEX METHOD: STANDARD MAXIMIZATION PROBLEMS

375

5. Maximize 

P ⫽ x ⫹ 3y ⫹ 4z

subject to the constraints

13.

   x ⫹ 2y ⫹ z ⱕ 40
⫺ x ⫺ y ⫺ z ⱖ ⫺30
x ⱖ 0,  y ⱖ 0,  z ⱖ 0

6. Maximize 

P ⫽ 4x ⫹ 5y ⫹ 6z

subject to the constraints

x
ᎏ5
ᎏ
2
1
0
0

2x ⫹ 3y ⫹ z ⱕ 900
3x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⱕ 350
4x ⫹ 2y ⫹ z ⱕ 400

x ⱖ 0,  y ⱖ 0,  z ⱖ 0

In Exercises 7–16, determine whether the given simplex tableau
is in final form. If so, find the solution to the associated standard
linear programming problem. If not, find the pivot element to be
used in the next iteration of the simplex method.
7. x
0
1

√ P Constant

0
0

ᎏ2
0ᎏ 
7
ᎏ3
0ᎏ
7
ᎏ22
0ᎏ
7

Constant

6

2

30

Constant

2
4

12

Constant

28
16

48

0

y
u
ᎏ5
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ1
1
ᎏ
7
7
ᎏ2
0 ⫺ᎏ3
ᎏ
ᎏ
7
7
ᎏ3
ᎏ1
3ᎏ
ᎏ
7
7
√ P
0
0
0

y
1
0⫺1

u
1
1

1

0

8. x
1
1

3

0

5

0

1
√ P
0
0

0

1 ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ
2
ᎏ1
0
ᎏ
2
ᎏ3
1
ᎏ
2
√ P
1
0
0
1

u
1
0

9. x
y u
ᎏ1
0
ᎏ
2
ᎏ1
1
ᎏ
2
0 ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ
2

10. x
3
2

2

y
0
1

0

z
5
3

8

11. x

y
1 ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ
3
2
0
ᎏ2
0
ᎏ
3
4

0

0

z
0
0
1

0

12.

x
ᎏ1
ᎏ
2
ᎏ1
ᎏ
2
2

⫺1

y
z
ᎏ1
0
ᎏ
4
ᎏ3
1
ᎏ
4
0
3
0 ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ
2

1

3
u √
ᎏ1
ᎏ
3
0 1
ᎏ1
0
ᎏ
3
1

w P
0
0
0

0 ⫺ᎏ2
ᎏ
3
1
ᎏ1
ᎏ
3
2
1
√ w P
0
0
0

u
1 ⫺ᎏ1
0
ᎏ
4
ᎏ1
0
0
ᎏ
4
0 1
0

0

6

ᎏ3
ᎏ
2

0

1

Constant

ᎏ1
ᎏ
3
6
ᎏ1
3ᎏ
3
17

Constant

ᎏ1
9ᎏ
2
ᎏ2
1ᎏ
2
30

63

z
y
0
3
0
0
1
0
0 1
0

t
s
1
0
0 1
0
0
0

√ P
0
0
0
0
1

u
0 ⫺4
0
0
0
0 1
0
0
1
300
0
0
√ P
0
0
0
0

Constant

46
9
12
6
1800

Constant

4
5
12
6

1

4920

Constant

⫺180 ⫺200

14. x
1
0
0
0
0

15. x
1
0

16.

0

x
0
1
2
⫺1

12

u
0

y
0
0
1
0
0

z
s
ᎏ2
0
ᎏ
5
0⫺ ᎏ2
ᎏ
5
0
0
1
0
72
0

u
t
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ8
0 ⫺ᎏ6
ᎏ
5
5
ᎏ8
ᎏ6
1
ᎏ
ᎏ
5
5
0
1
0
0
0
1
0⫺16
√ P
y
z
ᎏ3
ᎏ1
0
0
ᎏ
ᎏ
5
5
1⫺ ᎏ1
9ᎏ 1 ⫺ᎏ3
0
ᎏ
5
5
ᎏ2
6ᎏ 0
0
5
√ w P
0
0
0
1

z
0 1 ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ
2
ᎏ1
0
1
ᎏ
2
0 ⫺ᎏ3
0
ᎏ
2
0
0
1

y
ᎏ1
ᎏ
2
ᎏ1
ᎏ
2
ᎏ1
ᎏ
2
3

0
0
1
0

1

0

u

30
10

60

Constant

2
13
4
26

In Exercises 17–31, solve each linear programming problem by
the simplex method.
17. Maximize P ⫽ 3x ⫹ 4y
x ⫹ y ⱕ 4
2x ⫹ y ⱕ 5
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

subject to

subject to

18. Maximize P ⫽ 5x ⫹ 3y
x ⫹ y ⱕ 80
ⱕ 90
3x
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

subject to

19. Maximize P ⫽ 10x ⫹ 12y
x ⫹ 2y ⱕ 12
3x ⫹ 2y ⱕ 24
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

subject to

20. Maximize P ⫽ 5x ⫹ 4y
3x ⫹ 5y ⱕ 78
4x ⫹ y ⱕ 36
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

subject to

21. Maximize P ⫽ 4x ⫹ 6y
3x ⫹ y ⱕ 24
2x ⫹ y ⱕ 18
x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 24
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

376

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

subject to

22. Maximize P ⫽ 15x ⫹ 12y
x ⫹ y ⱕ 12
3x ⫹ y ⱕ 30
10x ⫹ 7y ⱕ 70
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

subject to

23. Maximize P ⫽ 3x ⫹ 4y ⫹ 5z
x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⱕ 8
3x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 4z ⱕ 24
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

subject to

24. Maximize P ⫽ 3x ⫹ 3y ⫹ 4z
x ⫹ y ⫹ 3z ⱕ 15
4x ⫹ 4y ⫹ 3z ⱕ 65
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

25. Maximize P ⫽ 3x ⫹ 4y ⫹ z

subject to

3x ⫹ 10y ⫹ 5z ⱕ 120
5x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 8z ⱕ 6
8x ⫹ 10y ⫹ 3z ⱕ 105
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

26. Maximize P ⫽ x ⫹ 2y ⫺ z

subject to

2x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⱕ 14
4x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 3z ⱕ 28
2x ⫹ 5y ⫹ 5z ⱕ 30
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

subject to

27. Maximize P ⫽ 4x ⫹ 6y ⫹ 5z
x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⱕ 20
2x ⫹ 4y ⫹ 3z ⱕ 42
⫹ 3z ⱕ 30
2x
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

subject to

28. Maximize P ⫽ x ⫹ 4y ⫺ 2z
3x ⫹ y ⫺ z ⱕ 80
2x ⫹ y ⫺ z ⱕ 40
⫺x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⱕ 80
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

29. Maximize P ⫽ 12x ⫹ 10y ⫹ 5z

subject to

2x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⱕ 10
3x ⫹ 5y ⫹ z ⱕ 45
2x ⫹ 5y ⫹ z ⱕ 40
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

30. Maximize P ⫽ 2x ⫹ 6y ⫹ 6z

subject to

2x ⫹ y ⫹ 3z ⱕ 10
4x ⫹ y ⫹ 2z ⱕ 56
6x ⫹ 4y ⫹ 3z ⱕ 126
2x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⱕ 32
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

31. Maximize P ⫽ 24x ⫹ 16y ⫹ 23z

subject to

2x ⫹ y ⫹ 2z ⱕ 7
2x ⫹ 3y ⫹ z ⱕ 8
x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 3z ⱕ 7
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

32. Rework Example 3 using the y-column as the pivot column

in the first iteration of the simplex method.

33. Show that the linear programming problem

Maximize P ⫽ 2x ⫹ 2y ⫺ 4z
subject to 3x ⫹ 3y ⫺ 2z ⱕ 100
5x ⫹ 5y ⫹ 3z ⱕ 150
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

has optimal solutions x ⫽ 30, y ⫽ 0, z ⫽ 0, P ⫽ 60 and 
x ⫽ 0, y ⫽ 30, z ⫽ 0, P ⫽ 60.

34. MANUFACTURING—PRODUCTION SCHEDULING A  company
manufactures two products, A and B, on two machines, I
and II. It has been determined that the company will real-
ize a profit of $3/unit on Product A and a profit of $4/unit
on  Product  B.  To  manufacture  1  unit  of  Product  A
requires 6 min on Machine I and 5 min on Machine II. To
manufacture  1  unit  of  Product  B requires  9  min  on
Machine  I  and  4  min  on  Machine  II.  There  are  5  hr  of
machine time available on Machine I and 3 hr of machine
time  available  on  Machine  II  in  each  work  shift.  How
many  units  of  each  product  should  be  produced  in  each
shift  to  maximize  the  company’s  profit?  What  is  the
largest profit the company can realize? Is there any time
left unused on the machines?

35. MANUFACTURING—PRODUCTION SCHEDULING National  Busi-
ness  Machines  Corporation  manufactures  two  models  of
fax machines: A and B. Each model A costs $100 to make,
and each model B costs $150. The profits are $30 for each
model A and $40 for each model B fax machine. If the total
number  of  fax  machines  demanded  each  month  does  not
exceed 2500 and the company has earmarked no more than
$600,000/month for manufacturing costs, find how many
units of each model National should make each month to
maximize its monthly profit. What is the largest monthly
profit the company can make?

36. MANUFACTURING—PRODUCTION SCHEDULING Kane  Manu-
facturing  has  a  division  that  produces  two  models 
of  hibachis,  model  A  and  model  B.  To  produce  each
model A hibachi requires 3 lb of cast iron and 6 min of
labor. To produce each model B hibachi requires 4 lb of
cast iron and 3 min of labor. The profit for each model A
hibachi is $2, and the profit for each model B hibachi is
$1.50.  If  1000  lb  of  cast  iron  and  20  labor-hours  are
available  for  the  production  of  hibachis  each  day,  how
many  hibachis  of  each  model  should  the  division  pro-
duce  to  maximize  Kane’s  profit?  What  is  the  largest
profit the company can realize? Is there any raw material
left over?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

37. AGRICULTURE—CROP PLANNING A  farmer  has  150  acres  of
land suitable for cultivating Crops A and B. The cost of cul-
tivating Crop A is $40/acre, whereas the cost of cultivating
Crop B is $60/acre. The farmer has a maximum of $7400
available for land cultivation. Each acre of Crop A requires
20 labor-hours, and each acre of Crop B requires 25 labor-
hours.  The  farmer  has  a  maximum  of  3300  labor-hours
available.  If  he  expects  to  make  a  profit  of  $150/acre  on
Crop A and $200/acre on Crop B, how many acres of each
crop should he plant to maximize his profit? What is the
largest  profit  the  farmer  can  realize?  Are  there  any  re-
sources left over?

38. INVESTMENTS—ASSET ALLOCATION A  financier  plans 

to
invest  up  to  $500,000  in  two  projects.  Project  A yields  a
return of 10% on the investment, whereas Project B yields
a return of 15% on the investment. Because the investment
in Project B is riskier than the investment in Project A, the
financier  has  decided  that  the  investment  in  Project  B
should not exceed 40% of the total investment. How much
should she invest in each project to maximize the return on
her investment? What is the maximum return?

39. INVESTMENTS—ASSET ALLOCATION Ashley has earmarked at
most  $250,000  for  investment  in  three  mutual  funds:  a
money  market  fund,  an  international  equity  fund,  and  a
growth-and-income  fund.  The  money  market  fund  has 
a  rate  of  return  of  6%/year,  the  international  equity  fund
has  a  rate  of  return  of  10%/year,  and  the  growth-and-
income fund has a rate of return of 15%/year. Ashley has
stipulated  that  no  more  than  25%  of  her  total  portfolio
should be in the growth-and-income fund and that no more
than  50%  of  her  total  portfolio  should  be  in  the  interna-
tional equity fund. To maximize the return on her invest-
ment,  how  much  should  Ashley  invest  in  each  type  of
fund? What is the maximum return?

40. MANUFACTURING—PRODUCTION SCHEDULING A  division  of
the  Winston  Furniture  Company  manufactures  dining
tables  and  chairs.  Each  table  requires  40  board  feet  of
wood and 3 labor-hours. Each chair requires 16 board feet
of wood and 4 labor-hours. The profit for each table is $45,
and the profit for each chair is $20. In a certain week, the
company  has  3200  board  feet  of  wood  available  and 
520  labor-hours  available.  How  many  tables  and  chairs
should Winston manufacture to maximize its profit? What
is the maximum profit?

41. MANUFACTURING—PRODUCTION SCHEDULING A company man-
ufactures Products A, B, and C. Each product is processed in
three  departments:  I,  II,  and  III.  The  total  available  labor-
hours per week for Departments I, II, and III are 900, 1080,
and 840, respectively. The time requirements (in hours per
unit) and profit per unit for each product are as follows:

Product A

Product B

Product C

Dept. I
Dept. II
Dept. III

Profit

$ 2
$ 3
$ 2

$18

$ 1
$ 1
$ 2

$12

$ 2
$ 2
$ 1

$15

6.4 THE SIMPLEX METHOD: STANDARD MAXIMIZATION PROBLEMS

377

How many units of each product should the company pro-
duce to maximize its profit? What is the largest profit the
company can realize? Are there any resources left over?

42. MANUFACTURING—PRODUCTION SCHEDULING Ace  Novelty
manufactures  Giant  Pandas  and  Saint  Bernards.  Each
Panda requires 1.5 yd2 of plush, 30 ft3 of stuffing, and 5
pieces of trim; each Saint Bernard requires 2 yd2 of plush,
35 ft3 of stuffing, and 8 pieces of trim. The profit for each
Panda is $10, and the profit for each Saint Bernard is $15.
If  3600  yd2 of  plush,  66,000  ft3 of  stuffing,  and  13,600
pieces  of  trim  are  available,  how  many  of  each  of  the
stuffed animals should the company manufacture to maxi-
mize its profit? What is the maximum profit?

43. ADVERTISING—TELEVISION COMMERCIALS As  part  of  a  cam-
paign to promote its annual clearance sale, Excelsior Com-
pany  decided  to  buy  television  advertising  time  on  Station
KAOS. Excelsior’s television advertising budget is $102,000.
Morning  time  costs  $3000/min,  afternoon  time  costs
$1000/min, and evening (prime) time costs $12,000/min. Be-
cause  of  previous  commitments,  KAOS  cannot  offer  Ex-
celsior more than 6 min of prime time or more than a total
of 25 min of advertising time over the 2 weeks in which the
commercials  are  to  be  run.  KAOS  estimates  that  morning
commercials are seen by 200,000 people, afternoon commer-
cials are seen by 100,000 people, and evening commercials
are seen by 600,000 people. How much morning, afternoon,
and evening advertising time should Excelsior buy to maxi-
mize exposure of its commercials?

44. INVESTMENTS—ASSET ALLOCATION Sharon  has  a  total  of
$200,000 to invest in three types of mutual funds: growth,
balanced, and income funds. Growth funds have a rate of
return of 12%/year, balanced funds have a rate of return of
10%/year, and income funds have a return of 6%/year. The
growth,  balanced,  and  income  mutual  funds  are  assigned
risk factors of 0.1, 0.06, and 0.02, respectively. Sharon has
decided that at least 50% of her total portfolio is to be in
income funds and at least 25% in balanced funds. She has
also decided that the average risk factor for her investment
should not exceed 0.05. How much should Sharon invest in
each  type  of  fund  to  realize  a  maximum  return  on  her
investment? What is the maximum return?
Hint: The constraint for the average risk factor for the investment
is given by 0.1x ⫹ 0.06y ⫹ 0.02z ⱕ 0.05(x ⫹ y ⫹ z).

45. MANUFACTURING—PRODUCTION CONTROL Custom  Office
Furniture is introducing a new line of executive desks made
from  a  specially  selected  grade  of  walnut.  Initially,  three
models—A, B, and C—are to be marketed. Each model A
desk requires 1 hr for fabrication, 1 hr for assembly, and
1 hr for finishing; each model  B desk requires 1 hr for fab-
rication,  1  hr  for  assembly,  and  1  hr  for  finishing;  each
model C desk requires 1 hr,  hr, and  hr for fabrication,
assembly,  and  finishing,  respectively.  The  profit  on  each
model A desk is $26, the profit on each model B desk is $28,
and the profit on each model C desk is $24. The total time
available in the fabrication department, the assembly depart-
ment, and the finishing department in the first month of pro-
duction is 310 hr, 205 hr, and 190 hr, respectively. To max-

1
2

1
2

1
4

1
2

3
4

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

378

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

imize  Custom’s  profit,  how  many  desks  of  each  model
should be made in the month? What is the largest profit the
company can realize? Are there any resources left over?

46. MANUFACTURING—PREFABRICATED HOUSING PRODUCTION Boise
Lumber has decided to enter the lucrative prefabricated hous-
ing business. Initially, it plans to offer three models: standard,
deluxe, and luxury. Each house is prefabricated and partially
assembled in the factory, and the final assembly is completed
on site. The dollar amount of building material required, the
amount of labor required in the factory for prefabrication and
partial assembly, the amount of on-site labor required, and
the profit per unit are as follows:

Material
Factory Labor (hr)
On-site Labor (hr)

Profit

Standard

Model
$6,000
$ 240
$ 180

$3,400

Deluxe
Model
$8,000
$ 220
$ 210

$4,000

Luxury
Model
$10,000
200
$
$
300

$5,000

For the first year’s production, a sum of $8,200,000 is bud-
geted for the building material; the number of labor-hours
available  for  work  in  the  factory  (for  prefabrication  and
partial  assembly)  is  not  to  exceed  218,000  hr;  and  the
amount of labor for on-site work is to be less than or equal
to  237,000  labor-hours.  Determine  how  many  houses  of
each type Boise should produce to maximize its profit from
this new venture. (Market research has confirmed that there
should be no problems with sales.)

47. MANUFACTURING—COLD FORMULA PRODUCTION Beyer Pharma-
ceutical produces three kinds of cold formulas: I, II, and III. 
It  takes  2.5  hr  to  produce  1000  bottles  of  Formula  I,  3  hr 
to produce 1000 bottles of Formula II, and 4 hr to produce
1000 bottles of Formula III. The profits for each 1000 bottles
of  Formula  I,  Formula  II,  and  Formula  III  are  $180,  $200, 
and $300, respectively. Suppose that for a certain production
run,  there  are  enough  ingredients  on  hand  to  make  at  most
9000 bottles of Formula I, 12,000 bottles of Formula II, and
6000 bottles of Formula III. Furthermore, suppose the time for
the production run is limited to a maximum of 70 hr. How
many  bottles  of  each  formula  should  be  produced  in  this 
production run so that the profit is maximized? What is the
maximum  profit  realizable  by  the  company?  Are  there  any
resources left over?

48. PRODUCTION—JUICE PRODUCTS CalJuice  Company  has  de-
cided to introduce three fruit juices made from blending two
or more concentrates. These juices will be packaged in 2-qt
(64-oz)  cartons.  One  carton  of  pineapple–orange  juice  re-
quires 8 oz each of pineapple and orange juice concentrates.
One carton of orange–banana juice requires 12 oz of orange
juice  concentrate  and  4  oz  of  banana  pulp  concentrate.  Fi-
nally, one carton of pineapple–orange–banana juice requires
4 oz of pineapple juice concentrate, 8 oz of orange juice con-
centrate, and 4 oz of banana pulp. The company has decided
to allot 16,000 oz of pineapple juice concentrate, 24,000 oz
of orange juice concentrate, and 5000 oz of banana pulp con-
centrate for the initial production run. The company has also

stipulated  that  the  production  of  pineapple–orange–banana
juice should not exceed 800 cartons. Its profit on one carton
of pineapple–orange juice is $1.00, its profit on one carton of
orange–banana juice is $0.80, and its profit on one carton of
pineapple–orange–banana juice is $0.90. To realize a maxi-
mum profit, how many cartons of each blend should the com-
pany produce? What is the largest profit it can realize? Are
there any concentrates left over?

49. INVESTMENTS—ASSET ALLOCATION A financier plans to invest
up to $2 million in three projects. She estimates that Project
A will yield a return of 10% on her investment, Project  B
will yield a return of 15% on her investment, and Project C
will yield a return of 20% on her investment. Because of the
risks associated with the investments, she decided to put not
more than 20% of her total investment in Project C. She also
decided that her investments in Projects B and C should not
exceed 60% of her total investment. Finally, she decided that
her investment in Project A should be at least 60% of her
investments  in  Projects  B and  C.  How  much  should  the
financier invest in each project if she wishes to maximize the
total  returns  on  her  investments?  What  is  the  maximum
amount she can expect to make from her investments?

50. Consider the linear programming problem

Maximize P ⫽ 3x ⫹ 2y
x ⫺ y ⱕ 3
subject to
x ⱕ 2
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

a. Sketch the feasible set for the linear programming

problem.

b. Show that the linear programming problem is un-

bounded.

c. Solve the linear programming problem using the sim-

plex method. How does the method break down?

d. Explain why the result in part (c) implies that no solu-

tion exists for the linear programming problem.

In Exercises 51–54, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
51. If  at  least  one  of  the  coefficients  a1,  a2, . . . ,  an of  the
objective function P ⫽ a1x1 ⫹ a2x2 ⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⫹a nxn is posi-
tive, then (0, 0, . . . , 0) cannot be the optimal solution of
the standard (maximization) linear programming problem.
52. Choosing the pivot row by requiring that the ratio associ-
ated with that row be the smallest ensures that the iteration
will not take us from a feasible point to a nonfeasible point.
53. Choosing the pivot column by requiring that it be the col-
umn associated with the most negative entry to the left of
the  vertical  line  in  the  last  row  of  the  simplex  tableau
ensures that the iteration will result in the greatest increase
or, at worse, no decrease in the objective function.

54. If, at any stage of an iteration of the simplex method, it is
not possible to compute the ratios (division by zero) or the
ratios are negative, then we can conclude that the standard
linear programming problem may have no solution.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.4 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. Introducing the slack variables u, √, and w, we obtain the

system of linear equations

2x ⫹ 3y ⫹ z ⫹ u

x ⫹ y ⫹ 2z
2y ⫹ 3z
⫺2x ⫺ 3y ⫺ 6z

⫹ √

⫹ w

⫽ 10
⫽ 8
⫽ 6
⫹ P ⫽ 0

The  initial  simplex  tableau  and  the  successive  tableaus
resulting from the use of the simplex procedure follow:

x
2
1
0

y
3
1
2

z
1
2
3
⫺2 ⫺3 ⫺6
앖

Pivot 씮
row

u
1
0
0
0

√ w P
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1

0
0
1
0

Constant

10
8
6
0

Ratio
 10
⫽ 10
1
 8
⫽ 4
2
 6
⫽ 2
3

1
3

R3⎯→

Pivot column

x
2
1
0

y
3
1
ᎏ2
ᎏ
3

z
1
2
1
⫺2 ⫺3 ⫺6

√ w P
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1

0
0
ᎏ1
ᎏ
3
0

u
1
0
0
0

Constant

10
8
2
0

R1 ⫺ R3
⎯⎯⎯→
R2 ⫺ 2R3
R4 ⫹ 6R3

Pivot 씮
row

z
x
y
ᎏ7
0
2
ᎏ
3
1 ⫺ᎏ1
0
ᎏ
3
ᎏ2
0
1
ᎏ
3
⫺2
1 0
앖

Pivot column

w P Constant

u √
1 0 ⫺ᎏ1
0
ᎏ
3
1 ⫺ᎏ2
ᎏ 0
0
3
ᎏ1
0
0
0
ᎏ
3
0
0
2
1

8
4
2
12

Ratio
8
⫽ 4
2
4
⫽ 4
1
—

R1 ⫺ 2R2
⎯⎯⎯→
R4 ⫹ 2R2

y
x
3
0
1 ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ
3
ᎏ2
0
ᎏ
3
ᎏ1
0
ᎏ
3

u

√
z
0 1 ⫺2
0
1
0

0
0
0

w P Constant
1
1⫺ ᎏ2
ᎏ
3
ᎏ1
0
ᎏ
3
ᎏ2
2
ᎏ
3

0
4
2
20

0
0
0
1

All entries in the last row are nonnegative, and the tableau
is final. We conclude that x ⫽ 4, y ⫽ 0, z ⫽ 2, and P ⫽ 20.

2. Let x denote the number of model A grates, and let y denote
the number of model B grates to be made this week. Then
the profit function to be maximized is given by

P ⫽ 6x ⫹ 8y

The  limitations  on  the  availability  of  material  and  labor
may be expressed by the linear inequalities

20x ⫹ 30y ⱕ 7200
20x ⫹ 15y ⱕ 6000

or
or

2x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 7200
4x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 1200

6.4 THE SIMPLEX METHOD: STANDARD MAXIMIZATION PROBLEMS

379

Finally, the condition that no more than 150 units of model
A grates be made this week may be expressed by the linear
inequality

x ⱕ 150

Thus,  we  are  led  to  the  following  linear  programming
problem:

Maximize P ⫽ 6x ⫹ 8y
subject to 2x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 720
4x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 1200
ⱕ 150
x
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

To solve this problem, we introduce slack variables u, √, and
w and  use  the  simplex  method,  obtaining  the  following
sequence of simplex tableaus:
√ w P
0
0

Constant

y u

720

2

3

1

0

x

Pivot 씮
row

Ratio
⫽ 240
⫽ 400

 720
3
 1200
3

—

Ratio
⫽ 360
⫽ 240
⫽ 150

240
2/3
480
2
150
1

4

3

1

0
⫺6 ⫺8
앖

0

0
0

1

0
0

0

1
0

0

0
1

Pivot column

1200

150
0

x

ᎏ2
ᎏ
3
4

y

1

3

1
3

R1⎯→

u √ w P Constant
ᎏ1
ᎏ
3
0

1200

240

0

0

0

0

1

0

1

0
⫺6 ⫺8

0
0

0
0

1
0

0
1

150
0

R2 ⫺ 3R1
⎯⎯⎯→
R4 ⫹ 8R1
Pivot row 씮

x

ᎏ2
ᎏ
3
2

y

u

ᎏ1
1
ᎏ
3
0 ⫺1

0
0

1
⫺ᎏ2
ᎏ
3
앖

0
ᎏ8
ᎏ
3

Pivot column

√ w P Constant
0

240

0

0

1

0
0

0

1
0

0

0
1

480

150
1920

w P

Constant

2
3

R1 ⫺ R3
⎯⎯⎯→
R2 ⫺ 2R3
R4 ⫹ R3

2
3

x

0

0

1
0

y

1
0⫺1

0
0

u √
ᎏ1
ᎏ
3

0 ⫺ᎏ2
ᎏ
3
0

1⫺2

0
ᎏ8
ᎏ
3

0
0

1
ᎏ2
ᎏ
3

0

0
1

140

180

150
2020

The last tableau is final, and we see that x ⫽ 150, y ⫽ 140,
and P ⫽ 2020. Therefore, LaCrosse should make 150 model
A grates and 140 model B grates this week. The profit will
be $2020.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

380

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

USING

TECHNOLOGY

The Simplex Method: Solving Maximization Problems

Graphing Utility
A graphing utility can be used to solve a linear programming problem by the simplex
method, as illustrated in Example 1.

EXAMPLE 1 (Refer to Example 5, Section 6.4.) The problem reduces to the follow-
ing linear programming problem:

Maximize P ⫽ 6x ⫹ 5y ⫹ 4z
subject to 2x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⱕ 180
x ⫹ 3y ⫹ 2z ⱕ 300
2x ⫹ y ⫹ 2z ⱕ 240
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

With u, √, and w as slack variables, we are led to the following sequence of simplex
tableaus, where the first tableau is entered as the matrix A:

Pivot 씮
row

x

2
1
2

y

1
3
1

z

1
2
2

⫺6 ⫺5 ⫺4

앖
Pivot
column

y

0.5
3 
1 

x

1
1
2

z

0.5
2
2

⫺6 ⫺5 ⫺4

u

1
0
0

0

u

0.5
0
0

0

√ w P Constant
0
0
1
0
0 1

180
300
240

0
0
0

0 0 1

0

√ w P Constant
0
1
0

90
300
240

0
0
1

0
0
0

0 0

1

0

Ratio
⫽ 90
⫽ 300

180
2

300
1

ᎏ, A, 1Ô 䉴 B
*rowÓᎏ1
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→

2

240
2

⫽ 120

*rowⴙ(⫺1, B, 1, 2) 䉴 C
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→
*rowⴙ(⫺2, C, 1, 3) 䉴 B
*rowⴙ(6, B, 1, 4) 䉴 C

z

u

√ w P Constant
0.5
0
1.5 ⫺0.5 1
1  ⫺1
0

90
210
60

0
0
0

0
0
1

0.5

⫺1

3

0

0

1

540

Pivot 씮
row

x

1
0
0

y

0.5
2.5
0 

0 ⫺2
앖
Pivot
column

Ratio
90
0.5

⫽ 180
⫽ 84

210
2.5

*rowÓᎏ
ᎏ, C, 2Ô 䉴 B
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→

1
2
.5

x

1
0
0

y

0.5
1
0

z

u

0.5
0.5
0.6 ⫺0.2
1⫺1
0

√ w P
0
0
0
0.4
0 0
0
1

Constant

90
84

60

0 ⫺2  ⫺1

3

0

0

1

540

*rowⴙ(⫺0.5, B, 2, 1) 䉴 C
———————————씮
*rowⴙ(2, C, 2, 4)     䉴 B

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.4 THE SIMPLEX METHOD: STANDARD MAXIMIZATION PROBLEMS

381

√
u
0.6 ⫺0.2
0.4
0 

0.2
0.6 ⫺0.2
1

⫺1

z

x

1
0
0

0

y

0
1
0

0

0.2

2.6

0.8

w P Constant

0
0
1

0

0
0
0

1

48
84
60

708

The final simplex tableau is the same as the one obtained earlier. We see that 
x ⫽ 48, y ⫽ 84, z ⫽ 0, and P ⫽ 708. Hence, Ace Novelty should produce 48 
Type A souvenirs, 84 Type B souvenirs, and no Type C souvenirs, resulting in a
profit of $708 per day.

Excel
Solver is an Excel add-in that is used to solve linear programming problems. When
you start the Excel program, check the Tools menu for the Solver command. If it 
is  not  there,  you  will  need  to  install  it.  (Check  your  manual  for  installation
instructions.)

EXAMPLE 2 Solve the following linear programming problem:

Maximize P ⫽ 6x ⫹ 5y ⫹ 4z
subject to 2x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⱕ 180
x ⫹ 3y ⫹ 2z ⱕ 300
2x ⫹ y ⫹ 2z ⱕ 240
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

Solution

1. Enter the data for the linear programming problem onto a spreadsheet. Enter the

labels shown in column A and the variables with which we are working under
Decision Variables in cells B4:B6, as shown in Figure T1. This optional step will
help us to organize our work.

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

I

Formulas for indicated cells
C8: = 6*C4 + 5*C5 + 4*C6
C11: = 2*C4 + C5 + C6
C12: = C4 + 3*C5 + 2*C6
C13: = 2*C4 + C5 + 2*C6

Maximiza(cid:415)on Problem

Decision Variables

x
y
z

Objec(cid:415)ve Func(cid:415)on

Constraints

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

0
0
0

0

0
0
0

<=
<=
<=

180
300
240

FIGURE T1
Setting up the spreadsheet 
for Solver

For the moment, the cells that will contain the values of the variables (C4:C6) are
left blank. In C8, type the formula for the objective function: =6*C4+5*C5+
4*C6. In C11, type the formula for the left-hand side of the first constraint:
=2*C4+C5+C6. In C12, type the formula for the left-hand side of the second

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

382

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

constraint: =C4+3*C5+2*C6. In C13, type the formula for the left-hand side of
the third constraint: =2*C4+C5+2*C6. Zeros will then appear in cell C8 and
cells C11:C13. In cells D11:D13, type <= to indicate that each constraint is of the
form ⱕ. Finally, in cells E11:E13, type the right-hand value of each constraint—
in this case, 180, 300, and 240, respectively. Note that we need not enter the
nonnegativity constraints x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, and z ⱖ 0. The resulting spreadsheet is
shown in Figure T1, where the formulas that were entered for the objective func-
tion and the constraints are shown in the comment box.

2. Use Solver to solve the problem. Click the 

Data

tab, and then click 

Solver

in

the Analysis group. The Solver Parameters dialog box will appear.
a. The pointer will be in the Set Objective: box (refer to Figure T2). High-

light the cell on your spreadsheet containing the formula for the objective
function—in this case, C8.

FIGURE T2
The completed Solver Parameters dialog
box

Max

. Select the 

box,

Then, next to To:, select 
and highlight the cells in your spreadsheet that will contain the values of the
variables—in this case, C4:C6. Select the 
box, 
. The Add Constraint dialog box will appear (Figure T3).
and then click 

By Changing Variable Cells:

Subject to the Constraints:

Add

Note: Boldfaced words/characters enclosed in a box (for example, 
is required. Words/characters printed blue (for example, Chart sub-type:) indicate words/characters that appear on the screen.
Words/characters printed in a monospace font (for example, =(—2/3)*A2+2) indicate words/characters that need to be typed
and entered.

) indicate that an action (click, select, or press) 

Enter

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

6.4 THE SIMPLEX METHOD: STANDARD MAXIMIZATION PROBLEMS

383

FIGURE T3
The Add Constraint dialog box

b. The pointer will appear in the Cell Reference: box. Highlight the cells on your

. Select the 

, 

Constraint:

spreadsheet that contain the formula for the left-hand side of the first constraint—in
this case, C11. Next, select the symbol for the appropriate constraint—in this case,
<=
side of the first constraint on your spreadsheet—in this case, 180. Click 
and then follow the same procedure to enter the second and third constraints. Click
. The resulting Solver Parameters dialog box shown in Figure T2 will appear.
OK
c. In the Solver Parameters dialog box, go to the Select a Solving Method: box, and

box, and highlight the value of the right-hand 
Add

select 

Simplex LP

. 

d. Next, click 

. A Solver Results dialog box will then appear (see Figure T4),
and at the same time the answers will appear on your spreadsheet (see Figure T5).

Solve

FIGURE T4
The Solver Results dialog box

FIGURE T5
Completed spreadsheet after using Solver

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

A

B

C

D

E

MaximizaƟon Problem

Decision Variables

ObjecƟve FuncƟon

Constraints

x
y
z

48
84
0

708

180
300
240

<=
<=
<=

180
300
240

(continued)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

384

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

3. Read off your answers. From the spreadsheet, we see that the objective function
attains a maximum value of 708 (cell C8) when x ⫽ 48, y ⫽ 84, and z ⫽ 0 (cells
C4:C6).

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

subject to

Solve the linear programming problems.
1. Maximize P ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3y ⫹ 4z ⫹ 2w
x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 3z ⫹ 2w ⱕ 6
2x ⫹ 4y ⫹ z ⫺ w ⱕ 4
3x ⫹ 2y ⫺ 2z ⫹ 3w ⱕ 12
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0, w ⱖ 0

2. Maximize P ⫽ 3x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 2z ⫹ w

subject to

2x ⫹ y ⫺ z ⫹ 2w ⱕ 8
2x ⫺ y ⫹ 2z ⫹ 3w ⱕ 20
x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⫹ 2w ⱕ 8
4x ⫺ 2y ⫹ z ⫹ 3w ⱕ 24
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0, w ⱖ 0

3. Maximize P ⫽ x ⫹ y ⫹ 2z ⫹ 3w

subject to

3x ⫹ 6y ⫹ 4z ⫹ 2w ⱕ 12
x ⫹ 4y ⫹ 8z ⫹ 4w ⱕ 16
2x ⫹ y ⫹ 4z ⫹ w ⱕ 10
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0, w ⱖ 0

subject to

4. Maximize P ⫽ 2x ⫹ 4y ⫹ 3z ⫹ 5w
x ⫺ 2y ⫹ 3z ⫹ 4w ⱕ 8
2x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 4z ⫹ 6w ⱕ 12
3x ⫹ 2y ⫹ z ⫹ 5w ⱕ 10
2x ⫹ 8y ⫺ 2z ⫹ 6w ⱕ 24
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0, w ⱖ 0

6.5

The Simplex Method: Standard Minimization Problems

Minimization with ⱕ Constraints
In  the  previous  section,  we  developed  a  procedure,  called  the  simplex  method,  for
solving standard linear programming problems. Recall that a standard maximization
problem satisfies three conditions:
1. The objective function is to be maximized.
2. All the variables involved are nonnegative.
3. Each linear constraint may be written so that the expression involving the variables

is less than or equal to a nonnegative constant.

In  this  section,  we  see  how  the  simplex  method  may  be  used  to  solve  certain
classes of problems that are not necessarily standard maximization problems. In par-
ticular, we see how a modified procedure may be used to solve problems involving the
minimization of objective functions.

We begin by considering the class of linear programming problems that calls for
the minimization of objective functions but otherwise satisfies conditions 2 and 3 for
standard maximization problems. The method that is used to solve these problems is
illustrated in the following example.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 1

Minimize C ⫽ ⫺2x ⫺ 3y
5x ⫹ 4y ⱕ 32
subject to
x ⫹ 2y ⱕ 10
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

Solution This problem involves the minimization of the objective function and is
accordingly not a standard maximization problem. Note, however, that all other 
conditions for a standard maximization problem hold true. To solve a problem of
this type, we observe that minimizing the objective function C is equivalent to maxi-
mizing the objective function P ⫽ ⫺C. Thus, the solution to this problem may be

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.5 THE SIMPLEX METHOD: STANDARD MINIMIZATION PROBLEMS

385

found by solving the following associated standard maximization problem: Maxi-
mize P ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3y subject to the given constraints. Using the simplex method with u
and √ as slack variables, we obtain the following sequence of simplex tableaus:

√ P
0
0
1
0

0

1

√ P
0
0
ᎏ1
0
ᎏ
2
0
1
√ P
0

ᎏ1
ᎏ
2

ᎏ3
ᎏ
2

0

1

Pivot 씮
row

1
2

R2⎯→

u

1
0

0

x

y

5
1

4
2
⫺2 ⫺3
앖
Pivot
column

x

y

u

4
1

5
ᎏ1
ᎏ
2

1
0
⫺2 ⫺3 0

y u
0 1⫺2
1 0

0 0

Pivot
row
—씮

R1 ⫺ 4R2
⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫹ 3R2

x

3
ᎏ1
ᎏ
2

⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ
2
앖
Pivot
column

x

1
ᎏ1
ᎏ
2

1
3

R1⎯→

y u
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ2
0 ᎏ1
ᎏ
3
3
ᎏ1
1 0
ᎏ
2

√ P
0
0

⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ
2

0 0

ᎏ3
1
ᎏ
2
√ P
0
0

y

u
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ2
ᎏ1
0
ᎏ
3
3
1 ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ5
ᎏ
ᎏ
6
6

0

ᎏ1
ᎏ
6

ᎏ7
ᎏ
6

1

1
2

R2 ⫺ R1
⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫹ R1

1
2

x

1
0

0

Ratio
32
⫽ 8
4
10
⫽ 5
2

Ratio
 12
⫽ 4
3
 5
⫽ 10
1/2

Constant

32
10

0

Constant

32
5

0

Constant

12

5

15

Constant

4
5

15

Constant

4
3

17

The last tableau is in final form. The solution to the standard maximization problem
associated with the given linear programming problem is x ⫽ 4, y ⫽ 3, and P ⫽ 17,
so the required solution is given by x ⫽ 4, y ⫽ 3, and C ⫽ ⫺17. You may verify
that the solution is correct by using the method of corners.

The Dual Problem
Another special class of linear programming problems we encounter in practical appli-
cations is characterized by the following conditions:
1. The objective function is to be minimized.
2. All the variables involved are nonnegative.
3. All other linear constraints may be written so that the expression involving the vari-

ables is greater than or equal to a constant.

Such problems are called standard minimization problems.

A  method  for  solving  this  type  of  problem  is  based  on  the  following  observa-
tion.  Each  maximization  linear  programming  problem  is  associated  with  a  minimi-
zation problem, and vice versa. For the purpose of identification, the given problem
is called the primal problem; the problem related to it is called the dual problem.

Explore & Discuss
Refer to Example 1.

1. Sketch the feasible set S for

the linear programming 
problem.

2. Solve the problem using the

method of corners.

3. Indicate on S the corner

points corresponding to each
iteration of the simplex pro-
cedure and trace the path
leading to the optimal 
solution.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

386

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

PORTFOLIO

Chad Smith

TITLE Manager of Supply Chain Sustainability
INSTITUTION Earthbound Farm

Earthbound Farm, America’s

largest grower of organic produce,
is committed to protecting the
environment. As Manager of Sup-

ply Chain Sustainability, I run life-cycle analyses to deter-
mine the financial and environmental feasibility of decisions
relating to sustainability.

I use Microsoft Excel on a daily basis to run these analyses.

Sometimes I use Excel to model the project cost or financial
return of a project. In other cases, I use the program to calcu-
late energy usage or to measure environmental impacts. For
example, before making the decision to convert to 100% PCR
PET (post-consumer recycled polyethylene terephthalate
PET), I ran a life-cycle analysis of the product. On the basis of
Earthbound Farm’s use of rigid PET plastic in 2008, I learned
that the company’s conversion to 100% PCRT PET clamshell
packaging will conserve 424,000 million BTUs of energy and
68,307 gallons of water, eliminate 16,191 tons of carbon diox-
ide, and divert 1.3 million pounds of solid waste from landfills.

When I run these analyses, I use a variety of tools and

functions in Excel. The solver tool, for example, is very useful
when I am working on these feasibility projects. In essence,
the solver tool determines where linear functions intersect.
This information allows me to manipulate parameters to
maximize or minimize certain outcomes.

Although the solver tool is easy to use, it is important

that I understand the mathematics—in this case linear pro-
gramming—that determine the tool’s output. This means
that I need to be able to identify the variables, constraints,
and parameters of a problem
before I run an analysis. When I
am helping my company to
make important financial and
environmental decisions, I
have to be confident that I
have entered the data correctly
and that the results of the
analysis make sense.

Photos courtesy of Earthbound Farm

The following example illustrates the technique for constructing the dual of a given
linear programming problem.

EXAMPLE 2 Write the dual problem associated with the following problem:

Minimize the objective function C ⫽ 4x ⫹ 2y
subject to 5x ⫹ y ⱖ 5
5x ⫹ 3y ⱖ 10
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0000

Primal
problem

Solution We first write down the following tableau for the given primal problem:

Constant

5
10

x
5
5
4

y
1
3
2

Next, we interchange the columns and rows of the foregoing tableau and head the
two columns of the resulting array with the two variables u and √, obtaining the
tableau:

u
5
1
5

√
5
3
10

Constant

4
2

Interpreting the last tableau as if it were part of the initial simplex tableau for a

standard maximization problem—with the exception that the signs of the coeffi-

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.5 THE SIMPLEX METHOD: STANDARD MINIMIZATION PROBLEMS

387

cients pertaining to the objective function are not reversed—we construct the
required dual problem as follows:

Maximize the objective function P ⫽ 5u ⫹ 10√
subject to 5u ⫹ 5√ ⱕ 4
u ⫹ 3√ ⱕ 2
u ⱖ 0, √ ⱖ 0

Dual
problem

5
4
3
2
1

y

C(0, 5)

5x + y = 5

B 1
2

,

5
2

5x + 3y = 10
A(2, 0)

1

2

x

3

Since both the primal problem and the dual problem in Example 2 involve two
variables, they can be solved graphically. In fact, the feasible sets of the primal prob-
lem and the dual problem are shown in Figure 22. From the following tables of val-
ues associated with the two problems, we see that the solution to the primal problem
x ⫽ 1
is 
and
P ⫽ 7.

, and the solution for the dual problem is 

2,  and  C ⫽ 7

5,  √ ⫽ 3
5,

2,  y ⫽ 5

u ⫽ 1

Table for the primal problem

Table for the dual problem

(a) Feasible set for the primal problem

Vertex

C ⴝ 4x ⴙ 2y

√

D 0 2
3,

C 1
5

3
5,

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

5u + 5√ = 4

A(0, 0)

1

2

B

04
5,

u + 3√ = 2

u

(b) Feasible set for the dual problem
FIGURE 22

A12, 02
22
B11
2, 

5

C(0, 5)

8
7
10

Vertex

A10, 02
B14
5, 02
C11
52
5, 
D10, 2
32

3

P ⴝ 5u ⴙ 10

√√

0
4
7
20
3

Observe that the objective functions of both the primal problem and the dual problem
attain the same optimal value.

Next let’s see how we can find these solutions using the simplex method. Since
the  dual  problem  is  a  standard  maximization  problem,  we  can  use  the  method  of 
Section 6.4. Proceeding, we obtain the following sequence of tableaus. Note that we
use the letters x and y (the variables used in the primal problem) to denote the slack
variables.

Pivot 씮
row

u

5
1

√
5
3
⫺5 ⫺10
앖
Pivot
column

y P
0
0
1
0
3
1
0

Constant

R1 ⫺ 5R2
⎯⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫹ 10R2

4
2
3
0

x

u

√
5 1
0
1
⫺5 ⫺10
0

5
1
3

√
0
1

u

1
1
3

⫺ 0

5
3

x
3
10
0

0

y P
⫺ 0
0

1
2
1
3

10
3

1

Constant

1
5
2
3

20
3

1
3

⎯⎯⎯⎯→

R2 ⫺ R1
R3 ⫹ R1

5
3

x

1
0

0

y P Constant
0
1

4
2

0
0

0

1

0

Ratio

4
5
2
3

1
3

R2⎯→

Ratio

1
5
2

3
10

R1⎯→

u
10
3
1
3

√
0
1

y P
x
1 ⫺ 0
0
0

5
3
1
3

⫺ 0 0

5
3

10
3

1

u

1
0

0

√
0
1⫺

0

x
3
10
1
10

y P
⫺ 0
0

1
2
1
2

1
2

5
2
(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:5)

1

Constant

2
3
2
3

20
3

Constant

1
5
3
5
7

Solution for the primal problem

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

388

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

u ⫽ 1

5,  √ ⫽ 3

5,  and  P ⫽ 7,

Interpreting the final tableau in the usual manner, we see that the solution of the
as  obtained  earlier  by  using  the  graphical 
dual  problem  is 
method. Next, observe that the solution of the primal problem 
appears
under the respective slack variables in the last row of the final tableau, as indicated.
That  we  can  always  find  the  solution  to  both  the  optimal  and  dual  problems 
in  this  manner  is  the  content  of  the  following  theorem.  The  theorem,  attributed  to 
John von Neumann (1903–1957), is stated without proof.

x ⫽ 1

2  and  y ⫽ 5
2

THEOREM 3
The Fundamental Theorem of Duality
A primal problem has a solution if and only if the corresponding dual problem
has a solution. Furthermore, if a solution exists, then:
a. The objective functions of both the primal and the dual problem attain the

same optimal value.

b. The optimal solution to the primal problem appears under the slack variables
in the last row of the final simplex tableau associated with the dual problem.

Armed with this theorem, we will solve the following problem.

EXAMPLE 3 Write and solve the dual problem associated with the following
problem:

Minimize the objective function C ⫽ 6x ⫹ 8y
subject to 40x ⫹ 10y ⱖ 2400
10x ⫹ 15y ⱖ 2100
5x ⫹ 15y ⱖ 1500
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0000

Primal
problem

Solution We first write down the following tableau for the given primal problem:

Constant

2400
2100
1500

x
40
10
5
6

y
10
15
15
8

Next, we interchange the columns and rows of the foregoing tableau and head the three
columns of the resulting array with the three variables u, √, and w, obtaining the tableau

u
40
10
2400

√
10
15
2100

w Constant
5
15
1500

6
8

Interpreting the last tableau as if it were part of the initial simplex tableau for a stan-
dard maximization problem—with the exception that the signs of the coefficients
pertaining to the objective function are not reversed—we construct the required dual
problem as follows:

Maximize the objective function P ⫽ 2400u ⫹ 2100√ ⫹ 1500w
subject to 40u ⫹ 10√ ⫹ 5w ⱕ 6
10u ⫹ 15√ ⫹ 15w ⱕ 8
u ⱖ 0, √ ⱖ 0, w ⱖ 0

Dual
problem

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.5 THE SIMPLEX METHOD: STANDARD MINIMIZATION PROBLEMS

389

Observe that the dual problem associated with the given (primal) problem is a standard
maximization problem. The solution may thus be found by using the simplex algorithm.
Introducing the slack variables x and y, we obtain the system of linear equations

40u ⫹ 10√ ⫹
10u ⫹ 15√ ⫹ 15w
⫺2400u ⫺ 2100√ ⫺ 1500w

5w ⫹ x

⫹ y

⫽ 6
⫽ 8
⫹ P ⫽ 0

Continuing with the simplex algorithm, we obtain the following sequence of simplex
tableaus:

w x

y P

5
15

1
0

0
1

冨

0
0

1

Constant

6
8

0

Ratio
6
⫽ 3
40
20
⫽ 4
8
10
5

Pivot 씮
row

u

40
10

√
10
15

⫺2400 ⫺2100 ⫺1500

앖
Pivot
column

0 0

1
40

R1⎯→

u

1
10

√
ᎏ1
ᎏ
4
15

w x
1
ᎏ1
ᎏ
ᎏ
ᎏ
4
8
0
0
15

⫺2400 ⫺2100 ⫺1500

0

y P Constant

0
1

0

0
0

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

3
ᎏ
ᎏ
2
0
8

0

3
ᎏ
ᎏ
2
0
ᎏ1
3ᎏ
2

360

√
ᎏ1
ᎏ
4
ᎏ2
5ᎏ
2

u

1

x
w
1
ᎏ1
ᎏ
ᎏ
ᎏ
8
4
0
5ᎏ ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ5
ᎏ
4
4
0 ⫺1500 ⫺1200
60

0

y P Constant

Ratio
⫽ 3
5
⫽ 13
25

3/20
1/4
13/2
25/2

冨
冨

冨
冨

3
ᎏ
ᎏ
2
0
3
ᎏ1
ᎏ
2
5
360

Constant

1
ᎏ
ᎏ
5
0
3
ᎏ1
ᎏ
2
5

1140

R2 ⫺ 10R1
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫹ 2400R1

씮

Pivot
row

2
25

R2⎯→

앖
Pivot
column
√
ᎏ1
ᎏ
4
1

y P Constant

u

1

x
w
1
ᎏ1
ᎏ
ᎏ
ᎏ
4
8
0
1
1
ᎏ1
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ
ᎏ
5
1
0
0
0 ⫺1500 ⫺1200
60

0

0

0
2
ᎏ 0
ᎏ
2
5
0

1

1
4

R1 ⫺ R2

⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫹ 1500R2

u

1

0

0

√
x
w
y P
1
3
3
0⫺ ᎏ
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ
ᎏ
ᎏ
ᎏ
5
00
2
1
0
0
2
1
1
ᎏ1
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ
1
ᎏ
ᎏ
ᎏ
5
1
2
0
0
5
30
450
120
(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:5)

0

0

0

1

Solution for the
primal problem

The last tableau is final. The fundamental theorem of duality tells us that the

solution to the primal problem is x ⫽ 30 and y ⫽ 120 with a minimum value for C
of 1140. Observe that the solution to the dual (maximization) problem may be read
from the simplex tableau in the usual manner: u ⫽ , √ ⫽ , w ⫽ 0, and P ⫽ 1140.
Note that the maximum value of P is equal to the minimum value of C, as guaran-

13
25

1
50

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

390

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

teed by the fundamental theorem of duality. The solution to the primal problem
agrees with the solution of the same problem that we solved in Section 6.3, Example
2, using the method of corners.

Notes

1. The dual of a standard minimization problem is always a standard maximization
problem provided that the coefficients of the objective function in the primal prob-
lem are all nonnegative. Such problems can always be solved by applying the sim-
plex method to solve the dual problem.

2. Standard minimization problems in which the coefficients of the objective function
are not all nonnegative do not necessarily have a dual problem that is a standard
maximization problem.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 4

Minimize C ⫽ 3x ⫹ 2y
subject to 8x ⫹ y ⱖ 80
8x ⫹ 5y ⱖ 240
x ⫹ 5y ⱖ 100
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

Solution We begin by writing the dual problem associated with the given primal
problem. First, we write down the following tableau for the primal problem:

Constant

80
240
100

x
8
8
1
3

y
1
5
5
2

Next, interchanging the columns and rows of this tableau and heading the three
columns of the resulting array with the three variables, u, √, and w, we obtain the
tableau

u
8
1
80

√
8
5
240

w Constant
1
5
100

3
2

Interpreting the last tableau as if it were part of the initial simplex tableau for a standard
maximization problem—with the exception that the signs of the coefficients pertaining
to the objective function are not reversed—we construct the dual problem as follows:
Maximize the objective function P ⫽ 80u ⫹ 240√ ⫹ 100w subject to the constraints

8u ⫹ 8√ ⫹ w ⱕ 3
u ⫹ 5√ ⫹ 5w ⱕ 2

where u ⱖ 0, √ ⱖ 0, and w ⱖ 0. Having constructed the dual problem, which is a
standard maximization problem, we now solve it using the simplex method. Intro-
ducing the slack variables x and y, we obtain the system of linear equations

8u ⫹ 8√ ⫹
u ⫹ 5√ ⫹ 5w
⫺80u ⫺ 240√ ⫺ 100w

w ⫹ x

⫹ y

⫽ 3
⫽ 2
⫹ P ⫽ 0

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.5 THE SIMPLEX METHOD: STANDARD MINIMIZATION PROBLEMS

391

Continuing with the simplex algorithm, we obtain the following sequence of simplex
tableaus:

Pivot 씮
row

u

8
1

√
8
5

w x

y P Constant

1
5

1
0

0

0
1

0
0

0 1

3
2

0

Ratio

3
8

2
5

Ratio

3
1
35

⫺80 ⫺240 ⫺100

앖

Pivot column

1
8

R1⎯→

u

1
1

√
1
5

w x
ᎏ1
ᎏ1
ᎏ
ᎏ
8
8
5 0

u

√
1 1
0

⫺80 ⫺240 ⫺100 0
x
w
ᎏ1
ᎏ1
ᎏ
ᎏ
8
8
5ᎏ ⫺ᎏ5
ᎏ3
ᎏ
8
8
0 ⫺70
30
앖

160

⫺4

씮

Pivot
row

Pivot column

R2 ⫺ 5R1
⎯⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫹ 240R1

y P

Constant

0
1

0

0
0

1

ᎏ3
ᎏ
8
2

0

y P Constant

0
1

0

0
0

1

ᎏ3
ᎏ
8
ᎏ1
ᎏ
8
90

y P Constant

8
35

R2⎯→

u √
1 1
⫺ᎏ3
2
0
ᎏ
3
5
160

1
8

R1 ⫺ R2
⎯⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫹ 70R2

u
9
ᎏ3
ᎏ
3
5
2
⫺ᎏ3
ᎏ
3
5
96

w
x
ᎏ1
ᎏ1
ᎏ
ᎏ
8
8
1 ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ
7
30

0
8
ᎏ
ᎏ
3
5
0

0 ⫺70
√ w
y
x
ᎏ1
1
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ
0
1
ᎏ
3
7
5
8
1 ⫺ᎏ1
0
ᎏ
ᎏ
ᎏ
3
7
5
20
16
(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:5)

0

0

0
0

1

ᎏ3
ᎏ
8
1
ᎏ
ᎏ
3
5
90

P Constant

0
0

1

3
ᎏ1
ᎏ
5
3
1
ᎏ
ᎏ
3
5
92

Solution for the
primal problem

The last tableau is final. The fundamental theorem of duality tells us that the solution
to the primal problem is x ⫽ 20 and y ⫽ 16 with a minimum value for C of 92.

Our last example illustrates how the warehouse problem posed in Section 6.2 may be
solved by duality.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 5 A Warehouse Problem Complete the solution to the
warehouse problem given in Section 6.2, Example 4 (page 341).
Minimize C ⫽ 20x1 ⫹ 8x2 ⫹ 10x3 ⫹ 12x4 ⫹ 22x5 ⫹ 18x6

(21)

subject to

x1 ⫹ x2 ⫹ x3

x1

⫹ x4

ⱕ 400
x4 ⫹ x5 ⫹ x6 ⱕ 600
ⱖ 200
ⱖ 300
⫹ x6 ⱖ 400

⫹ x5

x2

x3

(22)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

x1 ⱖ 0, x2 ⱖ 0, . . . , x6 ⱖ 0

392

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

Solution Upon multiplying each of the first two inequalities of (22) by ⫺1, we
obtain the following equivalent system of constraints, in which each of the
expressions involving the variables is greater than or equal to a constant:

⫺x1 ⫺ x2 ⫺ x3

x1

x2

x3

ⱖ ⫺400
⫺ x4 ⫺ x5 ⫺ x6 ⱖ ⫺600
ⱖ 200
⫹ x4
ⱖ 300
⫹ x6 ⱖ 400

⫹ x5

x1 ⱖ 0, x2 ⱖ 0, . . . , x6 ⱖ 000

The problem may now be solved by duality. First, we write the tableau

x1

x2

x3
⫺1 ⫺1 ⫺1

0
1
0
0
20

0
0
1
0
8

Constant

x4
0

x5
0

x6
0 ⫺400
0 ⫺1 ⫺1 ⫺1 ⫺600
200
0
300
0
1
400
10

0
0
1
18

1
0
0
12

0
1
0
22

Interchanging the rows and columns of this tableau and heading the five columns
of the resulting array of numbers by the variables u1, u2, u3, u4, and u5, we obtain
the tableau

u1
⫺1
⫺1
⫺1
0
0
0

u2
0
0
0
⫺1
⫺1
⫺1
⫺400 ⫺600

u3
1
0
0
1
0
0
200

u4
0
1
0
0
1
0
300

u5 Constant
0
0
1
0
0
1
400

20
8
10
12
22
18

from which we construct the associated dual problem:

Maximize P ⫽ ⫺400u1 ⫺ 600u2 ⫹ 200u3 ⫹ 300u4 ⫹ 400u5

subject to

⫹ u3

⫹ u4

⫺ u1 
⫺ u1
⫺ u1

ⱕ 20
ⱕ 8
⫹ u5 ⱕ 10
ⱕ 12
ⱕ 22
⫹ u5 ⱕ 18
u1 ⱖ 0, u2 ⱖ 0, . . . , u5 ⱖ 00

⫺ u2 ⫹ u3
⫺ u2
⫺ u2

⫹ u4

Solving the standard maximization problem by the simplex algorithm, we
obtain the following sequence of tableaus (x1, x2, . . . , x6 are slack variables):

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.5 THE SIMPLEX METHOD: STANDARD MINIMIZATION PROBLEMS

393

Pivot 씮
row

u1
⫺1
⫺1
⫺1

u3
1
0
0
1
0
0

u2
0
0
0
0 ⫺1
0 ⫺1
0 ⫺1

u5 x1 x2 x3 x4 x5 x6 P Constant
0
0
1
0
0
1
600 ⫺200 ⫺300 ⫺400
앖

0
1
0
0
0 1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 0
0

20
8
10
12
22
18
0

u4
0
1
0
0
1
0

0
0
0
1
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
1
0

0
0
0
0
1
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
1

400

Ratio

—

—

10

—

—

18

Pivot 씮
row

R6 ⫺ R3

⎯⎯⎯⎯→
R7 ⫹ 400R3

R5 ⫺ R2

⎯⎯⎯⎯→
R7 ⫹ 300R2

Pivot 씮
row

u1
⫺1
⫺1
⫺1

Pivot column
u4 u5 x1 x2
x3 x4 x5 x6 P
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
1 0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1 0
0
0 ⫺1
0
0
0
600 ⫺200 ⫺300 0
0
400
1

0
0
0
1 0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
1 0
1
0
0
0

u2
0
0
0
0 ⫺1
0 ⫺1
1 ⫺1
0

u3
1
0
0
1
0
0

1
0
0
0
0
0
0

앖

u1
⫺1
⫺1
⫺1

u2
0
0
0
0 ⫺1
1 ⫺1
1 ⫺1

Pivot column
x2
u3 u4 u5 x1
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0 0
1
0
0 0 ⫺1
0
0
0
600 ⫺200
0

0
1
0
0
0
0
0

300

0
0

x3 x4 x5 x6 P
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1

0
0
0
1
0
0 ⫺1 0
0

0
0
0
0
0
1
0

0
0
0
0
1
0
0

400

⫺300
앖

Constant

Ratio

20
8
10
12
22
8
4000

—

8

—

—

22

—

Constant

Ratio

20
8
10
12
14
8
6400

—

—

—

—

14

8

Ratio

28

—

—

12

—

—

⎯⎯⎯⎯→

R1 ⫹ R6
R2 ⫹ R6
R3 ⫹ R6
R5 ⫺ R6

R7 ⫹ 300R6

Pivot column
u1
u2
0 ⫺1
0 ⫺1
0 ⫺1
0 ⫺1
0
0
1 ⫺1
0

씮

Pivot
row

x2
u3 u4 u5 x1
0 ⫺1
1
1 0
1 ⫺1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0 ⫺1
1
0
0
0 ⫺1
0
0
0
300 ⫺200
100
0
0
앖

0
0
1
0
0
0
0

x6 P Constant
x3 x4 x5
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
1 ⫺1
0
1
300
0

28
16
18
12
6
8
8800

0
0
0
0
0
0
1

0
0
0
1
0
0
0

300

Pivot column
u2 u3 u4 u5 x1
u1
0
0
0
1
0 ⫺1
0 0
0 ⫺1
1 0
0 ⫺1
00
0
0
0
1 ⫺1
0 0
0
100
0
0

0
1
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
1
0
0
0

x3

x2
0 ⫺1 ⫺1
1 ⫺1
0
0
0
0

x4 x5
0
0
0

x6 P Constant
1
16
16
1
1
18

0
0
0

0 ⫺1

0

0

1
0 ⫺1
100

300

1

0

0
0 1 ⫺1
0
1
300
200

0
0

0

0
0
1

12

6
8
11,200

R1 ⫺ R4

⎯⎯⎯⎯→
R7 ⫹ 200R4

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

394

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

The last tableau is final, and we find that

x1 ⫽ 0
x5 ⫽ 0

x2 ⫽ 300
x6 ⫽ 300

x3 ⫽ 100
P ⫽ 11,200

x4 ⫽ 200

Thus, to minimize shipping costs, Acrosonic should ship 300 loudspeaker sys-
tems from Plant I to Warehouse B, 100 systems from Plant I to Warehouse C, 
200 systems from Plant II to Warehouse A, and 300 systems from Plant II to
Warehouse C. The company’s total shipping cost is $11,200.

6.5 Self-Check Exercises

1. Write the dual problem associated with the following prob-

2. Solve the primal problem posed in Exercise 1.

lem:

Minimize C ⫽ 2x ⫹ 5y
4x ⫹ y ⱖ 40
subject to
2x ⫹ y ⱖ 30
x ⫹ 3y ⱖ 30
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

6.5 Concept Questions

1. Suppose you are given the linear programming problem

Minimize C ⫽ ⫺3x ⫺ 5y
subject to 5x ⫹ 2y ⱕ 30
x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 21
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

Give  the  associated  standard  maximization  problem  that
you would use to solve this linear programming problem
via the simplex method.

2. Give three characteristics of a standard minimization linear

programming problem.

6.5 Exercises

In Exercises 1–6, use the technique developed in this section to
solve the minimization problem.
1. Minimize C ⫽ ⫺2x ⫹ y
x ⫹ 2y ⱕ 6
3x ⫹ 2y ⱕ 12
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

subject to

subject to

2. Minimize C ⫽ ⫺2x ⫺ 3y
3x ⫹ 4y ⱕ 24
7x ⫺ 4y ⱕ 16
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 6.5 can be found on 
page 396.

3. What  is  the  primal  problem  associated  with  a  standard
minimization  linear  programming  problem?  The  dual
problem?

4. a. What  does  the  fundamental  theorem  of  duality  tell  us
about the existence of a solution to a primal problem? 
b. How are the optimal values of the primal and dual prob-

lems related?

c. Given the final simplex tableau associated with a dual
problem,  how  would  you  determine  the  optimal  solu-
tion to the associated primal problem?

4. Minimize C ⫽ x ⫺ 2y ⫹ z

subject to

x ⫺ 2y ⫹ 3z ⱕ 10
2x ⫹ y ⫺ 2z ⱕ 15
2x ⫹ y ⫹ 3z ⱕ 20
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

5. Minimize C ⫽ 2x ⫺ 3y ⫺ 4z

subject to ⫺x ⫹ 2y ⫺ z ⱕ 8
x ⫺ 2y ⫹ 2z ⱕ 10
2x ⫹ 4y ⫺ 3z ⱕ 12
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

3. Minimize C ⫽ ⫺3x ⫺ 2y subject to the constraints of Exer-

cise 2.

6. Minimize C ⫽ ⫺3x ⫺ 2y ⫺ z subject to the constraints of

Exercise 5.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In Exercises 7–10, you are given the final simplex tableau for the
dual  problem.  Give  the  solution  to  the  primal  problem  and  the
solution to the associated dual problem.
7. Problem: Minimize C ⫽ 8x ⫹ 12y
x ⫹ 3y ⱖ 2
2x ⫹ 2y ⱖ 3
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

subject to

Final tableau:

u

0

1

0

y P
0

√
x
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ3
1
ᎏ
4
4
ᎏ1
0⫺ ᎏ1
ᎏ
ᎏ
2
2

0

ᎏ5
ᎏ
4

ᎏ1
ᎏ
4

Constant

3

2

13

0

1

8. Problem: Minimize C ⫽ 3x ⫹ 2y
subject to 5x ⫹ y ⱖ 10
2x ⫹ 2y ⱖ 12
x ⫹ 4y ⱖ 12
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

Final tableau:

u

1

0

0

x
√
y P
w
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ1
0⫺ ᎏ3
ᎏ 0
ᎏ
4
4
4
ᎏ5
9ᎏ ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ1
ᎏ
ᎏ
8
8
8

0

1

0

9

1

5

1

Constant

ᎏ1
ᎏ
4
ᎏ7
ᎏ
8

13

9. Problem: Minimize C ⫽ 10x ⫹ 3y ⫹ 10z
2x ⫹ y ⫹ 5z ⱖ 20
4x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⱖ 30
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 00

subject to

Final tableau:

u

0

1

0

0

√
y
x
ᎏ1
ᎏ ⫺1
1
2
0⫺ ᎏ1
ᎏ
2
2⫺9 1

2

0

z P
0
0

0

0

0

0

5

10

0

1

Constant

2

1

3

80

subject to

10. Problem: Minimize C ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3y
x ⫹ 4y ⱖ 8
x ⫹ y ⱖ 5
2x ⫹ y ⱖ 7
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

Final tableau:

u

0

1

0

√
x
y P
w
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ4
ᎏ7
1
ᎏ 0
ᎏ
3
3
3
ᎏ1
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ1
0⫺ ᎏ1
ᎏ
ᎏ
3
3
3

0

0

2

4

1

1

Constant

ᎏ5
ᎏ
3
ᎏ1
ᎏ
3

11

6.5 THE SIMPLEX METHOD: STANDARD MINIMIZATION PROBLEMS

395

In Exercises 11–20, construct the dual problem associated with
the primal problem. Solve the primal problem.
11. Minimize C ⫽ 2x ⫹ 5y 12. Minimize C ⫽ 3x ⫹ 2y

subject to

x ⫹ 2y ⱖ 4
3x ⫹ 2y ⱖ 6
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

subject to 2x ⫹ 3y ⱖ 90
3x ⫹ 2y ⱖ 120
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

subject to

13. Minimize C ⫽ 6x ⫹ 4y
6x ⫹ y ⱖ 60
2x ⫹ y ⱖ 40
x ⫹ y ⱖ 30
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 00

subject to

14. Minimize C ⫽ 10x ⫹ y
4x ⫹ y ⱖ 16
4x ⫹ 2y ⱖ 12
x ⱖ 2
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 02

15. Minimize C ⫽ 200x ⫹ 150y ⫹ 120z

subject to

20x ⫹ 10y ⫹ z ⱖ 10
x ⫹ y ⫹ 2z ⱖ 20
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

16. Minimize C ⫽ 40x ⫹ 30y ⫹ 11z

subject to

2x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⱖ 8
x ⫹ y ⫺ z ⱖ 6
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

subject to

17. Minimize C ⫽ 6x ⫹ 8y ⫹ 4z
x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 2z ⱖ 10
2x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⱖ 24
x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⱖ 16
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

18. Minimize C ⫽ 12x ⫹ 4y ⫹ 8z

subject to

2x ⫹ 4y ⫹ z ⱖ 6
3x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 2z ⱖ 2
4x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⱖ 2
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

19. Minimize C ⫽ 30x ⫹ 12y ⫹ 20z

subject to

2x ⫹ 4y ⫹ 3z ⱖ 6
⫹ z ⱖ 2
6x
6y ⫹ 2z ⱖ 4
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

subject to

20. Minimize C ⫽ 8x ⫹ 6y ⫹ 4z
2x ⫹ 3y ⫹ z ⱖ 6
x ⫹ 2y ⫺ 2z ⱖ 4
x ⫹ y ⫹ 2z ⱖ 2
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

396

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

21. TRANSPORTATION Deluxe River Cruises operates a fleet of
river vessels. The fleet has two types of vessels: A type A
vessel  has  60  deluxe  cabins  and  160  standard  cabins,
whereas a type B vessel has 80 deluxe cabins and 120 stan-
dard  cabins.  Under  a  charter  agreement  with  Odyssey
Travel  Agency,  Deluxe  River  Cruises  is  to  provide
Odyssey with a minimum of 360 deluxe and 680 standard
cabins for their 15-day cruise in May. It costs $44,000 to
operate  a  type  A  vessel  and  $54,000  to  operate  a  type  B
vessel  for  that  period.  How  many  of  each  type  vessel
should be used to keep the operating costs to a minimum?
What is the minimum cost?

22. SHIPPING COSTS Acrosonic  manufactures  a  model  G  loud-
speaker system in Plants I and II. The output at Plant I is at
most  800/month,  and  the  output  at  Plant  II  is  at  most
600/month. Model G loudspeaker systems are also shipped
to  the  three  warehouses—A,  B,  and  C—whose  minimum
monthly  requirements  are  500,  400,  and  400  systems,
respectively. Shipping costs from Plant I to Warehouse A,
Warehouse B, and Warehouse C are $16, $20, and $22 per
loudspeaker  system,  respectively,  and  shipping  costs  from
Plant II to each of these warehouses are $18, $16, and $14,
respectively. What shipping schedule will enable Acrosonic
to meet the requirements of the warehouses while keeping
its shipping costs to a minimum? What is the minimum cost?
23. ADVERTISING Everest  Deluxe  World  Travel  has  decided  to
advertise in the Sunday editions of two major newspapers in
town. These advertisements are directed at three groups of
potential customers. Each advertisement in Newspaper I is
seen by 70,000 Group A customers, 40,000 Group B custom-
ers, and 20,000 Group C customers. Each advertisement in
Newspaper II is seen by 10,000 Group A, 20,000 Group B,
and  40,000  Group  C customers.  Each  advertisement  in
Newspaper I costs $1000, and each advertisement in News-
paper II costs $800. Everest would like their advertisements
to be read by at least 2 million people from Group A, 1.4 mil-
lion people from Group B, and 1 million people from Group
C. How many advertisements should Everest place in each
newspaper  to  achieve  its  advertising  goals  at  a  minimum
cost? What is the minimum cost?

24. SHIPPING COSTS Steinwelt Piano manufactures uprights and
consoles in two plants, Plant I and Plant II. The output of
Plant I is at most 300/month, and the output of Plant II is at
most  250/month.  These  pianos  are  shipped  to  three  ware-
houses that serve as distribution centers for Steinwelt. To fill
current and projected future orders, Warehouse A requires a

6.5 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. We  first  write  down  the  following  tableau  for  the  given

(primal) problem:

Constant

40
30
30

x

4
2
1
2

y

1
1
3
5

minimum  of  200  pianos/month,  Warehouse  B requires  at
least 150 pianos/month, and Warehouse C requires at least
200  pianos/month.  The  shipping  cost  of  each  piano  from
Plant I to Warehouse A, Warehouse B, and Warehouse C is
$60,  $60,  and  $80,  respectively,  and  the  shipping  cost  of
each piano from Plant II to Warehouse A, Warehouse B, and
Warehouse C is $80, $70, and $50, respectively. What ship-
ping schedule will enable Steinwelt to meet the requirements
of the warehouses while keeping the shipping costs to a min-
imum? What is the minimum cost?

25. NUTRITION—DIET PLANNING The owner of the Health Juice-
Bar wishes to prepare a low-calorie fruit juice with a high
vitamin A and vitamin C content by blending orange juice
and pink grapefruit juice. Each glass of the blended juice is
to contain at least 1200 International Units (IU) of vitamin
A and 200 IU of vitamin C. One ounce of orange juice con-
tains 60 IU of vitamin A, 16 IU of vitamin C, and 14 calo-
ries; each ounce of pink grapefruit juice contains 120 IU of
vitamin A, 12 IU of vitamin C, and 11 calories. How many
ounces of each juice should a glass of the blend contain if
it is to meet the minimum vitamin requirements while con-
taining a minimum number of calories?

26. PRODUCTION CONTROL An  oil  company  operates 

two
refineries in a certain city. Refinery I has an output of 200,
100, and 100 barrels of low-, medium-, and high-grade oil
per day, respectively. Refinery II has an output of 100, 200,
and 600 barrels of low-, medium-, and high-grade oil per
day, respectively. The company wishes to produce at least
1000, 1400, and 3000 barrels of low-, medium-, and high-
grade  oil  to  fill  an  order.  If  it  costs  $200/day  to  operate
Refinery I and $300/day to operate Refinery II, determine
how many days each refinery should be operated to meet
the production requirements at minimum cost to the com-
pany. What is the minimum cost?

In Exercises 27 and 28, determine whether the statement is true
or  false.  If  it  is  true,  explain  why  it  is  true.  If  it  is  false,  give  an
example to show why it is false.
27. If  a  standard  minimization  linear  programming  problem
has a unique solution, then so does the corresponding max-
imization problem with objective function P ⫽ ⫺C, where
C ⫽ a1x1 ⫹ a2x2 ⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⫹a nxn is the objective function for
the minimization problem.

28. The optimal value attained by the objective function of the
primal problem may be different from that attained by the
objective function of the dual problem.

Next, we interchange the columns and rows of the tableau
and head the three columns of the resulting array with the
three variables, u, √, and w, obtaining the tableau

u

4
1
40

√
2
1
30

w

1
3
30

Constant

2
5

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Interpreting the last tableau as if it were the initial tableau
for  a  standard  linear  programming  problem—with  the
exception  that  the  signs  of  the  coefficients  pertaining  to 
the objective function are not reversed—we construct the
required dual problem as follows:

Maximize P ⫽ 40u ⫹ 30√ ⫹ 30w
subject to

4u ⫹ 2√ ⫹ w ⱕ 2
u ⫹ √ ⫹ 3w ⱕ 5
u ⱖ 0, √ ⱖ 0, w ⱖ 0

2. We introduce slack variables x and y to obtain the system

of linear equations

4u ⫹ 2√ ⫹ w ⫹ x
u ⫹ √ ⫹ 3w
⫺40u ⫺ 30√ ⫺ 30w

⫹ y

⫽ 2
⫽ 5
⫹ P ⫽ 0

Using  the  simplex  algorithm,  we  obtain  the  sequence  of
simplex tableaus

6.5 THE SIMPLEX METHOD: STANDARD MINIMIZATION PROBLEMS

397

u

1
0

√
ᎏ1
ᎏ
2
2
ᎏ
ᎏ
1
1

0 ⫺10 ⫺20

w

x

y P

Constant

ᎏ1
ᎏ1
ᎏ
ᎏ
4
4
1
1 ⫺ᎏ
ᎏ
1
1
10

0
0
4
ᎏ 0
ᎏ
1
1
0

1

ᎏ1
ᎏ
2
8
ᎏ1
ᎏ
1
1
20

1
4

R1 ⫺ R2
———씮
R3 ⫹ 20R2

x

y P

Constant

1
3
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ
ᎏ
ᎏ
1
1
1
1
4
1
1 ⫺ᎏ
ᎏ
ᎏ
ᎏ
1
1
1
1
0
ᎏ8
0
ᎏ9
ᎏ
ᎏ
1
1
1
1

0
0

1

1
ᎏ
ᎏ
1
1
8
ᎏ1
ᎏ
1
1
ᎏ5
8
0ᎏ
1
1

Ratio
1/11
⫽ 1
5/11
5
18/11
⫽ 9
2/11

11
5

R1⎯→

u

√ w
5
1
ᎏ 0
ᎏ
1
1
2
0
ᎏ
ᎏ
1
1
0
0 ⫺ᎏ7
ᎏ
1
1
앖
Pivot 
column
√

0

w

Pivot 씮
row

u

x

y P

Constant

ᎏ1
1ᎏ
1
5
2
0
ᎏ
ᎏ
1
1
0 ⫺ᎏ7
0
ᎏ 0
1
1

ᎏ ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ3
0
ᎏ
5
5
4
1
1 ⫺ᎏ
ᎏ
ᎏ
ᎏ
1
1
1
1
0
ᎏ8
0
ᎏ9
ᎏ
ᎏ
1
1
1
1

0
0

1

ᎏ1
ᎏ
5
8
ᎏ1
ᎏ
1
1
8
ᎏ5
0ᎏ
1
1

2
11

R2 ⫺ R1
⎯⎯⎯→
R3 ⫹ R1

70
11

u

4

√

2

Pivot 씮
row

w x y P
0
1

0

1

1

1

3
⫺40 ⫺30 ⫺30

0
0

1
0

0
1

Constant

2

5
0

Ratio
⫽ 1
2
4
2
5
⫽ 5
1

1
4

R1⎯→

u

ᎏ1
1ᎏ
5
⫺ᎏ2
ᎏ
5
14

x

√ w
ᎏ ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ3
0
1
ᎏ
5
5
ᎏ2
1 ⫺ᎏ1
0
ᎏ
ᎏ
5
5
12
6
(cid:2)(cid:4)(cid:5)

0

0

y P

0
0

1

Constant

ᎏ1
ᎏ
5
ᎏ8
ᎏ
5
54

Solution for the
primal problem

The last tableau is final, and the solution to the primal prob-
lem is x ⫽ 12 and y ⫽ 6 with a minimum value for C of 54.

앖
Pivot 
column

u

√
ᎏ1
ᎏ
2
1

√
ᎏ1
ᎏ
2
ᎏ1
ᎏ
2

w x

y P

Constant

1

ᎏ1
ᎏ
4
3
⫺40 ⫺30 ⫺30

1

ᎏ1
ᎏ 0
4
0
0

1
0

0

0
1

ᎏ1
ᎏ
2
5
0

R2 ⫺ R1
————씮
R3 ⫹ 40R1

Pivot 씮
row

u

w

x

y P

Constant

0
0

1

ᎏ1
ᎏ
2
ᎏ9
ᎏ
2
20

ᎏ1
ᎏ1
1
0
ᎏ
ᎏ
4
4
1ᎏ ⫺ᎏ1
ᎏ1
0
ᎏ 1
4
4
0 ⫺10 ⫺20
10
앖
Pivot 
column

0

Ratio
1/2
⫽ 2
1/4
9/2
⫽ 18
11/4
11

4
11

R2⎯→

USING

TECHNOLOGY

The Simplex Method: Solving Minimization Problems
Graphing Utility
A  graphing  utility  can  be  used  to  solve  minimization  problems  using  the  simplex
method.

EXAMPLE 1

Minimize C ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3y
subject to 8x ⫹ y ⱖ 80
3x ⫹ 2y ⱖ 100
x ⫹ 4y ⱖ 80
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

(continued)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

398

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

Solution We begin by writing the dual problem associated with the given primal
problem. From the tableau for the primal problem

Constant

80
100
80

x
8
3
1
2

y
1
2
4
3

we obtain—upon interchanging the columns and rows of this tableau and heading
the three columns of the resulting array with the variables u, √, and w—the tableau

u
8
1
80

√
3
2
100

w Constant
1
4
80

2
3

This tells us that the dual problem is

Maximize P ⫽ 80u ⫹ 100√ ⫹ 80w
subject to

8u ⫹ 3√ ⫹ w ⱕ 2
u ⫹ 2√ ⫹ 4w ⱕ 3
u ⱖ 0, √ ⱖ 0, w ⱖ 0

To solve this standard maximization problem, we proceed as follows:

Pivot row 씮

u

8
1

√
3
2

⫺80 ⫺100 ⫺80

앖

w

Pivot column
√
1
2

0.33
4

u

2.67
1

⫺80

⫺100 ⫺80

w x

y P

Constant

1
4

1
0

0

0
1

0

0
0

1

2
3

0

x

y P

Constant

0.33
0

0

x

0
1

0

0
0

1

0.67
3

0

y P

Constant

u

2.67
⫺4.33

√
1
0

Pivot 씮
row

w

0.33
0.33
3.33 ⫺0.67

186.67

0 ⫺46.67

33.33

앖

Pivot column

u

2.67
⫺1.30

√
1
0

w

0.33
1 

x

0.33
⫺0.2

y

0 
0.3

186.67

0 ⫺46.67

33.33

0 

0
1

0

0
0

1

P

0
0

1

0.67
1.67

66.67

Constant

0.67
0.5

66.67

*rowÓᎏ1
ᎏ, A, 1Ô 䉴 B
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→

3

Ratio

2
3
3
2

*rowⴙ(⫺2, B, 1, 2) 䉴 C
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→
*rowⴙ(100, C, 1, 3) 䉴 B

Ratio
2
0.5

*rowÓᎏ
ᎏ, B, 2Ô 䉴 C
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→

1
3.
33

*rowⴙ(⫺0.33, C, 2, 1) 䉴 B
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→
*rowⴙ(46.67, B, 2, 3) 䉴 C

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.5 THE SIMPLEX METHOD: STANDARD MINIMIZATION PROBLEMS

399

u

3.1
⫺1.3

√ w
0
1
0
1

125.93

0

0.05

P

0
0

1

y
x
0.4 ⫺0.1
0.3

⫺0.2

23.99
14.02
(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:5)
Solution for the
primal problem

Constant

0.50
0.50

90.03

From the last tableau, we see that x ⫽ 23.99, y ⫽ 14.02, and C ⫽ 90.03.

Excel

EXAMPLE 2

Minimize C ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3y
subject to

8x ⫹ y ⱖ 80
3x ⫹ 2y ⱖ 100
x ⫹ 4y ⱖ 80
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

Solution We use Solver as outlined in Example 2, pages 381–384, to obtain the
spreadsheet shown in Figure T1. (In this case, select 
next to To: instead of 
Min
Max because this is a minimization problem. Also select 
dialog box because the inequalities in the problem are of the form ⱖ.) From the 
spreadsheet, we read off the solution: x ⫽ 24, y ⫽ 14, and C ⫽ 90.

in the Add Constraint

>=

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

I

J

Formulas for indicated cells

C8: = 2*C4 + 3*C5
C11: = 8*C4 + C5
C12: = 3*C4 + 2*C5
C13: = C4 + 4*C5

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

MinimizaƟon Problem

Decision Variables

x
y

ObjecƟve FuncƟon

Constraints

24
14

90

206
100
80

>=
>=
>=

80
100
80

FIGURE T1
Completed spreadsheet after using Solver

Note: Boldfaced words/characters enclosed in a box (for example, 
is required. Words/characters printed blue (for example, Chart sub-type:) indicate words/characters that appear on the screen. 

) indicate that an action (click, select, or press) 

Enter

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(continued)

400

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

In Exercises 1–4, solve the linear programming problem by the
simplex method.
1. Minimize C ⫽ x ⫹ y ⫹ 3z

subject to

2x ⫹ y ⫹ 3z ⱖ 6
x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 4z ⱖ 8
3x ⫹ y ⫺ 2z ⱖ 4
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

2. Minimize C ⫽ 2x ⫹ 4y ⫹ z

subject to

x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 4z ⱖ 7
3x ⫹ y ⫺ z ⱖ 6
x ⫹ 4y ⫹ 2z ⱖ 24
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

3. Minimize C ⫽ x ⫹ 1.2y ⫹ 3.5z

subject to 2x ⫹ 3y ⫹ 5z ⱖ 12
3x ⫹ 1.2y ⫺ 2.2z ⱖ 8
1.2x ⫹ 3y ⫹ 1.8z ⱖ 14
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

4. Minimize C ⫽ 2.1x ⫹ 1.2y ⫹ z

subject to

x ⫹ y ⫺ z ⱖ 5.2
x ⫺ 2.1y ⫹ 4.2z ⱖ 8.4
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

CHAPTER 6

Summary of Principal Terms

TERMS

solution set of a system of linear

inequalities (333)

bounded solution set (334)
unbounded solution set (334)
objective function (338)
linear programming problem (338)
feasible solution (346)
feasible set (346)

optimal solution (346)
isoprofit line (347)
method of corners (348)
standard maximization problem (359)
slack variable (359)
basic variable (360)
nonbasic variable (360)
basic solution (361)

pivot column (362)
pivot row (363)
pivot element (363)
simplex tableau (363)
simplex method (364)
standard minimization problem (385)
primal problem (385)
dual problem (385)

CHAPTER 6

Concept Review Questions

Fill in the blanks.
1. a. The solution set of the inequality ax ⫹ by ⬍ c is a/an
_____ _____ that  does  not  include  the  _____ with
equation ax ⫹ by ⫽ c.

b. If ax ⫹ by ⬍ c describes the lower half plane, then the
inequality  _____ describes  the  lower  half  plane
together with the line having equation _____.

2. a. The solution set of a system of linear inequalities in the
two variables x and y is the set of all _____ satisfying
_____ inequality of the system.

b. The  solution  set  of  a  system  of  linear  inequalities  is

_____ if it can be _____ by a circle.

3. A  linear  programming  problem  consists  of  a  linear  func-
tion, called a/an _____ _____ to be _____ or _____ sub-
ject to constraints in the form of _____ equations or _____.
4. a. If a linear programming problem has a solution, then it

must occur at a/an _____ _____ of the feasible set.

b. If the objective function of a linear programming prob-
lem is optimized at two adjacent vertices of the feasible
set,  then  it  is  optimized  at  every  point  on  the  _____
segment joining these vertices.

5. In a standard maximization problem: the objective function
is to be _____; all the variables involved in the problem are
_____;  and  each  linear  constraint  may  be  written  so  that
the expression involving the variables is _____ _____ or
_____ _____ a nonnegative constant.

6. In setting up the initial simplex tableau, we first transform
the  system  of  linear  inequalities  into  a  system  of  linear
_____,  using  _____ _____;  the  objective  function  is
rewritten so that it has the form _____ and then is placed
_____ the  system  of  linear  equations  obtained  earlier.
Finally,  the  initial  simplex  tableau  is  the  _____ matrix
associated with this system of linear equations.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7. In a standard minimization problem: the objective function
is to be _____; all the variables involved in the problem are
_____;  and  each  linear  constraint  may  be  written  so  that
the expression involving the variables is _____ _____ or
_____ _____ a constant.

8. The  fundamental  theorem  of  duality  states  that  a  primal
problem  has  a  solution  if  and  only  if  the  corresponding
_____ problem has a solution. If a solution exists, then the
_____ functions of both the primal and the dual problem
attain the same _____ _____.

REVIEW EXERCISES

401

CHAPTER 6

Review Exercises

In Exercises 1 and 2, find the optimal value(s) of the given objec-
tive function on the feasible set S.
1. Z ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3y

y

(0, 6)

(3, 4)

(0, 0)

(5, 0)

x

2. Z ⫽ 4x ⫹ 3y

y

(3, 5)

(1, 3) 
S

(1, 1)

(6, 

1)
x

In Exercises 3–12, use the method of corners to solve the given
linear programming problem.
3. Maximize P ⫽ 3x ⫹ 5y
2x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 12
x ⫹ y ⱕ 5
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

subject to

4. Maximize P ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3y
subject to 2x ⫹ y ⱕ 12
x ⫺ 2y ⱕ 1
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

subject to

5. Minimize C ⫽ 2x ⫹ 5y
x ⫹ 3y ⱖ 15
4x ⫹ y ⱖ 16
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

6. Minimize C ⫽ 3x ⫹ 4y
subject to 2x ⫹ y ⱖ 4
2x ⫹ 5y ⱖ 10
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

7. Maximize P ⫽ 3x ⫹ 2y
subject to 2x ⫹ y ⱕ 16
2x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 36
4x ⫹ 5y ⱖ 28
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

subject to

8. Maximize P ⫽ 6x ⫹ 2y
x ⫹ 2y ⱕ 12
x ⫹ y ⱕ 8
2x ⫺ 3y ⱖ 6
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

9. Minimize C ⫽ 2x ⫹ 7y

subject to 3x ⫹ 5y ⱖ 45
3x ⫹ 10y ⱖ 60
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

10. Minimize C ⫽ 4x ⫹ y

subject to 6x ⫹ y ⱖ 18
2x ⫹ y ⱖ 10
x ⫹ 4y ⱖ 12
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

11. Find the maximum and minimum of Q ⫽ x ⫹ y subject to

5x ⫹ 2y ⱖ 20
x ⫹ 2y ⱖ 8
x ⫹ 4y ⱕ 22
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

12. Find the maximum and minimum of Q ⫽ 2x ⫹ 5y subject to

x ⫹ y ⱖ 4
⫺x ⫹ y ⱕ 6
x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 30
x ⱕ 12
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

In  Exercises  13–20,  use  the  simplex  method  to  solve  the 
linear programming problem.
13. Maximize P ⫽ 3x ⫹ 4y
subject to x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 15
4x ⫹ y ⱕ 16
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

14. Maximize P ⫽ 2x ⫹ 5y
subject to 2x ⫹ y ⱕ 16
2x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 24
y ⱕ 6
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

15. Maximize P ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3y ⫹ 5z
subject to x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 3z ⱕ 12
x ⫺ 3y ⫹ 2z ⱕ 10
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

402

CHAPTER 6 LINEAR PROGRAMMING

16. Maximize P ⫽ x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 3z
subject to 2x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⱕ 14
3x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 4z ⱕ 24
2x ⫹ 5y ⫺ 2z ⱕ 10
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

17. Minimize C ⫽ 3x ⫹ 2y
subject to 2x ⫹ 3y ⱖ 6
2x ⫹ y ⱖ 4
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0
18. Minimize C ⫽ x ⫹ 2y

subject to 3x ⫹ y ⱖ 12
x ⫹ 4y ⱖ 16
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

19. Minimize C ⫽ 24x ⫹ 18y ⫹ 24z

subject to 3x ⫹ 2y ⫹ z ⱖ 4
x ⫹ y ⫹ 3z ⱖ 6
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0
20. Minimize C ⫽ 4x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 6z

subject to

x ⫹ 2y ⫹ z ⱖ 4
2x ⫹ y ⫹ 2z ⱖ 2
3x ⫹ 2y ⫹ z ⱖ 3
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

In Exercises 21–23, use the method of corners to solve the linear
programming problem.
21. FINANCIAL ANALYSIS An investor has decided to commit no
more than $80,000 to the purchase of the common stocks
of  two  companies,  Company  A and  Company  B.  He  has
also estimated that there is a chance of at most a 1% capi-
tal loss on his investment in Company A and a chance of at
most a 4% loss on his investment in Company B, and he
has  decided  that  these  losses  should  not  exceed  $2000. 
On the other hand, he expects to make a 14% profit from
his  investment  in  Company  A and  a  20%  profit  from 
his  investment  in  Company  B.  Determine  how  much  he
should invest in the stock of each company to maximize his
investment returns.

22. MANUFACTURING—PRODUCTION SCHEDULING Soundex  pro-
duces  two  models  of  clock  radios.  Model  A  requires 
15 min of work on Assembly Line I and 10 min of work on
Assembly  Line  II.  Model  B  requires  10  min  of  work  on
Assembly Line I and 12 min of work on Assembly Line II.
At  most,  25  labor-hours  of  assembly  time  on  Line  I  and 
22 labor-hours of assembly time on Line II are available
each day. It is anticipated that Soundex will realize a profit
of $12 on model A and $10 on model B. How many clock
radios of each model should be produced each day to max-
imize Soundex’s profit?

23. MANUFACTURING—PRODUCTION SCHEDULING Kane  Manufac-
turing  has  a  division  that  produces  two  models  of  grates,
model  A  and  model  B.  To  produce  each  model  A  grate
requires 3 lb of cast iron and 6 min of labor. To produce
each model B grate requires 4 lb of cast iron and 3 min of
labor. The profit for each model A grate is $2.00, and the
profit for each model B grate is $1.50. Available for grate
production each day are 1000 lb of cast iron and 20 labor-
hours. Because of a backlog of orders for model B grates,
Kane’s manager has decided to produce at least 180 model
B grates/day. How many grates of each model should Kane
produce to maximize its profits?

In Exercises 24–26, use the simplex method to solve the linear
programming problem.
24. MINING—PRODUCTION Perth  Mining  Company  operates
two  mines  for  the  purpose  of  extracting  gold  and  silver.
The  Saddle  Mine  costs  $14,000/day  to  operate,  and  it
yields 50 oz of gold and 3000 oz of silver each day. The
Horseshoe Mine costs $16,000/day to operate and it yields
75  oz  of  gold  and  1000  oz  of  silver  each  day.  Company
management has set a target of at least 650 oz of gold and
18,000 oz of silver. How many days should each mine be
operated at so that the target can be met at a minimum cost
to the company? What is the minimum cost?

25. INVESTMENT ANALYSIS Jorge  has  decided  to  invest  at  most
$100,000 in securities in the form of corporate stocks. He
has classified his options into three groups of stocks: blue-
chip stocks that he assumes will yield a 10% return (divi-
dends  and  capital  appreciation)  within  a  year,  growth
stocks  that  he  assumes  will  yield  a  15%  return  within  a
year,  and  speculative  stocks  that  he  assumes  will  yield 
a 20% return (mainly due to capital appreciation) within a
year. Because of the relative risks involved in his invest-
ment, Jorge has further decided that no more than 30% of
his investment should be in growth and speculative stocks
and at least 50% of his investment should be in blue-chip
and speculative stocks. Determine how much Jorge should
invest in each group of stocks in the hope of maximizing
the return on his investments.

26. MAXIMIZING PROFIT A  company  manufactures  three  prod-
ucts, A, B, and C, on two machines, I and II. It has been
determined that the company will realize a profit of $4/unit
of Product A, $6/unit of Product B, and $8/unit of Product
C.  Manufacturing  a  unit  of  Product  A requires  9  min  on
Machine I and 6 min on Machine II; manufacturing a unit
of Product B requires 12 min on Machine I and 6 min on
Machine  II;  manufacturing  a  unit  of  Product  C requires 
18 min on Machine I and 10 min on Machine II. There are
6 hr of machine time available on Machine I and 4 hr of
machine time available on Machine II in each work shift.
How  many  units  of  each  product  should  be  produced  in
each shift to maximize the company’s profit?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

BEFORE MOVING ON . . . 

403

Write the initial simplex tableau for the problem and iden-
tify the pivot element to be used in the first iteration of the
simplex method.

4. The  following  simplex  tableau  is  in  final  form.  Find  the
solution  to  the  linear  programming  problem  associated
with this tableau.

x
0
0
1

0

y
1
2
1
4
1
4

13
4

z
0
1
0

0

u
1
0
0

0

√
1
⫺
2
5
4
3
⫺
4

1
4

w
0
1
⫺
2
1
2

1
2

P
0
0
0

1

Constant

2
11
2

28

5. Using the simplex method, solve the following linear pro-

gramming problem:

Maximize P ⫽ 5x ⫹ 2y
subject to 4x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 30
2x ⫺ 3y ⱕ 6
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

CHAPTER 6

Before Moving On . . .

1. Find the maximum and minimum values of Z ⫽ 3x ⫺ y on

the following feasible set.

y

(16, 24)

(3, 16)

(8, 2) 

(28, 8)

x

2. Use  the  method  of  corners  to  solve  the  following  linear

programming problem:

Maximize P ⫽ x ⫹ 3y
subject to 2x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 11
3x ⫹ 7y ⱕ 24
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

3. Consider the following linear programming problem:

Maximize P ⫽ x ⫹ 2y ⫺ 3z
subject to 2x ⫹ y ⫺ z ⱕ 3
x ⫺ 2y ⫹ 3z ⱕ 1
3x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 4z ⱕ 17
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7

SETS AND
PROBABILITY

© E Pixel 4 Images 2010/Shutterstock.com

WE OFTEN DEAL with well-defined collections of objects

called sets. In this chapter, we see how sets can be

combined algebraically to yield other sets. We also look at some

techniques for determining the number of elements in a set and

for determining the number of ways the elements of a set can be

arranged or combined. After giving the technical meaning of the

term probability, we see how the rules of probability are applied to

many real-life situations to compute the probability of the

occurrence of certain events.

In how many ways can the Futurists (a

rock group) plan their concert tour to

San Francisco, Los Angeles, San Diego,

Denver, and Las Vegas if the three

performances in California must be

given consecutively?  In Example 13,

page 435, we will show how to

determine the number of possible

different itineraries.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

405

406

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

7.1

Sets and Set Operations

Set Terminology and Notation
We often deal with collections of different kinds of objects. For example, in conduct-
ing a study of the distribution of the weights of newborn infants, we might consider
the collection of all infants born in Massachusetts General Hospital during 2012. In a
study of the fuel consumption of compact cars, we might be interested in the collec-
tion of compact cars manufactured by General Motors in the 2012 model year. Such
collections are examples of sets. More specifically, a set is a well-defined collection
of objects. Thus, a set is not just any collection of objects; a set must be well defined
in  the  sense  that  if  we  are  given  an  object,  then  we  should  be  able  to  determine
whether or not it belongs to the collection.

The objects of a set are called the elements, or members, of a set and are usually
denoted by lowercase letters a, b, c, . . . ; the sets themselves are usually denoted by
uppercase letters A, B, C, . . . . The elements of a set can be displayed by listing all the
elements between braces. For example, in roster notation, the set A consisting of the
first three letters of the English alphabet is written
A ⫽ {a, b, c}

The set B of all letters of the alphabet can be written
B ⫽ {a, b, c, . . . , z}

Another notation that is commonly used is set-builder notation. Here, a rule is
given that describes the definite property or properties an object x must satisfy to qual-
ify for membership in the set. In this notation, the set B is written as

B ⫽ {x 0 x is a letter of the English alphabet}

and is read “B is the set of all elements x such that x is a letter of the English alphabet.”
If a is an element of a set A, we write a 僆 A and read “a belongs to A” or “a is 
an element of A.” If the element a does not belong to the set A, however, then we write
a 僆 A and read “a does not belong to A.” For example, if A ⫽ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}, then 
3 僆 A but 6 僆 A.

Explore & Discuss
1. Let A denote the collection of all the days in August 2012 in which the average daily
temperature at the San Francisco International Airport was approximately 75°F. Is A a
set? Explain your answer.

2. Let B denote the collection of all the days in August 2012 in which the average daily

temperature at the San Francisco International Airport was between 73.5°F and 81.2°F,
inclusive. Is B a set? Explain your answer.

Set Equality
Two sets A and B are equal, written A ⫽ B, if and only if they have exactly the
same elements.

EXAMPLE 1 Let A, B, and C be the sets

A ⫽ {a, e, i, o, u}
B ⫽ {a, i, o, e, u}
C ⫽ {a, e, i, o}

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.1 SETS AND SET OPERATIONS

407

Then A ⫽ B, since they both contain exactly the same elements. Note that the order
in which the elements are displayed is immaterial. Also, A ⫽ C, since u 僆 A but 
u 僆 C. Similarly, we conclude that B ⫽ C.

Subset
If every element of a set A is also an element of a set B, then we say that A is a
subset of B and write A 債 B.

By this definition, two sets A and B are equal if and only if (1) A 債 B, and (2) B 債 A.
You can verify this (see Exercise 66).

EXAMPLE 2 Referring to Example 1, we find that C 債 B, since every element of C
is also an element of B. Also, if D is the set

D ⫽ {a, e, i, o, x}

then D is not a subset of A, written D 債 A, since x 僆 D but x 僆 A. Observe that 
A 債 D as well, since u 僆 A but u 僆 D.

If A and B are sets such that A 債 B but A ⫽ B, then we say that A is a proper sub-
set of  B.  In  other  words,  a  set  A is  a  proper  subset  of  a  set  B,  written  A 傺 B,  if
(1) A 債 B and (2) there exists at least one element in B that is not in A. The second
condition states that the set A is properly “smaller” than the set B.

EXAMPLE 3 Let A ⫽ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6} and B ⫽ {2, 4, 6}. Then B is a proper subset
of A because (1) B 債 A, which is easily verified, and (2) there exists at least one 
element in A that is not in B—for example, the element 1.

When we refer to sets and subsets, we use the symbols 傺, 債, 傻, and 傶 to express
the idea of “containment.” However, when we wish to show that an element is
contained in a set, we use the symbol 僆 to express the idea of “membership.”
Thus, in Example 3, we would write 1 僆 A and not {1} 僆 A.

Empty Set
The set that contains no elements is called the empty set and is denoted by ⭋.

The empty set, ⭋, is a subset of every set. To see this, observe that ⭋ has no ele-

ments and therefore contains no element that is not also in any set A.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 4 List all subsets of the set A ⫽ {a, b, c}.
Solution There is one subset consisting of no elements, namely, the empty set ⭋.
Next, observe that there are three subsets consisting of one element,

{a}, {b}, {c}

three subsets consisting of two elements,

{a, b}, {a, c}, {b, c}

and one subset consisting of three elements, the set A itself. Therefore, the subsets 
of A are

⭋, {a}, {b}, {c}, {a, b}, {a, c}, {b, c}, {a, b, c}

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

408

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

In  contrast  with  the  empty  set,  we  have,  at  the  other  extreme,  the  notion  of  a
largest, or universal, set. A universal set is the set of all elements of interest in a par-
ticular discussion. It is the largest in the sense that all sets considered in the discussion
of the problem are subsets of the universal set. Of course, different universal sets are
associated with different problems, as shown in Example 5.

EXAMPLE 5
a. If the problem at hand is to determine the ratio of female to male students in a

college, then a logical choice of a universal set is the set consisting of the whole
student body of the college.

b. If the problem is to determine the ratio of female to male students in the business

department of the college in part (a), then the set of all students in the business
department can be chosen as the universal set.

A  visual  representation  of  sets  is  realized  through  the  use  of  Venn  diagrams,
which  are  of  considerable  help  in  understanding  the  concepts  introduced  earlier  as
well as in solving problems involving sets. The universal set U is represented by a rect-
angle, and subsets of U are represented by regions lying inside the rectangle.

EXAMPLE 6 Use Venn diagrams to illustrate the following statements:
a. The sets A and B are equal.
b. The set A is a proper subset of the set B.
c. The sets A and B are not subsets of each other.

Solution The respective Venn diagrams are shown in Figure 1a–c.

A, B

(a) A ⫽ B

U

U

B

A

(b) A 傺 B

U

U

A

B

or

A

B

FIGURE 1

(c) A 債 B and B 債 A

Set Operations
Having  introduced  the  concept  of  a  set,  our  next  task  is  to  consider  operations  on
sets—that  is,  to  consider  ways  in  which  sets  can  be  combined  to  yield  other  sets.
These operations enable us to combine sets in much the same way that the operations
of addition and multiplication enable us to combine numbers to obtain other numbers.
In what follows, all sets are assumed to be subsets of a given universal set U.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

7.1 SETS AND SET OPERATIONS

409

Set Union
Let A and B be sets. The union of A and B, written A 傼 B, is the set of all ele-
ments that belong to either A or B or both.

A 傼 B ⫽ 5x 0 x 僆 A or x 僆 B or both6

The shaded portion of the Venn diagram (Figure 2) depicts the set A 傼 B.
EXAMPLE 7 If A ⫽ {a, b, c} and B ⫽ {a, c, d}, then A 傼 B ⫽ {a, b, c, d}.

Set Intersection
Let A and B be sets. The set of elements common to the sets A and B, written 
A 傽 B, is called the intersection of A and B.

A 艚 B ⫽ 5x 0 x 僆 A and x 僆 B6

The shaded portion of the Venn diagram (Figure 3) depicts the set A 傽 B.
EXAMPLE 8 Let A ⫽ {a, b, c}, and let B ⫽ {a, c, d}. Then A 傽 B ⫽ {a, c}. (Compare
this result with Example 7.)
EXAMPLE 9 Let A ⫽ {1, 3, 5, 7, 9}, and let B ⫽ {2, 4, 6, 8, 10}. Then A 傽 B ⫽ ⭋.

U

U

A

U

B

FIGURE 2
Set union A 傼 B

A

B

FIGURE 3
Set intersection A 傽 B

The two sets of Example 9 have empty, or null, intersection. In general, the sets A and
B are said to be disjoint if they have no elements in common—that is, if A 傽 B ⫽ ⭋.

EXAMPLE 10 Let U be the set of all students in the classroom. If M ⫽
{x 僆 U 0 x is male} and F ⫽ {x 僆 U 0 x is female}, then F 傽 M ⫽ ⭋, so F and M are

disjoint.

Complement of a Set
If U is a universal set and A is a subset of U, then the set of all elements in U
that are not in A is called the complement of A and is denoted Ac.

Ac ⫽ 5x 0 x 僆 U and x 僆 A6

A

U

Ac

The shaded portion of the Venn diagram (Figure 4) shows the set Ac.
EXAMPLE 11 Let U ⫽ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10}, and let A ⫽ {2, 4, 6, 8, 10}.
Then Ac ⫽ {1, 3, 5, 7, 9}.

FIGURE 4
Set complementation

Explore & Discuss
Let A, B, and C be nonempty subsets of a set U.

1. Suppose A 傽 B ⫽ ⭋, A 傽 C ⫽ ⭋, and B 傽 C ⫽ ⭋. Can you conclude that 

A 傽 B 傽 C ⫽ ⭋? Explain your answer with an example.

2. Suppose A 傽 B 傽 C ⫽ ⭋. Can you conclude that A 傽 B ⫽ ⭋, A 傽 C ⫽ ⭋, and 

B 傽 C ⫽ ⭋? Explain your answer.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

410

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

The following rules hold for the operation of complementation. See whether you

can verify them.

Set Complementation
If U is a universal set and A is a subset of U, then
a. U c ⫽ ⭋
d. A 傼 Ac ⫽ U

b. ⭋ c ⫽ U
e. A 傽 Ac ⫽ ⭋

c.

1 Ac2 c ⫽ A

The operations on sets satisfy the following properties.

Properties of Set Operations
Let U be a universal set. If A, B, and C are arbitrary subsets of U, then

A 傼 B ⫽ B 傼 A
A 傽 B ⫽ B 傽 A
A 傼 1 B 傼 C2 ⫽ 1 A 傼 B2 傼 C
A 傽 1 B 傽 C2 ⫽ 1 A 傽 B2 傽 C
A 傼 1 B 傽 C2
⫽ 1 A 傼 B2 傽 1 A 傼 C2
A 傽 1 B 傼 C2
⫽ 1 A 傽 B2 傼 1 A 傽 C2

Commutative law for union

Commutative law for intersection

Associative law for union

Associative law for intersection

Distributive law for union

Distributive law for intersection

Two additional properties, referred to as De Morgan’s Laws, hold for the operations
on sets.

De Morgan’s Laws
Let A and B be sets. Then

1 A 傼 B2 c ⫽ Ac 傽 Bc
1 A 傽 B2 c ⫽ Ac 傼 Bc

(1)
(2)

Equation (1) states that the complement of the union of two sets is equal to the inter-
section of their complements. Equation (2) states that the complement of the intersec-
tion of two sets is equal to the union of their complements.

We will not prove De Morgan’s Laws here, but we will demonstrate the validity

of Equation (2) in the following example.

U

A

B

FIGURE 5
(A 傽 B)c

EXAMPLE 12 Using Venn diagrams, show that

1 A 傽 B2 c ⫽ Ac 傼 Bc

Solution 1 A 傽 B2 c is the set of elements in U but not in A 傽 B and is therefore the
Ac 傼 Bc, is easily seen to be equal to 1 A 傽 B2 c by referring once again to Figure 5.

shaded region shown in Figure 5. Next, Ac and Bc are shown in Figure 6a–b. Their union,

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

7.1 SETS AND SET OPERATIONS

411

FIGURE 6
Ac 傼 Bc is the set obtained by joining (a)
and (b).

A

U

Ac

B

U

Bc

(a)

(b)

EXAMPLE 13 Let U ⫽ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10}, A ⫽ {1, 2, 4, 8, 9}, and 
B ⫽ {3, 4, 5, 6, 8}. Verify by direct computation that 1 A 傼 B2 c ⫽ Ac 傽 Bc.
Solution A 傼 B ⫽ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9}, so 1 A 傼 B2 c ⫽ {7, 10}. Moreover, 
Ac ⫽ {3, 5, 6, 7, 10} and Bc ⫽ {1, 2, 7, 9, 10}, so Ac 傽 Bc ⫽ {7, 10}. The required
result follows.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 14 Automobile Options Let U denote the set of all 
cars in a dealer’s lot, and let

A ⫽ {x 僆 U 0 x is equipped with Sirius XM Radio}
B ⫽ {x 僆 U 0 x is equipped with a moonroof}
C ⫽ {x 僆 U 0 x is equipped with side air bags}

Find an expression in terms of A, B, and C for each of the following sets:
a. The set of cars with at least one of the given options
b. The set of cars with exactly one of the given options
c. The set of cars with Sirius XM Radio and side air bags but no moonroof.

Solution
a. The set of cars with at least one of the given options is A 傼 B 傼 C (Fig-

ure 7a).

b. The set of cars with Sirius XM Radio only is given by A 傽 Bc 傽 C c. Simi-

larly, we find that the set of cars with a moonroof only is given by 
B 傽 C c 傽 Ac, while the set of cars with side air bags only is given by 
C 傽 Ac 傽 Bc. Thus, the set of cars with exactly one of the given options is 
1 A 傽 Bc 傽 Cc2 傼 1 B 傽 Cc 傽 Ac2 傼 1 C 傽 Ac 傽 Bc2 (Figure 7b).
given by A 傽 C 傽 Bc (Figure 7c).

c. The set of cars with Sirius XM Radio and side air bags but no moonroof is

U

U

U

B

A

C

B

A

C

B

A

C

(a) The set of cars with at least one 
option

(b) The set of cars with exactly one 
option

(c) The set of cars with Sirius XM 
Radio and side air bags but no 
moonroof

FIGURE 7

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

412

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

7.1 Self-Check Exercises
1. Let U ⫽ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7}, A ⫽ {1, 2, 3}, B ⫽ {3, 4, 5, 6},

and C ⫽ {2, 3, 4}. Find the following sets:
a. Ac
d.

1 A 傼 B2 傽 C e.

b. A 傼 B

c. B 傽 C

1 A 傽 B2 傼 C f. Ac 傽 1 B 傼 C2 c

2. Let U denote the set of all members of the House of Rep-

resentatives. Let

D ⫽ {x 僆 U 0 x is a Democrat}
R ⫽ {x 僆 U 0 x is a Republican}

7.1 Concept Questions

F ⫽ {x 僆 U 0 x is a female}
L ⫽ {x 僆 U 0 x is a lawyer by training}

Describe each of the following sets in words.
a. D 傽 F

b. Fc 傽 R

c. D 傽 F 傽 Lc

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 7.1 can be found on 
page 415.

1. a. What is a set? Give an example.

b. When are two sets equal? Give an example of two equal

sets.

c. What is the empty set?

3. a. If  A 傺 B,  what  can  you  say  about  the  relationship

between Ac and Bc?

b. If Ac ⫽ ⭋, what can you say about A?

2. What can you say about two sets A and B such that

a. A 傼 B 債 A
c. A 傽 B ⫽ B

b. A 傼 B ⫽ ⭋
d. A 傽 B ⫽ ⭋

7.1 Exercises

In Exercises 1–4, write the set in set-builder notation.
1. The  set  of  gold  medalists  in  the  2010  Winter  Olympic

Games

2. The set of football teams in the NFL
3. {3, 4, 5, 6, 7}
4. {1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, . . . , 39}

In Exercises 5–8, list the elements of the set in roster notation.

5. {x 0 x is a digit in the number 352,646}
6. {x 0 x is a letter in the word HIPPOPOTAMUS}
7. {x 0 2 ⫺ x ⫽ 4 and x is an integer}
8. {x 0 2 ⫺ x ⫽ 4 and x is a fraction}

In Exercises 9–14, state whether the statements are true or false.
9. a. {a, b, c} ⫽ {c, a, b}
10. a. ⭋ 僆 A
11. a. 0 僆 ⭋
12. a. {⭋} ⫽ ⭋
13. {Chevrolet, Cadillac, Buick} 傺 {x 0 x is a division of Gen-
14. {x 0 x is  a  silver  medalist  in  the  2010  Winter  Olympic 

b. A 僆 A
b. A 傺 A
b. 0 ⫽ ⭋
b. {a, b} 僆 {a, b, c}

eral Motors}

Games} ⫽ ⭋

In Exercises 15 and 16, let A ⴝ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}. Determine whether
the statements are true or false.
15. a. 2 僆 A
16. a. 0 僆 A
17. Let  A ⫽ {1,  2,  3}.  Which  of  the  following  sets  are  equal 

b. A 債 {2, 4, 6}
b. {1, 3, 5} 僆 A

to A?
a. {2, 1, 3}
c. {0, 1, 2, 3}

b. {3, 2, 1}

18. Let A ⫽ {a, e, l, t, r}. Which of the following sets are equal

to A?

a. {x 0 x is a letter of the word later}
b. {x 0 x is a letter of the word latter}
c. {x 0 x is a letter of the word relate}
a. {1, 2}

19. List all subsets of the following sets:

b. {1, 2, 3}

c. {1, 2, 3, 4}

20. List  all  subsets  of  the  set  A ⫽ {IBM,  U.S.  Steel,  Union 
Carbide, Boeing}. Which of these are proper subsets of A?

In Exercises 21–24, find the smallest possible set (i.e., the set with
the  least  number  of  elements)  that  contains  the  given  sets  as
subsets.
21. {1, 2}, {1, 3, 4}, {4, 6, 8, 10}
22. {1, 2, 4}, {a, b}
23. {Jill, John, Jack}, {Susan, Sharon}
24. {GM, Ford, Chrysler}, {Daimler-Benz, Volkswagen}, 

{Toyota, Nissan}

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

25. Use Venn diagrams to represent the following relationships:

a. A 傺 B and B 傺 C
b. A 傺 U and B 傺 U, where A and B have no elements in

common

c. The sets A, B, and C are equal.

26. Let U denote the set of all students who applied for admis-
sion to the freshman class at Faber College for the upcom-
ing academic year, and let

A ⫽ {x 僆 U 0 x is a successful applicant}
B ⫽ {x 僆 U 0 x is a female student who enrolled in 
C ⫽ {x 僆 U 0 x is a male student who enrolled in 

the freshman class}

the freshman class}

a. Use Venn diagrams to represent the sets U, A, B, and C.
b. Determine whether the following statements are true or

false.
i. A 債 B

ii. B 傺 A

iii. C 傺 B

In Exercises 27 and 28, shade the portion of the accompanying
figure that represents each set.
27. a. A 傽 Bc
b. Ac 傽 B

U

28. a. Ac 傽 Bc
b. 1 A 傼 B2 c

A

B

In Exercises 29–32, shade the portion of the accompanying fig-
ure that represents each set.

7.1 SETS AND SET OPERATIONS

413

In Exercises 37 and 38, determine whether the pairs of sets are
disjoint.
37. a. {1, 2, 3, 4}, {4, 5, 6, 7}

b. {a, c, e, t}, {b, d, f}

38. a. ⭋, {1, 3, 5}

b. {0, 1, 3, 4}, {0, 2, 5, 7}

In Exercises 39–42, let U denote the set of all employees at Uni-
versal Life Insurance Company, and let
T ⫽ {x苸U 兩 x drinks tea}
C ⫽ {x苸U 兩 x drinks coffee}

Describe each set in words.
39. a. T c

40. a. T 傼 C

41. a. T 傽 C c

42. a. T c 傽 C c

b. C c

b. T 傽 C

b. T c 傽 C
1 T 傼 C2 c

b.

In Exercises 43–46, let U denote the set of all employees in a hos-
pital. Let

N ⫽ {x苸U 兩 x is a nurse}
D ⫽ {x苸U 兩 x is a doctor}
A ⫽ {x苸U 兩 x is an administrator}
M ⫽ {x苸U 兩 x is a male}
F ⫽ {x苸U 兩 x is a female}

A

B

C

U

Describe each set in words.
43. a. Dc

44. a. N 傼 D

45. a. D 傽 Mc

46. a. N 傽 F

b. Nc

b. N 傽 M

b. D 傽 A
1 D 傼 N2 c

b.

29. a. A 傼 B 傼 C

b. A 傽 B 傽 C

30. a. A 傽 B 傽 Cc

b. Ac 傽 B 傽 C
1 A 傼 B2 c 傽 C
1 A 傼 B 傼 C2 c

b.

b.

31. a. Ac 傽 Bc 傽 Cc
32. a. A 傼 1 B 傽 C2 c
In  Exercises  33–36,  let  U ⫽ {1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  10}, 
A ⫽ {1,  3,  5,  7,  9},  B ⫽ {2,  4,  6,  8,  10},  and  C ⫽ {1,  2,  4, 
5, 8, 9}. List the elements of each set.
b. B 傼 Cc
33. a. Ac
1 A 傽 C2 c

c. C 傼 Cc
c. A 傼 1 B 傽 C2

b.

34. a. C 傽 Cc
35. a. 1 A 傽 B) 傼 C
c. 1 A 傽 B 傽 C2 c
36. a. Ac 傽 (B 傽 Cc2
c. 1 A 傼 B)c 傽 Cc

b.

b.

1 A 傼 B 傼 C2 c
1 A 傼 Bc2 傼 1 B 傽 Cc2

In Exercises 47 and 48, let U denote the set of all senators in Con-
gress and let

D ⫽ {x苸U 兩 x is a Democrat}
R ⫽ {x苸U 兩 x is a Republican}
F ⫽ {x苸U 兩 x is a female}
L ⫽ {x苸U 兩 x is a lawyer}

Write the set that represents each statement.
47. a. The set of all Democrats who are female

b. The  set  of  all  Republicans  who  are  male  and  are  not

lawyers

48. a. The set of all Democrats who are female or are lawyers
b. The  set  of  all  senators  who  are  not  Democrats  or  are

lawyers

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

414

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

In Exercises 49 and 50, let U denote the set of all students in the
business college of a certain university. Let

A ⫽ {x苸U 兩 x had taken a course in accounting}
B ⫽ {x苸U 兩 x had taken a course in economics}
C ⫽ {x苸U 兩 x had taken a course in marketing}

Write the set that represents each statement.
49. a. The  set  of  students  who  have  not  had  a  course  in

economics

b. The set of students who have had courses in accounting

and economics

c. The set of students who have had courses in accounting

and economics but not marketing

50. a. The set of students who have had courses in economics

but not courses in accounting or marketing

b. The  set  of  students  who  have  had  at  least  one  of  the

three courses

c. The set of students who have had all three courses

In Exercises 51 and 52, refer to the following diagram, where U is
the set of all tourists surveyed over a 1-week period in London
and where

A ⫽ {x苸U 兩 x has taken the underground [subway]}
B ⫽ {x苸U 兩 x has taken a cab}
C ⫽ {x苸U 兩 x has taken a bus}

U

8

6

B

2

7

A

4

3
1

C
5

Express the indicated regions in set notation and in words.
51. a. Region 1

b. Regions 1 and 4 together
c. Regions 4, 5, 7, and 8 together

52. a. Region 3

b. Regions 4 and 6 together
c. Regions 5, 6, and 7 together

In  Exercises  53–58,  use  Venn  diagrams  to  illustrate  each  state-
ment.
53. A 債 A 傼 B; B 債 A 傼 B

54. A 傽 B 債 A; A 傽 B 債 B
55. A 傼 1B 傼 C2 ⫽ 1A 傼 B2 傼 C
56. A 傽 1B 傽 C2 ⫽ 1A 傽 B2 傽 C
57. A 傽 1B 傼 C2 ⫽ 1A 傽 B2 傼 1A 傽 C2

58.

1A 傼 B2 c ⫽ Ac 傽 Bc

In Exercises 59 and 60, let

U ⫽ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10}
A ⫽ {1, 3, 5, 7, 9}
B ⫽ {1, 2, 4, 7, 8}
C ⫽ {2, 4, 6, 8}

Verify each equation by direct computation.

59. a. A 傼 1B 傼 C2 ⫽ 1A 傼 B2 傼 C
b. A 傽 1B 傽 C2 ⫽ 1A 傽 B2 傽 C
60. a. A 傽 1B 傼 C2 ⫽ 1A 傽 B2 傼 1A 傽 C2
b. 1A 傼 B2 c ⫽ Ac 傽 Bc

In Exercises 61–64, refer to the accompanying figure, and list the
points that belong to each set.

U

s

t

A

y

u

B

w

x

√
r

z

C

61. a. A 傼 B
62. a. A 傽 1B 傼 C2

63. a.

64. a.

1B 傼 C2 c
1A 傽 B2 傽 Cc

b. A 傽 B
1B 傽 C2 c

b.

b. Ac

b.

1A 傼 B 傼 C2 c

65. Suppose A 傺 B and B 傺 C, where A and B are any two sets.
What conclusion can be drawn regarding the sets A and C?

66. Verify the assertion that two sets A and B are equal if and

only if (1) A 債 B and (2) B 債 A.

In Exercises 67–76, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
67. A set is never a subset of itself.

68. A proper subset of a set is itself a subset of the set but not

necessarily vice versa.

69. If A 傼 B ⫽ ⭋, then A ⫽ ⭋and  B ⫽ ⭋.

70. If A 傽 B ⫽ ⭋, then either A ⫽ ⭋or  B ⫽ ⭋.

71.

1A 傼 Ac2 c ⫽ ⭋

72. If A 債 B, then A 傽 B ⫽ A.

73. If A 債 B, then A 傼 B ⫽ B.

74. If A 傼 B ⫽ A, then A 債 B.

75. If A 傺 B, then Ac 傻 Bc.

76. A 傽 ⭋ ⫽ ⭋

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

7.1 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. a. Ac is the set of all elements in U but not in A. Therefore,

Ac ⫽ {4, 5, 6, 7}

b. A 傼 B consists of all elements in A and/or B. Hence,

A 傼 B ⫽ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}

c. B 傽 C is the set of all elements in both B and C. There-

fore,

B 傽 C ⫽ {3, 4}

d. Using the result from part (b), we find

1 A 傼 B2 傽 C ⫽ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6} 傽 {2, 3, 4}

⫽ {2, 3, 4}

e. First, we compute

A 傽 B ⫽ {3}

Next, since 1 A 傽 B2 傼 C is the set of all elements in 
1 A 傽 B2 and/or C, we conclude that
1 A 傽 B2 傼 C ⫽ {3} 傼 {2, 3, 4}

⫽ {2, 3, 4}

7.2 THE NUMBER OF ELEMENTS IN A FINITE SET

415

f. From  part  (a),  we  have  Ac ⫽ {4,  5,  6,  7}.  Next,  we 

compute

B 傼 C ⫽ {3, 4, 5, 6} 傼 {2, 3, 4}

⫽ {2, 3, 4, 5, 6}

from which we deduce that

1B 傼 C2 c ⫽ {1, 7}

The set of elements 
in U but not in B 傼 C

Finally, using these results, we obtain

Ac 傽 1 B 傼 C2 c ⫽ {4, 5, 6, 7} 傽 {1, 7} ⫽ {7}

2. a. D 傽 F denotes the set of all elements in both D and F.
Since an element in D is a Democrat and an element in F
is a female representative, we see that D 傽 F is the set of
all female Democrats in the House of Representatives.

b. Since Fc is the set of male representatives and R is the
set of Republicans, it follows that F c 傽 R is the set of
male Republicans in the House of Representatives.

c. Lc is the set of representatives who are not lawyers by
training.  Therefore,  D 傽 F 傽 Lc is  the  set  of  female
Democratic  representatives  who  are  not  lawyers  by
training.

7.2

The Number of Elements in a Finite Set

Counting the Elements in a Set
The solution to some problems in mathematics calls for finding the number of ele-
ments in a set. Such problems are called counting problems and constitute a field of
study known as combinatorics. Our study of combinatorics is restricted to the results
that will be required for our work in probability later on.

The number of elements in a finite set is determined by simply counting the ele-
ments in the set. If A is a set, then n(A) denotes the number of elements in A. For exam-
ple, if

A ⫽ {1, 2, 3, . . . , 20}
then n(A) ⫽ 20, n(B) ⫽ 2, and n(C) ⫽ 1.

B ⫽ {a, b}

C ⫽ {8}

The empty set has no elements in it, so n(⭋) ⫽ 0. Another result that is easily seen

to be true is the following: If A and B are disjoint sets, then

n1A 傼 B2 ⫽ n1A2 ⫹ n1B2

EXAMPLE 1 If A ⫽ {a, c, d} and B ⫽ {b, e, f, t}, then n(A) ⫽ 3 and n(B) ⫽ 4, so
n(A) ⫹ n(B) ⫽ 7. Moreover, A 傼 B ⫽ {a, b, c, d, e, f, t} and n(A 傼 B) ⫽ 7. Thus,
Equation (3) holds true in this case. Note that A 傽 B ⫽ ⭋.

In the general case, A and B need not be disjoint, which leads us to the formula

n1A 傼 B2 ⫽ n1A2 ⫹ n1B2 ⫺ n1A 艚 B2

(3)

(4)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

416

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

A

B

x

y

z

FIGURE 8
n(A 傼 B) ⫽ x ⫹ y ⫹ z

Also,

so

To see this, we observe that the set A 傼 B may be viewed as the union of three mutu-
ally disjoint sets with x, y, and z elements, respectively (Figure 8). This figure shows
that

n1A 傼 B2 ⫽ x ⫹ y ⫹ z

n1A2 ⫽ x ⫹ y

and

n1B2 ⫽ y ⫹ z

n1A2 ⫹ n1B2 ⫽ 1x ⫹ y2 ⫹ 1y ⫹ z2
 ⫽ 1x ⫹ y ⫹ z2 ⫹ y
 ⫽ n1A 傼 B2 ⫹ n1A 艚 B2

n(A 傽 B) ⫽ y

Solving for n1A 傼 B2 , we obtain

which is the desired result.

n1A 傼 B2 ⫽ n1A2 ⫹ n1B2 ⫺ n1A 傽 B2

EXAMPLE 2 Let A ⫽ {a, b, c, d, e}, and let B ⫽ {b, d, f, h}. Verify Equation (4)
directly.

Solution

Furthermore,

so

A 傼 B ⫽ {a, b, c, d, e, f, h}
so

A 傽 B ⫽ {b, d}

n1A2 ⫽ 5 and

so

n1A 傼 B2 ⫽ 7

n1A 傽 B2 ⫽ 2
n1B2 ⫽ 4

n1A2 ⫹ n1B2 ⫺ n1A 傽 B2 ⫽ 5 ⫹ 4 ⫺ 2 ⫽ 7 ⫽ n1A 傼 B2

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 3 Consumer Surveys In a survey of 100 coffee
drinkers, it was found that 70 take sugar, 60 take cream, and 50 take both

sugar and cream with their coffee. How many coffee drinkers take sugar or cream
with their coffee?

Solution Let U denote the set of 100 coffee drinkers surveyed, and let

Then n(A) ⫽ 70, n(B) ⫽ 60, and n(A 傽 B) ⫽ 50. The set of coffee drinkers who
take sugar or cream with their coffee is given by A 傼 B. Using Equation (4), we find

A ⫽ {x 僆 U 0 x takes sugar}
B ⫽ {x 僆 U 0 x takes cream}

n1A 傼 B2 ⫽ n1A2 ⫹ n1B2 ⫺ n1A 傽 B2

⫽ 70 ⫹ 60 ⫺ 50 ⫽ 80

Explore & Discuss
Prove Equation (5), using an
argument similar to that used to
prove Equation (4). Another
proof is outlined in Exercise 45
on page 421.

Thus, 80 out of the 100 coffee drinkers surveyed take cream or sugar with their
coffee.

An equation similar to Equation (4) can be derived for the case that involves any finite
number of finite sets. For example, a relationship involving the number of elements in
the sets A, B, and C is given by

n1A 傼 B 傼 C2 ⫽ n1A2 ⫹ n1B2 ⫹ n1C2 ⫺ n1A 艚 B2

⫺ n1A 艚 C2 ⫺ n1B 艚 C2 ⫹ n1A 艚 B 艚 C2

(5)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

7.2 THE NUMBER OF ELEMENTS IN A FINITE SET

417

As useful as equations such as Equation (5) are, in practice it is often easier to attack
a problem directly with the aid of Venn diagrams, as shown by the following example.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 4 Marketing Surveys A leading cosmetics manufac-
turer advertises its products in three magazines: Allure, Cosmopolitan, and 
the Ladies Home Journal. A survey of 500 customers by the manufacturer reveals
the following information:

180 learned of its products from Allure.
200 learned of its products from Cosmopolitan.
192 learned of its products from the Ladies Home Journal.
84 learned of its products from Allure and Cosmopolitan.
52 learned of its products from Allure and the Ladies Home Journal.
64 learned of its products from Cosmopolitan and the Ladies Home Journal.
38 learned of its products from all three magazines.

How many of the customers saw the manufacturer’s advertisement in
a. At least one magazine?
b. Exactly one magazine?

Solution Let U denote the set of all customers surveyed, and let

A ⫽ {x 僆 U 0 x learned of the products from Allure}
C ⫽ {x 僆 U 0 x learned of the products from Cosmopolitan}
L ⫽ {x 僆 U 0 x learned of the products from the Ladies Home Journal}
The result that 38 customers learned of the products from all three magazines
translates into n(A 傽 C 傽 L) ⫽ 38 (Figure 9a). Next, the result that 64 learned 
of the products from Cosmopolitan and the Ladies Home Journal translates into 
n(C 傽 L) ⫽ 64. This leaves

64 ⫺ 38 ⫽ 26

who learned of the products from only Cosmopolitan and the Ladies Home Jour-
nal (Figure 9b). Similarly, n(A 傽 L) ⫽ 52, so

52 ⫺ 38 ⫽ 14

learned of the products from only Allure and the Ladies Home Journal, and 
n(A 傽 C) ⫽ 84, so

84 ⫺ 38 ⫽ 46

learned of the products from only Allure and Cosmopolitan. These numbers
appear in the appropriate regions in Figure 9b.

A

38

U

C

U

C

A

46
38

26

14

L

L

FIGURE 9

(a) All three magazines

(b) Two or more magazines

Continuing, we have n(L) ⫽ 192, so the number who learned of the products

from the Ladies Home Journal only is given by

192 ⫺ 14 ⫺ 38 ⫺ 26 ⫽ 114

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

418

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

A

82

14

46
38

114

90

C

26

L

U

90

FIGURE 10
The completed Venn diagram

(Figure 10). Similarly, n(C) ⫽ 200, so

200 ⫺ 46 ⫺ 38 ⫺ 26 ⫽ 90

learned of the products from only Cosmopolitan, and n(A) ⫽ 180, so

180 ⫺ 14 ⫺ 38 ⫺ 46 ⫽ 82

learned of the products from only Allure. Finally,

500 ⫺ (90 ⫹ 26 ⫹ 114 ⫹ 14 ⫹ 82 ⫹ 46 ⫹ 38) ⫽ 90

learned of the products from other sources.

We are now in a position to answer questions (a) and (b).

a. Referring to Figure 10, we see that the number of customers who learned of

the products from at least one magazine is given by

n1 A 傼 C 傼 L2 ⫽ 500 ⫺ 90 ⫽ 410

b. The number of customers who learned of the products from exactly one maga-

zine (Figure 11) is given by

n1L 傽 Ac 傽 C c2 ⫹ n1C 傽 Ac 傽 Lc2 ⫹ n1 A 傽 Lc 傽 C c2 ⫽ 114 ⫹ 90 ⫹ 82 ⫽ 286

FIGURE 11
Exactly one magazine

7.2 Self-Check Exercises

1. Let A and B be subsets of a universal set U, and suppose
that n(U) ⫽ 100, n(A) ⫽ 60, n(B) ⫽ 40, and n(A 傽 B) ⫽
20. Compute:
a. n(A 傼 B)

b. n(A 傽 Bc)

c. n(Ac 傽 B)

2. In  a  survey  of  1000  readers  of  Video  Magazine,  it  was
found that 166 own at least one HD player in the HD-DVD
format,  161  own  at  least  one  HD  player  in  the  Blu-ray 

7.2 Concept Questions

1. a. If A and B are sets with A 傽 B ⫽ ⭋, what can you say

about n(A) ⫹ n(B)?

b. If A and B are sets satisfying n(A 傼 B) ⫽ n(A) ⫹ n(B),

what can you say about A 傽 B?

7.2 Exercises

In Exercises 1 and 2, verify the equation

n(A 傼 B) ⫽ n(A) ⫹ n(B)

for the given disjoint sets.
1. A ⫽ {a, e, i, o, u} and B ⫽ {t, h, k, l, m}

A

82

90

C

U

114

L

format,  and  22  own  HD  players  in  both  formats.  How
many of the readers surveyed own HD players in the HD-
DVD format only? How many of the readers surveyed do
not own an HD-player in either format?

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 7.2 can be found on 
page 421.

2. Let A and B be subsets of U, the universal set, and suppose
that A 傽 B ⫽ ⭋. Is it true that n(A) ⫺ n(B) ⫽ n(Bc) ⫺ n(Ac)?
Explain.

2. A ⫽ {x 0 x is a whole number between 0 and 4}
B ⫽ {x 0 x is a negative integer greater than ⫺4}
3. Let A ⫽ {2, 4, 6, 8} and B ⫽ {6, 7, 8, 9, 10}. Compute:

a. n(A)
c. n(A 傼 B)

b. n(B)
d. n(A 傽 B)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

4. Let U ⫽ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, a, b, c, d, e}. If A ⫽ {1, 2, a, e}
and B ⫽ {1, 2, 3, 4, a, b, c}, find:
a. n1 Ac2
c. n1 A 傼 Bc2
5. Verify directly that n(A 傼 B) ⫽ n(A) ⫹ n(B) ⫺ n(A 傽 B)

b. n1 A 傽 Bc2
d. n1 Ac 傽 B2

for the sets in Exercise 3.

6. Let A ⫽ {a, e, i, o, u} and B ⫽ {b, d, e, o, u}. Verify by direct

computation that n(A 傼 B) ⫽ n(A) ⫹ n(B) ⫺ n(A 傽 B).

7. If n(A) ⫽ 15, n(A 傽 B) ⫽ 4, and n(A 傼 B) ⫽ 30, then what

is n(B)?

8. If n(A) ⫽ 10, n(A 傼 B) ⫽ 15, and n(B) ⫽ 8, then what is 

n(A 傽 B)?

In Exercises 9 and 10, refer to the following Venn diagram.

12

A

3

B

15

20

U

9. Find:

10. Find:

a. n1A2
d. n1A 傽 Bc2
a. n1A 傽 B2
d. n1Ac 傼 Bc2

c. n1Ac 傽 B2
f. n31A 傼 B2c4

b. n1A 傼 B2
e. n1U2
b. n1Ac 傽 Bc2
e. n31A 傽 Bc2 傼 1Ac 傽 B24

c. n31A 傽 B2c4
f. n1Uc2

In Exercises 11 and 12, let A and B be subsets of a universal set U
and suppose n(U) ⫽ 200, n(A) ⫽ 100, n(B) ⫽ 80, and n(A 傽 B) ⫽ 40.
Compute:

c. n1 A 傽 Bc2
11. a. n1 A 傼 B2
12. a. n1 Ac 傽 B2
c. n1 Ac 傽 Bc2
13. Find  n(A 傼 B)  given  that  n(A)  ⫽ 6,  n(B)  ⫽ 10,  and 
n(A 傽 B) ⫽ 4.

b. n1 Ac2
b. n1 Bc2

14. If n(B) ⫽ 6, n(A 傼 B) ⫽ 14, and n(A 傽 B) ⫽ 3, find n(A).
15. If n(A) ⫽ 4, n(B) ⫽ 5, and n(A 傼 B) ⫽ 9, find n(A 傽 B).
16. If  n(A)  ⫽ 16,  n(B)  ⫽ 16,  n(C)  ⫽ 14,  n(A 傽 B)  ⫽ 6, 
n(A 傽 C) ⫽ 5, n(B 傽 C) ⫽ 6, and n(A 傼 B 傼 C) ⫽ 31,
find n(A 傽 B 傽 C).

17. If n(A) ⫽ 12, n(B) ⫽ 12, n(A 傽 B) ⫽ 5, n(A 傽 C) ⫽ 5, 
n(B 傽 C) ⫽ 4, n(A 傽 B 傽 C) ⫽ 2, and n(A 傼 B 傼 C) ⫽
24, find n(C).

18. A  survey  of  1000  subscribers  to  the  Los  Angeles  Times
revealed  that  900  people  subscribe  to  the  daily  morning
edition and 500 subscribe to both the daily morning and the
Sunday editions. How many subscribe to the Sunday edi-
tion? How many subscribe to the Sunday edition only?

19. On a certain day, the Wilton County Jail held 190 prison-
ers  accused  of  a  crime  (felony  and/or  misdemeanor).  Of
these, 130 were accused of felonies and 121 were accused
of  misdemeanors.  How  many  prisoners  were  accused  of
both a felony and a misdemeanor?

7.2 THE NUMBER OF ELEMENTS IN A FINITE SET

419

20. Of 100 clock radios with digital tuners and/or CD players
sold  recently  in  a  department  store,  70  had  digital  tuners
and 90 had CD players. How many radios had both digital
tuners and CD players?

21. CONSUMER SURVEYS In  a  survey  of  120  consumers  con-
ducted  in  a  shopping  mall,  80  consumers  indicated  that
they buy Brand A of a certain product, 68 buy Brand B, and
42 buy both brands. How many consumers participating in
the survey buy:
a. At least one of these brands?
b. Exactly one of these brands?
c. Only Brand A?
d. Neither of these brands?

22. CONSUMER SURVEYS In a survey of 200 members of a local
sports club, 100 members indicated that they plan to attend
the next Summer Olympic Games, 60 indicated that they
plan  to  attend  the  next  Winter  Olympic  Games,  and  40
indicated that they plan to attend both games. How many
members of the club plan to attend:
a. At least one of the two games?
b. Exactly one of the games?
c. The Summer Olympic Games only?
d. None of the games?

23. INVESTING In a poll conducted among 200 active investors,
it was found that 120 use discount brokers, 126 use full-
service brokers, and 64 use both discount and full-service
brokers. How many investors:
a. Use at least one kind of broker?
b. Use exactly one kind of broker?
c. Use only discount brokers?
d. Don’t use a broker?

24. COMMUTER TRENDS Of 50 employees of a store located in
downtown Boston, 18 people take the subway to work, 12
take the bus, and 7 take both the subway and the bus. How
many employees:
a. Take the subway or the bus to work?
b. Take only the bus to work?
c. Take either the bus or the subway to work?
d. Get to work by some other means?

25. CONSUMER SURVEYS In  a  survey  of  200  households  re-
garding  the  ownership  of  desktop  and  laptop  computers,
the following information was obtained:
120 households own only desktop computers.
10 households own only laptop computers.
40 households own neither desktop nor laptop computers.
How many households own both desktop and laptop com-
puters?

26. CONSUMER SURVEYS In a survey of 400 households regard-
ing  the  ownership  of  HDTVs  and  DVD  players,  the  fol-
lowing data were obtained:
360 households own one or more HDTVs.
170 households own one or more HDTVs and one or more

DVD players.

19 households do not own a HDTV or a DVD player.
How many households own only one or more DVD players?

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

420

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

In Exercises 27 and 28, refer to the following Venn diagram.

8

C

5

7

A

4

2
3

B
10

11

U

27. Find:

28. Find:

a. n1A2
d. n31A 傼 B2 傽 C c24
a. n1A 傼 B c2
d. n31A 傽 B 傽 C2c4

b. n1A 傼 B2
e. n31A 傼 B 傼 C2c4
b. n31A 傽 1B 傼 C2c4
e. n1Ac 傼 Bc 傼 C c2

c. n1A 傽 B 傽 C c2

c. n1Ac2

35. STUDENT READING HABITS A survey of 100 college students
who frequent the reading lounge of a university revealed
the following results:

40 read Time.
30 read Newsweek.
25 read U.S. News & World Report.
15 read Time and Newsweek.
12 read Time and U.S. News & World Report.
10 read Newsweek and U.S. News & World Report.
4 read all three magazines.

How many of the students surveyed read:
a. At least one of these magazines?
b. Exactly one of these magazines?
c. Exactly two of these magazines?
d. None of these magazines?

In Exercises 29–32, let A, B, and C be subsets of a universal set U and
suppose n(U) ⫽ 100, n(A) ⫽ 28, n(B) ⫽ 30, n(C) ⫽ 34, n(A 傽 B) ⫽ 8,
n(A 傽 C) ⫽ 10, n(B 傽 C) ⫽ 15, and n(A 傽 B 傽 C) ⫽ 5. Compute:

36. SAT SCORES Results of a Department of Education survey

of SAT test scores in 22 states showed that:

29. a. n1 A 傼 B 傼 C2
30. a. n3 A 傽 1 B 傼 C24
31. a. n1 Ac 傽 Bc 傽 Cc2
32. a. n3 A 傼 1 B 傽 C24

b. n1 Ac 傽 B 傽 C2
b. n3 A 傽 1 B 傼 C2 c4
b. n3 Ac 傽 1 B 傼 C24
b. n31 Ac 傽 Bc 傽 Cc2 c4

33. ECONOMIC SURVEYS A survey of the opinions of ten leading
economists  in  a  certain  country  showed  that,  because  oil
prices were expected to drop in that country over the next
12 months,

Seven had lowered their estimate of the consumer inflation
rate.
Eight had raised their estimate of the gross national prod-
uct (GNP) growth rate.
Two had lowered their estimate of the consumer inflation
rate but had not raised their estimate of the GNP growth
rate.

How many economists had both lowered their estimate of
the consumer inflation rate and raised their estimate of the
GNP growth rate for that period?

34. STUDENT DROPOUT RATE Data  released  by  the  Department
of Education regarding the rate (percentage) of ninth-grade
students who don’t graduate showed that out of 50 states:

12 states had an increase in the dropout rate during the past

2 years.

15 states had a dropout rate of at least 30% during the past 

2 years.

21 states  had  an  increase  in  the  dropout  rate  and/or  a

dropout rate of at least 30% during the past 2 years.

a. How many states had both a dropout rate of at least 30%
and  an  increase  in  the  dropout  rate  over  the  2-year
period?

b. How many states had a dropout rate that was less than

30% but that had increased over the 2-year period?

10 states had an average composite SAT score of at least 

1000 during the past 3 years.

15 states had an increase of at least 10 points in the aver-

age composite SAT score during the past 3 years.

8 states had both an average composite SAT score of at
least  1000  and  an  increase  in  the  average  composite
SAT score of at least 10 points during the past 3 years.

a. How many of the 22 states had composite SAT scores
of less than 1000 and showed an increase of at least 10
points over the 3-year period?

b. How many of the 22 states had composite SAT scores
of at least 1000 and did not show an increase of at least
10 points over the 3-year period?

37. CONSUMER SURVEYS The  120  consumers  of  Exercise  21
were also asked about their buying preferences concerning
another  product  that  is  sold  in  the  market  under  three
labels. The results were as follows:

12 buy only those sold under Label A.
25 buy only those sold under Label B.
26 buy only those sold under Label C.
15 buy only those sold under Labels A and B.
10 buy only those sold under Labels A and C.
12 buy only those sold under Labels B and C.
8 buy the product sold under all three labels.

How many of the consumers surveyed buy the product sold
under:
a. At least one of the three labels?
b. Labels A and B but not C?
c. Label A?
d. None of these labels?

38. STUDENT SURVEYS To  help  plan  the  number  of  meals
(breakfast, lunch, and dinner) to be prepared in a college
cafeteria, a survey conducted of students who ate at least
one meal in the cafeteria revealed the following data:

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

130 students ate breakfast.
180 students ate lunch.
275 students ate dinner.
68 students ate breakfast and lunch.
112 students ate breakfast and dinner.
90 students ate lunch and dinner.
58 students ate all three meals.

How many of the students ate:
a. At least one meal in the cafeteria?
b. Exactly one meal in the cafeteria?
c. Only dinner in the cafeteria?
d. Exactly two meals in the cafeteria?

39. INVESTMENTS In a survey of 200 employees of a company
regarding  their  401(k)  investments,  the  following  data
were obtained:

141 had investments in stock funds.
91 had investments in bond funds.
60 had investments in money market funds.
47 had investments in stock funds and bond funds.
36 had investments in stock funds and money market

funds.

36 had investments in bond funds and money market funds.
5 had investments only in some other vehicle.

a. How many of the employees surveyed had investments

in all three types of funds?

b. How many of the employees had investments in stock

funds only?

7.2 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. Use the given information to construct the following Venn

diagram:

A

40 

20 

20

U

B

20

Using this diagram, we see that
a. n(A 傼 B) ⫽ 40 ⫹ 20 ⫹ 20 ⫽ 80
b. n(A 傽 Bc) ⫽ 40
c. n(Ac 傽 B) ⫽ 20

2. Let U denote the set of all readers surveyed, and let

DVD format}

A ⫽ {x 僆 U 0 x owns at least one HD player in the HD-
B ⫽ {x 僆 U 0 x owns at least one HD player in the Blu-ray 

format}

7.2 THE NUMBER OF ELEMENTS IN A FINITE SET

421

40. NEWSPAPER SUBSCRIPTIONS In  a  survey  of  300  individual
investors  regarding  subscriptions  to  the  New  York  Times
(NYT ), Wall Street Journal (WSJ), and USA Today (UST ),
the following data were obtained:

122 subscribe to the NYT.
150 subscribe to the WSJ.
62 subscribe to the UST.
38 subscribe to the NYT and WSJ.
20 subscribe to the NYT and UST.
28 subscribe to the WSJ and UST.
36 do not subscribe to any of these newspapers.

a. How  many  of  the  individual  investors  surveyed  sub-

scribe to all three newspapers?

b. How many subscribe to only one of these newspapers?

In Exercises 41–44, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
41. If A 傽 B ⫽ ⭋, then n(A 傼 B) ⫽ n(A) ⫹ n(B).

42. If A 債 B, then n(B) ⫽ n(A) ⫹ n(Ac 傽 B).

43. If n(A 傼 B) ⫽ n(A) ⫹ n(B), then A 傽 B ⫽ ⭋.

44. If n(A 傼 B) ⫽ 0 and n(A 傽 B) ⫽ 0, then A ⫽ ⭋.

45. Derive Equation (5).

Hint: Equation (4) can be written as n(D 傼 E) ⫽ n(D) ⫹ n(E) ⫺
n(D 傽 E). Now, put D ⫽ A 傼 B and E ⫽ C. Use Equation (4)
again if necessary.

46. Find conditions on the sets A, B, and C so that 

n(A 傼 B 傼 C) ⫽ n(A) ⫹ n(B) ⫹ n(C).

The  fact  that  22  of  the  readers  own  HD  players  in  both
formats means that n(A 傽 B) ⫽ 22. Also, n(A) ⫽ 166 and
n(B) ⫽ 161. Using this information, we obtain the follow-
ing Venn diagram:

A

144  22

139

U

B

695

From the Venn diagram, we see that the number of readers
who own HD players in the HD-DVD format only is given
by

n1 A 傽 Bc2 ⫽ 144

The number of readers who do not own an HD player in
either format is given by

n1 Ac 傽 B c2 ⫽ 695

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

422

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

7.3

The Multiplication Principle

The Fundamental Principle of Counting
The solution of certain problems requires more sophisticated counting techniques than
those developed in the previous section. We look at some such techniques in this and
the following section. We begin by stating a fundamental principle of counting called
the multiplication principle.

The Multiplication Principle
Suppose there are m ways of performing a task T1 and n ways of performing 
a task T2. Then there are mn ways of performing the task T1 followed by the 
task T2.

EXAMPLE 1 Three trunk roads connect Town A and Town B, and two trunk roads
connect Town B and Town C.
a. Use the multiplication principle to find the number of ways in which a journey

from Town A to Town C via Town B can be completed.
b. Verify part (a) directly by exhibiting all possible routes.

Solution

a. Since there are three ways of performing the first task (going from Town A to

Town B) followed by two ways of performing the second task (going from Town
B to Town C), the multiplication principle says that there are 3 ⭈ 2, or 6, ways to
complete a journey from Town A to Town C via Town B.

b. Label the trunk roads connecting Town A and Town B with the Roman numerals
I, II, and III, and label the trunk roads connecting Town B and Town C with the
lowercase letters a and b. A schematic of this is shown in Figure 12. Then the
routes from Town A to Town C via Town B can be exhibited with the aid of a
tree diagram (Figure 13).

FIGURE 12
Roads from Town A to Town C

A

I

II

III

B

a

b

C

If we follow all of the branches from the initial point A to the right-hand edge of
the tree, we obtain the six routes represented by six ordered pairs:

1 I, a2 , 1 I, b2 , 1 II, a2 , 1 II, b2 , 1 III, a2 , 1 III, b2

where (I, a) means that the journey from Town A to Town B is made on Trunk
Road I with the rest of the journey, from Town B to Town C, completed on
Trunk Road a, and so forth.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

7.3 THE MULTIPLICATION PRINCIPLE

423

B

I

II

III

Combined
outcomes

(I, a)

(I, b)

(II, a)

(II, b)

(III, a)

(III, b)

C

a

b

a

b

a

b

A

FIGURE 13
Tree diagram displaying the possible
routes from Town A to Town C

Explore & Discuss
One way of gauging the performance of an airline is to track the arrival times of its flights.
Suppose we denote by E, O, and L a flight that arrives early, on time, or late, respectively.

1. Use a tree diagram to exhibit the possible outcomes when you track two successive

flights of the airline. How many outcomes are there?

2. How many outcomes are there if you track three successive flights? Justify your answer.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 2 Menu Choices Diners at Angelo’s Spaghetti Bar can
select their entree from 6 varieties of pasta and 28 choices of sauce. How 
many such combinations are there that consist of 1 variety of pasta and 1 kind of
sauce?

Solution There are 6 ways of choosing a pasta followed by 28 ways of choos-
ing a sauce, so by the multiplication principle, there are 6 ⭈ 28, or 168, combina-
tions of this pasta dish.

The multiplication principle can be easily extended, which leads to the generalized
multiplication principle.

Generalized Multiplication Principle
Suppose a task T1 can be performed in N1 ways, a task T2 can be performed in
N2 ways, . . . , and, finally, a task Tm can be performed in Nm ways. Then, the
number of ways of performing the tasks T1, T2, . . . , Tm in succession is given
by the product

N1N2 ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ Nm

We  now  illustrate  the  application  of  the  generalized  multiplication  principle  to

several diverse situations.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

424

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 3 A coin is tossed three times, and the sequence of heads and tails is
recorded.
a. Use the generalized multiplication principle to determine the number of possible

outcomes of this activity.

b. Exhibit all the sequences by means of a tree diagram.

Solution

a. The coin may land in two ways. Therefore, in three tosses, the number of out-

comes (sequences) is given by 2 ⭈ 2 ⭈ 2, or 8.

b. Let H and T denote the outcomes “a head” and “a tail,” respectively. Then the

required sequences may be obtained as shown in Figure 14, giving the sequence
as HHH, HHT, HTH, HTT, THH, THT, TTH, and TTT.

First
toss

H

T

Second

toss

H

T

H

T

Third
toss

H

T
H

T
H

T
H

T

Combined
outcomes

(H, H, H)

(H, H, T)
(H, T, H)

(H, T, T)
(T, H, H)

(T, H, T)
(T, T, H)

(T, T, T)

FIGURE 14
Tree diagram displaying possible out-
comes of three consecutive coin tosses

APPLIED EXAMPLE 4 Combination Locks A combination lock is unlocked
by dialing a sequence of numbers: first to the left, then to the right, and to 
the left again. If there are ten digits on the dial, determine the number of possible
combinations.

Solution There are ten choices for the first number, followed by ten for the sec-
ond and ten for the third, so by the generalized multiplication principle there are
10 ⭈ 10 ⭈ 10, or 1000, possible combinations.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 5 Investment Options An investor has decided to pur-
chase shares in the stock of three companies: one engaged in aerospace 

activities, one involved in energy development, and one involved in electronics.
After some research, the account executive of a brokerage firm has recommended
that the investor consider stock from five aerospace companies, three energy
development companies, and four electronics companies. In how many ways can
the investor select the group of three companies from the executive’s list?

Solution The investor has five choices for selecting an aerospace company,
three choices for selecting an energy development company, and four choices for
selecting an electronics company. Therefore, by the generalized multiplication
principle, there are 5 ⭈ 3 ⭈ 4, or 60, ways in which she can select a group of three
companies, one from each industry group.

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 6 Travel Options Tom is planning to leave for New
York City from Washington, D.C., on Monday morning and has decided 

that he will either fly or take the train. There are five flights and two trains
departing for New York City from Washington that morning. When he returns on

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

7.3 THE MULTIPLICATION PRINCIPLE

425

Sunday afternoon, Tom plans to either fly or hitch a ride with a friend. There are
two flights departing from New York City to Washington that afternoon. In how
many ways can Tom complete this round trip?

Solution There are seven ways in which Tom can go from Washington, D.C.,
to New York City (five by plane and two by train). On the return trip, Tom can
travel in three ways (two by plane and one by car). Therefore, by the multiplica-
tion principle, Tom can complete the round trip in 7 ⭈ 3, or 21, ways.

7.3 Self-Check Exercises

1. Encore Travel offers a “Theater Week in London” package
originating from New York City. There is a choice of eight
flights departing from New York City each week, a choice
of five hotel accommodations, and a choice of one compli-
mentary  ticket  to  one  of  eight  shows.  How  many  such
travel packages can a tourist choose from?

2. The Café Napoleon offers a dinner special on Wednesdays
consisting  of  a  choice  of  two  entrées  (beef  bourguignon

7.3 Concept Questions

1. Explain the multiplication principle.

2. Given the accompanying tree diagram for an activity, what

are the possible outcomes?

and chicken basquaise); one dinner salad; one French roll;
a choice of three vegetables; a choice of a carafe of bur-
gundy, rosé, or chablis wine; a choice of coffee or tea; and
a choice of six french pastries for dessert. How many com-
binations of dinner specials are there?

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 7.3 can be found on 
page 427.

A

B

I

II
I

II

7.3 Exercises

1. RENTAL RATES Lynbrook West, an apartment complex fi-
nanced by the State Housing Finance Agency, consists of
one-, two-, three-, and four-bedroom units. The rental rate
for each type of unit—low, moderate, or market—is deter-
mined  by  the  income  of  the  tenant.  How  many  different
rates are there?

2. COMMUTER PASSES Five  different  types  of  monthly  com-
muter passes are offered by a city’s local transit authority
for  each  of  three  different  groups  of  passengers:  youths,
adults,  and  senior  citizens.  How  many  different  kinds  of
passes must be printed each month?

3. BLACKJACK In  the  game  of  blackjack,  a  2-card  hand  con-
sisting of an ace and either a face card or a 10 is called a
“blackjack.” If a standard 52-card deck is used, determine
how many blackjack hands can be dealt. (A “face card” is
a jack, queen, or king.)

4. COIN TOSSES A coin is tossed four times, and the sequence

of heads and tails is recorded.
a. Use  the  generalized  multiplication  principle  to  deter-

mine the number of outcomes of this activity.

b. Exhibit all the sequences by means of a tree diagram.

5. WARDROBE SELECTION A  female  executive  selecting  her
wardrobe purchased three blazers, four blouses, and three
skirts  in  coordinating  colors.  How  many  ensembles  con-
sisting of a blazer, a blouse, and a skirt can she create from
this collection?

6. COMMUTER OPTIONS Four  commuter  trains  and  three  ex-
press buses depart from City A to City B in the morning,
and three commuter trains and three express buses operate
on the return trip in the evening. In how many ways can a
commuter  from  City  A to  City  B complete  a  daily  round
trip via bus and/or train?

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

426

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

7. PSYCHOLOGY EXPERIMENTS A  psychologist  has  constructed
the following maze for use in an experiment. The maze is
constructed so that a rat must pass through a series of one-
way doors. How many different paths are there from start
to finish?

Start

Finish

Maze

8. UNION BARGAINING ISSUES In  a  survey  conducted  by  a
union, members were asked to rate the importance of the
following issues: (1) job security, (2) increased fringe ben-
efits, and (3) improved working conditions. Five different
responses were allowed for each issue. Among completed
surveys, how many different responses to this survey were
possible?

9. HEALTH-CARE PLAN OPTIONS A  new  state  employee  is
offered  a  choice  of  ten  basic  health  plans,  three  dental
plans,  and  two  vision  care  plans.  How  many  different
health-care  plans  are  there  to  choose  from  if  one  plan  is
selected from each category?

10. CODE WORDS How  many  three-letter  code  words  can  be
constructed from the first ten letters of the Greek alphabet
if no repetitions are allowed?

11. SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS A  Social  Security  number  has
nine  digits.  How  many  Social  Security  numbers  are  pos-
sible?

12. MENU CHOICES The  New  Shanghai  Restaurant  offers  a
choice of 3 appetizers, 2 choices of soups, and 10 choices
of entrees for its lunch special. How many different com-
plete  lunches  can  be  ordered  from  the  restaurant’s  lunch
special menu?

13. MENU CHOICES Maria’s Trattoria offers mushrooms, onions,
green pepper, pepperoni, Italian sausage, and anchovies as
toppings for the plain cheese base of its pizzas. How many
different pizzas can be made?

14. SERIAL NUMBERS Computers  manufactured  by  a  certain
company have a serial number consisting of a letter of the
alphabet followed by a four-digit number. If all the serial
numbers of this type have been used, how many sets have
already been manufactured?

15. COMPUTER DATING A  computer  dating  service  uses  the
results of its compatibility survey for arranging dates. The
survey consists of 50 questions, each having five possible
answers.  How  many  different  responses  are  possible  if
every question is answered?

16. AUTOMOBILE COLORS The  2010  BMW  335i  Coupe  is
offered with a choice of 13 exterior colors (10 metallic and
3 standard), 6 interior colors, and 4 trims. How many com-
binations  involving  color  and  trim  are  available  for  the
model?
Source: BMW.

17. AUTOMOBILE COLORS The 2011 Toyota Camry comes with 5
grades of models, 2 sizes of engines, 4 choices of transmis-
sions,  5  exterior  colors,  and  2  interior  colors.  How  many
choices of the Camry are available for a prospective buyer?
Source: Toyota.

18. TELEVISION-VIEWING POLLS An  opinion  poll  is  to  be  con-
ducted among cable TV viewers. Six multiple-choice ques-
tions,  each  with  four  possible  answers,  will  be  asked.  In
how many different ways can a viewer complete the poll if
exactly one response is given to each question?

19. ATM  CARDS To  gain  access  to  his  account,  a  customer
using  an  automatic  teller  machine  (ATM)  must  enter  a
four-digit code. If repetition of the same four digits is not
allowed (for example, 5555), how many possible combina-
tions are there?

20. POLITICAL POLLS An  opinion  poll  was  conducted  by  the
Morris Polling Group. Respondents were classified accord-
ing to their sex (M or F), political affiliation (D, I, R), and
the region of the country in which they reside (NW, W, C,
S, E, NE).
a. Use  the  generalized  multiplication  principle  to  deter-

mine the number of possible classifications.

b. Construct a tree diagram to exhibit all possible classifi-

cations of females.

21. LICENSE PLATE NUMBERS Over  the  years,  the  state  of  Cali-
fornia  has  used  different  combinations  of  letters  of  the
alphabet and digits on its automobile license plates.
a. At one time, license plates were issued that consisted
of  three  letters  followed  by  three  digits.  How  many
different  license  plates  can  be  issued  under  this
arrangement?

b. Later  on,  license  plates  were  issued  that  consisted  of 
three digits followed by three letters. How many differ-
ent  license  plates  can  be  issued  under  this  arrange-
ment?

22. LICENSE PLATE NUMBERS In  recent  years,  the  state  of  Cali-
fornia issued license plates using a combination of one let-
ter  of  the  alphabet  followed  by  three  digits,  followed  by
another three letters of the alphabet. How many different
license plates can be issued using this configuration?

23. EXAMS An  exam  consists  of  ten  true-or-false  questions.
Assuming  that  every  question  is  answered,  in  how  many
different ways can a student complete the exam? In how
many ways can the exam be completed if a student can
leave some questions unanswered because a penalty is as-
sessed for each incorrect answer?

24. WARRANTY NUMBERS A warranty identification number for
a  certain  product  consists  of  a  letter  of  the  alphabet  fol-
lowed by a five-digit number. How many possible identifi-
cation numbers are there if the first digit of the five-digit
number must be nonzero?

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.4 PERMUTATIONS AND COMBINATIONS

427

slot and (b) compute the number of ways in which the eight sym-
bols other than the “lucky dollar” can appear in the window slot.
The difference (a ⫺ b) is the number of ways in which the “lucky
dollar” can appear in the window slot. Why?

28. STAFFING Student Painters, which specializes in painting the
exterior of residential buildings, has five people available to
be organized into two-person and three-person teams.
a. In how many ways can a two-person team be formed?
b. In how many ways can a three-person team be formed?
c. In how many ways can the company organize the avail-
able  people  into  either  two-person  teams  or  three-
person teams?

In Exercises 29 and 30, determine whether the statement is true
or  false.  If  it  is  true,  explain  why  it  is  true.  If  it  is  false,  give  an
example to show why it is false.
29. There are 32 three-digit odd numbers that can be formed

from the digits 1, 2, 3, and 4.

30. If there are six toppings available, then the number of dif-

ferent pizzas that can be made is 25, or 32, pizzas.

beverages,  and  six  pastries.  Therefore,  by  the  generalized
multiplication principle, there are 2 ⭈ 1 ⭈ 1 ⭈ 3 ⭈ 3 ⭈ 2 ⭈ 6,
or 216, combinations of dinner specials.

25. LOTTERIES In a state lottery, there are 15 finalists who are
eligible for the Big Money Draw. In how many ways can
the first, second, and third prizes be awarded if no ticket
holder can win more than one prize?

26. TELEPHONE NUMBERS

a. How many seven-digit telephone numbers are possible

if the first digit must be nonzero?

b. How  many  direct-dialing  numbers  for  calls  within  the
United States and Canada are possible if each number
consists of a 1 plus a three-digit area code (the first digit
of  which  must  be  nonzero)  and  a  number  of  the  type
described in part (a)?

27. SLOT MACHINES A “lucky dollar” is one of the nine symbols
printed on each reel of a slot machine with three reels. A
player  receives  one  of  various  payouts  whenever  one  or
more “lucky dollars” appear in the window of the machine.
Find  the  number  of  winning  combinations  for  which  the
machine gives a payoff.
Hint: (a) Compute the number of ways in which the nine symbols
on the first, second, and third wheels can appear in the window

7.3 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. A tourist has a choice of eight flights, five hotel accommo-
dations,  and  eight  tickets.  By  the  generalized  multiplica-
tion principle, there are 8 ⭈ 5 ⭈ 8, or 320, travel packages.
2. There  is  a  choice  of  two  entrées,  one  dinner  salad,  one
French roll, three vegetables, three wines, two nonalcoholic

7.4

Permutations and Combinations

Permutations
In this section, we apply the generalized multiplication principle to the solution of two
types of counting problems. Both types involve determining the number of ways the
elements of a set can be arranged, and both play an important role in the solution of
problems in probability.

We begin by considering the permutations of a set. Specifically, given a set of dis-
tinct objects, a permutation of the set is an arrangement of these objects in a definite
order. To see why the order in which objects are arranged is important in certain prac-
tical situations, suppose the winning number for the first prize in a raffle is 9237. Then
the number 2973, although it contains the same digits as the winning number, cannot
be the first-prize winner (Figure 15). Here, the four objects—the digits 9, 2, 3, and 7—
are arranged in a different order; one arrangement is associated with the winning num-
ber for the first prize, and the other is not.

9

2

3

7

O M N I   C L U B
R A F

L

E

F

FIGURE 15
The same digits appear on each ticket,
but the order of the digits is different.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

t

e

k

c

g   t i

n

i

n

n

W i

OMNI CLUB
RAFFLE
Nonwinning ticket

2
9
7
3

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

428

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 1 Let A ⫽ {a, b, c}.
a. Find the number of permutations of A.
b. List all the permutations of A with the aid of a tree diagram.

Solution

a. Each permutation of A consists of a sequence of the three letters a, b, c. There-
fore, we may think of such a sequence as being constructed by filling in each of
the three blanks

__

__

__

with one of the three letters. Now, there are three ways in which we can fill the
first blank—we can choose a, b, or c. Having selected a letter for the first blank,
there are two letters left for the second blank. Finally, there is but one way left to
fill the third blank. Schematically, we have

  3      2      1  

Invoking the generalized multiplication principle, we conclude that there are 
3 ⭈ 2 ⭈ 1, or 6, permutations of the set A.

b. The tree diagram associated with this problem appears in Figure 16, and the six

permutations of A are abc, acb, bac, bca, cab, and cba.

a

b

c

b

c
a

c
a

b

Combined
outcomes

(a, b, c)

(a, c, b)
(b, a, c)

(b, c, a)
(c, a, b)

(c, b, a)

c

b
c

a
b

a

Note Notice that when the possible outcomes are listed in the tree diagram in Exam-
ple 1, order is taken into account. Thus, (a, b, c) and (a, c, b) are two different arrange-
ments.

EXAMPLE 2 Find the number of ways in which a baseball team consisting of nine
people can arrange themselves in a line for a group picture.

Solution We want to determine the number of permutations of the nine members
of the baseball team. Each permutation in this situation consists of an arrangement
of the nine team members in a line. The nine positions can be represented by nine
blanks. Thus,

Position

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

There are nine ways to choose from among the nine players to fill the first position.
When that position is filled, eight players are left, which gives us eight ways to fill
the second position. Proceeding in a similar manner, we find that there are seven
ways to fill the third position, and so on. Schematically, we have

Number of ways to
fill each position

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

FIGURE 16
Permutations of three objects

#

#

#

#
#
Invoking the generalized multiplication principle, we conclude that there are 
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1, or 362,880, ways in which the baseball team can be
arranged for the picture.

#

#

#

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

7.4 PERMUTATIONS AND COMBINATIONS

429

Whenever we are asked to determine the number of ways in which the objects of
a set can be arranged in a line, order is important. For example, if we take a pic-
ture of two baseball players, A and B, then the two players can line up for the pic-
ture in two ways, AB or BA, and the two pictures will be different.

Pursuing the same line of argument used in solving the problems in the last two
examples, we can derive an expression for the number of ways of permuting a set A
of n distinct objects taken n at a time. In fact, each permutation may be viewed as be-
ing obtained by filling each of n blanks with one and only one element from the set.
There are n ways of filling the first blank, followed by (n ⫺ 1) ways of filling the sec-
ond blank, and so on. Thus, by the generalized multiplication principle, there are

n1 n ⫺ 121n ⫺ 22

#p#

#
#
3 2 1

ways of permuting the elements of the set A.

Before stating this result formally, let’s introduce a notation that will enable us to
write in a compact form many of the expressions that follow. We use the symbol n!
(read “n-factorial”) to denote the product of the first n positive integers.

n-Factorial
For any natural number n,

n! ⫽ n1n ⫺ 121n ⫺ 22 # p # 3 # 2 # 1

0! ⫽ 1

For example,

 1! ⫽ 1

 2! ⫽ 2 # 1 ⫽ 2
 3! ⫽ 3 # 2 # 1 ⫽ 6
 4! ⫽ 4 # 3 # 2 # 1 ⫽ 24
 5! ⫽ 5 # 4 # 3 # 2 # 1 ⫽ 120
o
10! ⫽ 10 # 9 # 8 # 7 # 6 # 5 # 4 # 3 # 2 # 1 ⫽ 3,628,800

Using this notation, we can express the number of permutations of n distinct objects
taken n at a time, denoted by P(n, n), as

P1 n, n2 ⫽ n!

In many situations, we are interested in determining the number of ways of per-
muting n distinct objects taken r at a time, where r ⱕ n. To derive a formula for com-
puting the number of ways of permuting a set consisting of n distinct objects taken r
at a time, we observe that each such permutation may be viewed as being obtained by
filling each of r blanks with precisely one element from the set. Now there are n ways
of filling the first blank, followed by (n ⫺ 1) ways of filling the second blank, and so
on. Finally, there are (n ⫺ r ⫹ 1) ways of filling the rth blank. We can represent this
argument schematically:

Number of ways

Position

 n   n ⫺ 1  n ⫺ 2 p n ⫺ r ⫹ 1
1st

2nd

3rd

rth

Using the generalized multiplication principle, we conclude that the number of ways
of permuting n distinct objects taken r at a time, denoted by P(n, r), is given by

P1n, r2 ⫽ n1n ⫺ 121n ⫺ 22 p 1n ⫺ r ⫹ 12

(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:5)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

r factors

430

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

Since

n1n ⫺ 121n ⫺ 22 p 1n ⫺ r ⫹ 12
 ⫽ 3n1n ⫺ 121n ⫺ 22 p 1n ⫺ r ⫹ 124 # 1n ⫺ r21n ⫺ r ⫺ 12 # p # 3 # 2 # 1
1n ⫺ r21n ⫺ r ⫺ 12 # p # 3 # 2 # 1
 ⫽ 3n1n ⫺ 121n ⫺ 22 p 1n ⫺ r ⫹ 12431n ⫺ r21n ⫺ r ⫺ 12 # p # 3 # 2 # 14
 ⫽ n!
1n ⫺ r2!

1n ⫺ r21n ⫺ r ⫺ 12 # p # 3 # 2 # 1

(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:5)

Here we are multiplying by 1.

we have the following formula.

Permutations of n Distinct Objects
The number of permutations of n distinct objects taken r at a time is

P1n, r2 ⫽ n!

1n ⫺ r2!

(6)

Note When r ⫽ n, Equation (6) reduces to

P1n, n2 ⫽ n!

0!

⫽ n!
1

⫽ n!

Note that 0! ⫽ 1.

In  other  words,  the  number  of  permutations  of  a  set  of  n distinct  objects,  taken  all
together, is n!.

EXAMPLE 3 Compute (a) P(4, 4) and (b) P(4, 2), and interpret your results.

Solution

a.

P14, 42 ⫽

4!

14 ⫺ 42!

⫽ 4!
0!

⫽ 4!
1

⫽ 4 # 3 # 2 # 1

1

⫽ 24

Note that 0! ⫽ 1.

This gives the number of permutations of four objects taken four at a time.

b.

P14, 22 ⫽

4!

14 ⫺ 22!

⫽ 4!
2!

⫽ 4 # 3 # 2 # 1
2 # 1

⫽ 4 # 3 ⫽ 12

This is the number of permutations of four objects taken two at a time.

EXAMPLE 4 Let A ⫽ {a, b, c, d}.
a. Use Equation (6) to compute the number of permutations of the set A taken two

at a time.

b. Display the permutations of part (a) with the aid of a tree diagram.

Solution
a. Here, n ⫽ 4 and r ⫽ 2, so the required number of permutations is given by

 P14, 22 ⫽

4!

14 ⫺ 22!

⫽ 4!
2!

 ⫽ 12

⫽ 4 # 3 # 2 # 1
2 # 1

⫽ 4 # 3

b. The tree diagram associated with the problem is shown in Figure 17, and the 

permutations of A taken two at a time are

ab, ac, ad, ba, bc, bd, ca, cb, cd, da, db, dc

Combined
outcomes

b
c
d

a
c
d

a
b
d

a
b
c

(a, b)
(a, c)
(a, d)

(b, a)
(b, c)
(b, d)

(c, a)
(c, b)
(c, d)

(d, a)
(d, b)
(d, c)

a

b

c

d

FIGURE 17
Permutations of four objects taken two at
a time

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

PORTFOLIO

Lara Solanki

Los Angeles City Manager

TITLE
INSTITUTION Fanfoto

Fanfoto is a photography com-

pany that focuses on a major need
of sports fans and fans of the
entertainment industry. At Fan-

foto, we have developed a successful business model that is
based on allowing customers to commemorate their trips to
their favorite ballparks, stadiums, and arenas with profes-
sional photography.

As a manager, one of my primary responsibilities is to
pick the right combination of employees (photographers)
for various sporting events. In addition to making sure that I
have enough photographers scheduled for each event, I
manage labor percentage. Labor percentage is total labor
divided by total sales.

The lower the labor percentage, the better for us. Most

business managers would agree that 30% or lower is an
acceptable percentage. I am constantly tracking and evalu-
ating total sales, as well as the individual sales of each pho-
tographer, to ensure that the labor percentage for my staff
falls in this acceptable range.

7.4 PERMUTATIONS AND COMBINATIONS

431

I also keep track of the number of photographs taken by

each photographer at every event. I have found that there is a
direct correlation between the number of photographs taken
and sales. As more photos are taken, sales increase. For exam-
ple, Jon shoots 500 photos every night and works for 5 hours
at $10/hour. Ben also works for 5 hours at $10/hour but shoots
only 150 photos. Jon is reaching out to more people than Ben.
Jon's daily sales average is $500 a night, whereas Ben's daily
sales average is $100 a night. Jon's labor percentage is far bet-
ter than Ben's labor percentage,
which increases the profit for the
company.

Instead of scheduling staff at
random, I create groups of staff
based on their sales history and
labor percentages. By scheduling
a combination of higher- and
lower-performing staff, I can be
sure that the average labor per-
centage will be acceptable at any
given event.

Spencer Brennan; (inset) Tom Keene

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 5 Find the number of ways in which a chairman, a vice-chairman, a sec-
retary, and a treasurer can be chosen from a committee of eight members.

Solution The problem is equivalent to finding the number of permutations of 
eight distinct objects taken four at a time. Therefore, there are

P18, 42 ⫽

⫽ 8 # 7 # 6 # 5 ⫽ 1680

8!

18 ⫺ 42!

⫽ 8!
4!

ways of choosing the four officials from the committee of eight members.

The permutations considered thus far have been those involving sets of distinct
objects. In many situations, we are interested in finding the number of permutations
of a set of objects in which not all of the objects are distinct.

Permutations of n Objects, Not All Distinct
Given a set of n objects in which n1 objects are alike and of one kind, n2 objects
are alike and of another kind, . . . , and nm objects are alike and of yet another
kind, so that

n1 ⫹ n2 ⫹ ⫹ nm ⫽ n

p

then the number of permutations of these n objects taken n at a time is given by

n!

n1! n2! p nm!

(7)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

432

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

To  establish  Formula  (7),  let’s  denote  the  number  of  such  permutations  by  x.
Now, if we think of the n1 objects as being distinct, then they can be permuted in n1!
ways. Similarly, if we think of the n2 objects as being distinct, then they can be per-
muted in n2! ways, and so on. Therefore, if we think of the n objects as being distinct,
then, by the generalized multiplication principle, there are x n1! n2!
nm! permu-
tations of these objects. But the number of permutations of a set of n distinct objects
taken n at a time is just equal to n!. Therefore, we have
nm!) ⫽ n!

x(n1! n2!

# p #

#

# p #

#

#

from which we deduce that

x ⫽

n!

n1! n2! p nm!

EXAMPLE 6 Find the number of permutations that can be formed from all the 
letters in the word ATLANTA.

Solution There are seven objects (letters) involved, so n ⫽ 7. However, three of
them are alike and of one kind (the three As), while two of them are alike and of 
another kind (the two Ts); hence, in this case, we have n1 ⫽ 3, n2 ⫽ 2, n3 ⫽ 1 (the
one L), and n4 ⫽ 1 (the one N). Therefore, by Formula (7), there are

7!

3! 2! 1! 1!

permutations.

⫽ 7 # 6 # 5 # 4 # 3 # 2 # 1
3 # 2 # 1 # 2 # 1 # 1 # 1

⫽ 420

APPLIED EXAMPLE 7 Management Decisions Weaver and Kline, a stock
brokerage firm, has received nine inquiries regarding new accounts. 
In how many ways can these inquiries be directed to any three of the firm’s
account executives if each account executive is to handle three inquiries?

Solution If we think of the nine inquiries as being slots arranged in a row with
inquiry 1 on the left and inquiry 9 on the right, then the problem can be thought
of as one of filling each slot with a business card from an account executive.
Then nine business cards would be used, of which three are alike and of one kind,
three are alike and of another kind, and three are alike and of yet another kind.
Thus, by using Formula (7) with n ⫽ 9 and n1 ⫽ n2 ⫽ n3 ⫽ 3, there are

⫽ 9 # 8 # 7 # 6 # 5 # 4 # 3 # 2 # 1
3 # 2 # 1 # 3 # 2 # 1 # 3 # 2 # 1

9!

3! 3! 3!

⫽ 1680

ways of assigning the inquiries.

Combinations
Until now, we have dealt with permutations of a set—that is, with arrangements of the
objects of the set in which the order of the elements is taken into consideration. In
many situations, one is interested in determining the number of ways of selecting r
objects from a set of n objects without any regard to the order in which the objects are
selected. Such a subset is called a combination.

For example, if one is interested in knowing the number of 5-card poker hands
that can be dealt from a standard deck of 52 cards, then the order in which the poker
hand is dealt is unimportant (Figure 18). In this situation, we are interested in deter-
mining the number of combinations of 5 cards (objects) selected from a deck (set) of
52 cards (objects). (We will solve this problem in Example 10.)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.4 PERMUTATIONS AND COMBINATIONS

433

A A A K K

K K A

AA A

is considered
the same
hand as

K

A

A

To  derive  a  formula  for  determining  the  number  of  combinations  of  n objects

taken r at a time, written

C1n, r2  or  a n
rb

we observe that each of the C(n, r) combinations of r objects can be permuted in r!
ways (Figure 19).

r! permutations

r objects

r objects

. . .

r objects

C(n, r) boxes

Thus, by the multiplication principle, the product r! C(n, r) gives the number of

FIGURE 18

FIGURE 19

permutations of n objects taken r at a time; that is,

from which we find

or, using Equation (6),

r! C1 n, r2 ⫽ P1 n, r2
P1n, r2

C1n, r2 ⫽

r!

C1n, r2 ⫽

n!

r! 1n ⫺ r2!

Combinations of n Objects
The number of combinations of n distinct objects taken r at a time is given by

C1n, r2 ⫽

n!

r! 1n ⫺ r2!

(where r ⱕ n)

(8)

EXAMPLE 8 Compute and interpret the results of (a) C(4, 4) and (b) C(4, 2).

Solution

a.

C14, 42 ⫽

4!

4! 14 ⫺ 42!

⫽ 4!
4! 0!

⫽ 1

Recall that 0! ⫽ 1.

This gives 1 as the number of combinations of four distinct objects taken four at
a time.

b.

C14, 22 ⫽

4!

2! 14 ⫺ 22!

⫽ 4 # 3 # 2 # 1
2 # 2

⫽ 4!
2! 2!

⫽ 6

This gives 6 as the number of combinations of four distinct objects taken two at 
a time.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

434

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

APPLIED EXAMPLE 9 Committee Selection A Senate investigation sub-
committee of four members is to be selected from a Senate committee 

of ten members. Determine the number of ways in which this can be done.

Solution The order in which the members of the subcommittee are selected is
unimportant, so the number of ways of choosing the subcommittee is given by
C(10, 4), the number of combinations of ten objects taken four at a time. Hence,
there are

⫽ 10 # 9 # 8 # 7
4 # 3 # 2 # 1

⫽ 10!
4! 6!

⫽ 210

C110, 42 ⫽

10!

4! 110 ⫺ 42!

ways of choosing such a subcommittee.

Note Remember,  a  combination  is  a  selection  of  objects  without regard  to  order.
Thus, in Example 9, we used a combination formula rather than a permutation formula
to solve the problem because the order of selection was not important; that is, it did
not matter whether a member of the subcommittee was selected first, second, third, or
fourth.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 10 Poker How many poker hands of 5 cards can be
dealt from a standard deck of 52 cards?

Solution The order in which the 5 cards are dealt is not important. The number
of ways of dealing a poker hand of 5 cards from a standard deck of 52 cards is
given by C(52, 5), the number of combinations of 52 objects taken five at a time.
Thus, there are

C152, 52 ⫽

52!

⫽ 52!
5! 152 ⫺ 52!
 ⫽ 52 # 51 # 50 # 49 # 48
5! 47!
5 # 4 # 3 # 2 # 1

ways of dealing such a poker hand.

 ⫽ 2,598,960

The next several examples show that solving a counting problem often involves
the repeated application of Equation (6) and/or (8), possibly in conjunction with the
multiplication principle.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 11 Selecting Members of a Group The members of a
string quartet consisting of two violinists, a violist, and a cellist are to be 

selected from a group of six violinists, three violists, and two cellists.
a. In how many ways can the string quartet be formed?
b. In how many ways can the string quartet be formed if one of the violinists is
to be designated as the first violinist and the other is to be designated as the
second violinist?

Solution

a. Since the order in which each musician is selected is not important, we use

combinations. The violinists can be selected in C(6, 2), or 15, ways; the vio-
list can be selected in C(3, 1), or 3, ways; and the cellist can be selected in
C(2, 1), or 2, ways. By the multiplication principle, there are 15 ⭈ 3 ⭈ 2, or 90,
ways of forming the string quartet.

b. The order in which the violinists are selected is important here. Consequently,
the number of ways of selecting the violinists is given by P(6, 2), or 30, ways.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.4 PERMUTATIONS AND COMBINATIONS

435

The number of ways of selecting the violist and the cellist remain, of course, 
3 and 2, respectively. Therefore, the number of ways in which the string quar-
tet can be formed is given by 30 ⭈ 3 ⭈ 2, or 180.

Note The solution of Example 11 involves both a permutation and a combination.
When we select two violinists from six violinists, order is not important, and we use
a combination formula to solve the problem. However, when one of the violinists is
designated as a first violinist, order is important, and we use a permutation formula to
solve the problem.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 12 Investment Options Refer to Example 5, page 424.
Suppose the investor has decided to purchase shares in the stocks of two 
aerospace companies, two energy development companies, and two electronics
companies. In how many ways can the investor select the group of six companies
for the investment from the recommended list of five aerospace companies, three
energy development companies, and four electronics companies?

Solution There are C(5, 2) ways in which the investor can select the aerospace
companies, C(3, 2) ways in which she can select the companies involved in
energy development, and C(4, 2) ways in which she can select the electronics
companies as investments. By the generalized multiplication principle, there are

 C15, 22C13, 22C14, 22 ⫽ 5!
 ⫽ 5 # 4

2! 3!

2

# 4!
# 3!
# 3 # 4 # 3
2! 2!
2! 1!

⫽ 180

2

ways of selecting the group of six companies for her investment.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 13 Scheduling Performances The Futurists, a rock
group, are planning a concert tour with performances to be given in five 
cities: San Francisco, Los Angeles, San Diego, Denver, and Las Vegas. In how
many ways can they arrange their itinerary if:
a. There are no restrictions?
b. The three performances in California must be given consecutively?

Solution

a. The order is important here, and we see that there are

P1 5, 52 ⫽ 5! ⫽ 120

ways of arranging their itinerary.

b. First, note that there are P(3, 3) ways of choosing between performing in 

California and in the two cities outside that state. Next, there are P(3, 3) ways
of arranging their itinerary in the three cities in California. Therefore, by the
multiplication principle, there are

P13, 32P13, 32 ⫽

#

3!

13 ⫺ 32!

3!

13 ⫺ 32!

⫽ 6 # 6 ⫽ 36

ways of arranging their itinerary.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 14 U.N. Security Council Voting The United Nations
Security Council consists of 5 permanent members and 10 nonpermanent 
members. Decisions made by the council require 9 votes for passage. However,
any permanent member may veto a measure and thus block its passage. Assum-
ing that there are no abstentions, in how many ways can a measure be passed if
all 15 members of the Council vote?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

436

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

Solution If a measure is to be passed, then all 5 permanent members must vote
for passage of that measure. This can be done in C(5, 5), or 1, way.

Next, observe that since 9 votes are required for passage of a measure, at

least 4 of the 10 nonpermanent members must also vote for its passage. To deter-
mine the number of ways in which this can be done, notice that there are C(10, 4)
ways in which exactly 4 of the nonpermanent members can vote for passage of a
measure, C(10, 5) ways in which exactly 5 of them can vote for passage of a
measure, and so on. Finally, there are C(10, 10) ways in which all 10 nonperma-
nent members can vote for passage of a measure. Hence, there are

C1 10, 42 ⫹ C1 10, 52 ⫹ ⫹ C1 10, 102

p

ways in which at least 4 of the 10 nonpermanent members can vote for a mea-
sure. So by the multiplication principle, there are

C15, 523C110, 42 ⫹ C110, 52 ⫹ p ⫹ C110, 1024

⫹ 10!
5! 5!

 ⫽ 112 c 10!
 ⫽ 1121210 ⫹ 252 ⫹ 210 ⫹ 120 ⫹ 45 ⫹ 10 ⫹ 12 ⫽ 848

⫹ p ⫹ 10!
10! 0!d

4! 6!

ways in which a measure can be passed.

7.4 Self-Check Exercises

1. Evaluate:

a. 5!

b. C17, 42

c. P16, 22

2. A  space  shuttle  crew  consists  of  a  shuttle  commander,  a
pilot, three engineers, a scientist, and a civilian. The shut-
tle  commander  and  pilot  are  to  be  chosen  from  8  candi-

dates, the three engineers from 12 candidates, the scientist
from 5 candidates, and the civilian from 2 candidates. How
many such space shuttle crews can be formed?

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 7.4 can be found on 
page 440.

7.4 Concept Questions

1. a. What is a permutation of a set of distinct objects?

b. How many permutations of a set of five distinct objects

puting the permutation of these ten objects taken ten at a
time?

taken three at a time are there?

2. Given a set of ten objects in which three are alike and of
one kind, three are alike and of another kind, and four are
alike and of yet another kind, what is the formula for com-

3. a. What  is  a  combination  of  a  set  of  n distinct  objects

taken r at a time?

b. How many combinations are there of six distinct objects

taken three at a time?

7.4 Exercises

In Exercises 1–22, evaluate the given expression.
1. 3⭈ 5!

3.

4.

6!
4! 2!

7. P15, 32
10. P1k, 22
13. C17, 22

2. 2⭈ 7!
5. P15, 52
8. P15, 12
11. C16, 62
14. C19, 32

5!
2! 2!

6. P16, 62
9. P1n, 12
12. C18, 82
15. C15, 02

16. C16, 52
19. C1n, 32
22. C1n, n ⫺ 22

17. C19, 62
20. C17, r2

18. C110, 32
21. P1n, n ⫺ 22

In Exercises 23–30, classify (but do not solve) the problem accord-
ing to whether it involves a permutation or a combination.
23. In how many ways can the letters of the word GLACIER be

arranged?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

24. A 4-member executive committee is to be formed from a
12-member board of directors. In how many ways can it be
formed?

25. As  part  of  a  quality-control  program,  3  cell  phones  are
selected  at  random  for  testing  from  100  cell  phones  pro-
duced by the manufacturer. In how many ways can this test
batch be chosen?

26. How many three-digit numbers can be formed by using the
numerals in the set {3, 2, 7, 9} if repetition is not allowed?

27. In how many ways can nine different books be arranged on

a shelf?

28. A member of a book club wishes to purchase two books
from a selection of eight books recommended for a certain
month. In how many ways can she choose them?

29. How many five-card poker hands can be dealt consisting of

three queens and a pair?

30. In  how  many  ways  can  a  six-letter  security  password  be
formed from letters of the alphabet if no letter is repeated?

31. How  many  four-letter  permutations  can  be  formed  from

the first four letters of the alphabet?

32. How  many  three-letter  permutations  can  be  formed  from

the first five letters of the alphabet?

33. In how many ways can four students be seated in a row of

four seats?

34. In how many ways can five people line up at a checkout

counter in a supermarket?

35. How  many  different  batting  orders  can  be  formed  for  a

nine-member baseball team?

36. In  how  many  ways  can  the  names  of  six  candidates  for

political office be listed on a ballot?

37. In  how  many  ways  can  a  member  of  a  hiring  committee

select 4 of 12 job applicants for further consideration?

38. In how many ways can an investor select four mutual funds
for  his  investment  portfolio  from  a  recommended  list  of
eight mutual funds?

39. Find the number of distinguishable permutations that can

be formed from the letters of the word ANTARCTICA.

40. Find the number of distinguishable permutations that can

be formed from the letters of the word PHILIPPINES.

41. In how many ways can the letters of the Website MySpace
be arranged if all of the letters are used and the vowels a
and e must always stay in the order ae?

42. In  how  many  ways  can  five  people  boarding  a  bus  be

seated if the bus has eight vacant seats?

7.4 PERMUTATIONS AND COMBINATIONS

437

43. How many distinct five-digit numbers can be made using

the digits 1, 2, 2, 2, 7?

44. How many different signals can be made by hoisting two
yellow  flags,  four  green  flags,  and  three  red  flags  on  a
ship’s mast at the same time?

45. MANAGEMENT DECISIONS In  how  many  ways  can  a  super-
market chain select 3 out of 12 possible sites for the con-
struction of new supermarkets?

46. BOOK SELECTIONS A  student  is  given  a  reading  list  of  ten
books from which he must select two for an outside read-
ing requirement. In how many ways can he make his selec-
tions?

47. QUALITY CONTROL In how many ways can a quality-control
engineer select a sample of 3 microprocessors for testing
from a batch of 100 microprocessors?

48. STUDY GROUPS A group of five students studying for a bar
exam has formed a study group. Each member of the group
will be responsible for preparing a study outline for one of
five  courses.  In  how  many  different  ways  can  the  five
courses be assigned to the members of the group?

49. TELEVISION PROGRAMMING In how many ways can a televi-
sion-programming director schedule six different commer-
cials in the six time slots allocated to commercials during
a 1-hour program?

50. WAITING LINES Seven people arrive at the ticket counter of
Starlite Cinema at the same time. In how many ways can
they line up to purchase their tickets?

51. MANAGEMENT DECISIONS Weaver and Kline, a stock broker-
age  firm,  has  received  five  inquiries  regarding  new
accounts.  In  how  many  ways  can  these  inquiries  be
directed to its 12 account executives if each executive han-
dles no more than one inquiry?

52. CAR POOLS A company car that has a seating capacity of
six is to be used by six employees who have formed a car
pool. If only four of these employees can drive, how many
possible seating arrangements are there for the group?

53. BOOK DISPLAYS At  a  college  library  exhibition  of  faculty
publications, three mathematics books, four social science
books,  and  three  biology  books  will  be  displayed  on  a
shelf. (Assume that none of the books is alike.)
a. In how many ways can the ten books be arranged on the

shelf?

b. In how many ways can the ten books be arranged on the
shelf  if  books  on  the  same  subject  matter  are  placed
together?

54. SEATING In  how  many  ways  can  four  married  couples

attending a concert be seated in a row of eight seats if:
a. There are no restrictions?
b. Each married couple is seated together?
c. The members of each sex are seated together?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

438

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

55. NEWSPAPER ADVERTISEMENTS Four items from five different
departments of Metro Department Store will be featured in
a one-page newspaper advertisement, as shown in the fol-
lowing diagram:

Advertisement

1 

5 

9 

2 

6 

3 

7 

4 

8 

10  

1 1  

12 

13  

14  

15  

16 

17  

18  

19  

20 

a. In how many different ways can the 20 featured items

be arranged on the page?

b. If items from the same department must be in the same

row, how many arrangements are possible?

56. MANAGEMENT DECISIONS C & J Realty has received 12 in-
quiries from prospective home buyers. In how many ways
can the inquiries be directed to any four of the firm’s real
estate agents if each agent handles three inquiries?

57. SPORTS A  Little  League  baseball  team  has  12  players
available for a 9-member team (no designated team posi-
tions).
a. How many different 9-person batting orders are possi-

ble?

b. How many different 9-member teams are possible?
c. How many different 9-member teams and 2 alternates

are possible?

58. SPORTS In the men’s tennis tournament at Wimbledon, two
finalists, A and B, are competing for the title, which will be
awarded to the first player to win three sets. In how many
different ways can the match be completed?

59. SPORTS In the women’s tennis tournament at Wimbledon,
two finalists,  A and  B, are competing for the title, which
will be awarded to the first player to win two sets. In how
many different ways can the match be completed?

60. JURY SELECTION In how many different ways can a panel of
12 jurors and 2 alternate jurors be chosen from a group of
30 prospective jurors?

61. U.N. VOTING Refer to Example 14. In how many ways can
a measure be passed if two particular permanent and two
particular nonpermanent members of the Security Council
abstain from voting?

62. EXAMS A  student  taking  an  examination  is  required  to

answer exactly 10 out of 15 questions.
a. In how many ways can the 10 questions be selected?
b. In how many ways can the 10 questions be selected if

exactly 2 of the first 3 questions must be answered?

63. TEACHING ASSISTANTSHIPS Twelve  graduate  students  have
applied for three available teaching assistantships. In how
many ways can the assistantships be awarded among these
applicants if:
a. No preference is given to any student?
b. One  particular  student  must  be  awarded  an  assistant-

ship?

c. The  group  of  applicants  includes  seven  men  and  five
women and it is stipulated that at least one woman must
be awarded an assistantship?

64. SENATE COMMITTEES In how many ways can a subcommit-
tee  of  four  be  chosen  from  a  Senate  committee  of  five
Democrats and four Republicans if:
a. All members are eligible?
b. The subcommittee must consist of two Republicans and

two Democrats?

65. CONTRACT BIDDING UBS Television Company is consider-
ing  bids  submitted  by  seven  different  firms  for  each  of
three different contracts. In how many ways can the con-
tracts be awarded among these firms if no firm is to receive
more than two contracts?

66. PERSONNEL SELECTION JCL Computers has five vacancies in
its executive trainee program. In how many ways can the
company  select  five  trainees  from  a  group  of  ten  female
and ten male applicants if the vacancies
a. Can be filled by any combination of men and women?
b. Must be filled by two men and three women?

67. COURSE SELECTION A  student  planning  her  curriculum  for
the  upcoming  year  must  select  one  of  five  business
courses, one of three mathematics courses, two of six elec-
tive courses, and either one of four history courses or one
of three social science courses. How many different curric-
ula are available for her consideration?

68. DRIVERS’ TESTS A state Motor Vehicle Department requires
learners to pass a written test on the motor vehicle laws of
the state. The exam consists of ten true-or-false questions,
of which at least eight must be answered correctly to qual-
ify for a permit. In how many different ways can a learner
who  answers  all  the  questions  on  the  exam  qualify  for  a
permit?

A list of poker hands ranked in order from the highest to the low-
est is shown in the following table, along with a description and
example of each hand. Use the table to answer Exercises 69–74.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Example

A

2

3

4

5

K

K

K

K

2

3

5

3

6

3

9

7

J

7

K

10

J

Q

K

A

K

K

K

2

4

K

K

2

2

4

7.4 PERMUTATIONS AND COMBINATIONS

439

76. SPORTS In the World Series, one National League team and
one American League team compete for the title, which is
awarded to the first team to win four games. In how many
different ways can the series be completed?

77. VOTING QUORUMS A quorum (minimum) of 6 voting mem-
bers is required at all meetings of the Curtis Townhomes
Owners Association. If there is a total of 12 voting mem-
bers in the group, find the number of ways this quorum can
be formed.

78. CIRCULAR PERMUTATIONS Suppose n distinct objects are ar-
ranged in a circle. Show that the number of (different) cir-
cular arrangements of the n objects is (n ⫺ 1)!.
Hint: Consider the arrangement of the five letters A, B, C, D, and
E in the accompanying figure. The permutations ABCDE, BCDEA,
CDEAB, DEABC,  and EABCD are  not  distinguishable.  Generalize
this observation to the case of n objects.

A

E

B

D

C

K

K

5

2

4

79. Refer to Exercise 78. In how many ways can five TV com-

mentators be seated at a round table for a discussion?

Hand
Straight
flush

Four of
a kind

Full
house

Flush

Straight

Three
of a
kind

Two
pair

One
pair

Description
5 cards in sequence
in the same suit

4 cards of the same
rank and any other 
card

3 of a kind and a 
pair

5 cards of the same
suit that are not
all in sequence

5 cards in sequence 
but not all of the
same suit

3 cards of the
same rank and 2
unmatched cards

2 cards of the same
rank and 2 cards 
of any other rank
with an unmatched
card

2 cards of the 
same rank and 3 
unmatched cards

If  a  5-card  poker  hand  is  dealt  from  a  well-shuffled  deck  of  52
cards, how many different hands consist of the following:
69. A straight flush? (Note that an ace may be played as either
a high or a low card in a straight sequence—that is, A, 2, 3,
4,  5  or  10,  J,  Q,  K,  A.  Hence,  there  are  ten  possible
sequences for a straight in one suit.)
70. A straight (but not a straight flush)?
71. A flush (but not a straight flush)?
72. Four of a kind?
73. A full house?
74. Two pair?
75. BUS ROUTING The  following  is  a  schematic  diagram  of  a
city’s street system between the points A and B. The City
Transit Authority is in the process of selecting a route from
A to  B along  which  to  provide  bus  service.  If  the  com-
pany’s intention is to keep the route as short as possible,
how many routes must be considered?

B

A

Street system

80. Refer  to  Exercise  78.  In  how  many  ways  can  four  men
and  four  women  be  seated  at  a  round  table  at  a  dinner
party  if  each  guest  is  seated  between  members  of  the
opposite sex?

81. At the end of Section 6.3, we mentioned that solving a lin-
ear programming problem in three variables and five con-
straints by the methods of corners requires that we solve 
56 3 ⫻ 3 systems of linear equations. Verify this assertion.

82. Refer to Exercise 81. Show that, in order to solve a linear
programming problem in five variables and ten constraints,
we  must  solve  3003  5  ⫻ 5  systems  of  linear  equations.
This assertion was also made at the end of Section 6.3.

In Exercises 83–86, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
83. The number of permutations of n distinct objects taken all

together is n!

84. P1n, r2 ⫽ r! C1n, r2
85. The number of combinations of n objects taken n ⫺ r at a

time is the same as the number taken r at a time.

86. If a set of n objects consists of r elements of one kind and 
n ⫺ r elements of another kind, then the number of per-
mutations of the n objects taken all together is P(n, r).

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

440

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

7.4 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

b.

1. a. 5! ⫽ 5 ⭈ 4 ⭈ 3 ⭈ 2 ⭈ 1 ⫽ 120
⫽ 7 # 6 # 5
3 # 2 # 1
⫽ 6 # 5 ⫽ 30

C17, 42 ⫽ 7!
P16, 22 ⫽ 6!

4! 3!

c.

⫽ 35

4!

2. There are P(8, 2) ways of picking the shuttle commander and
pilot (the order is important here), C(12, 3) ways of picking
the engineers (the order is not important here), C(5, 1) ways
of  picking  the  scientist,  and  C(2,  1)  ways  of  picking  the

civilian. By the multiplication principle, there are

P18, 22 # C112, 32 # C15, 12 # C12,12
# 2!
 ⫽ 8!
1! 1!
6!
 ⫽ 8 # 7 # 12 # 11 # 10 # 5 # 2

# 5!
4! 1!

# 12!
9! 3!

3 # 2

 ⫽ 123,200

ways in which a crew can be selected.

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Evaluating n!, P(n, r), and C(n, r)

Graphing Utility
A graphing utility can be used to calculate factorials, permutations, and combinations
with  relative  ease.  A  graphing  utility  is  therefore  an  indispensable  tool  in  solving
counting problems involving large numbers of objects. Here, we use the nPr (permu-
tation) and nCr (combination) functions of a graphing utility. You can find these func-
tions by pressing 

and then moving the cursor to nPr or nCr.

MATH

EXAMPLE 1 Use a graphing utility to find (a) 12!, (b) P(52, 5), and (c) C(38, 10).

Solution
a. Using the factorial function, we find that 12! ⫽ 479,001,600.
b. Using the nPr function, we have

P152, 52 ⫽ 52 nPr 5 ⫽ 311,875,200

c. Using the nCr function, we obtain

C138, 102 ⫽ 38 nCr 10 ⫽ 472,733,756

Excel
Excel has built-in functions for calculating factorials, permutations, and combinations.

EXAMPLE 2 Use Excel to calculate (a) 12!, (b) P(52, 5), and (c) C(38, 10).

Solution

a. In cell A1, enter =FACT(12) and press 

Shift-Enter

. The number 479001600

will appear.

b. In cell A2, enter =PERMUT(52,5) and press 

Shift-Enter

. The number

311875200 will appear.

c. In cell A3, enter =COMBIN(38,10) and press 

Shift-Enter

. The number

472733756 will appear.

Note: Boldfaced words/characters enclosed in a box (for example, 
required. Words/characters printed blue (for example, Chart sub-type:) indicate words/characters that appear on the screen.
Words/characters printed in a monospace font (for example, =(—2/3)*A2+2)) indicate words/characters that need to be
typed and entered.

) indicate that an action (click, select, or press) is

Enter

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

In Exercises 1–10, evaluate the expression.
1. 15!

2. 20!

3. 4118!2
6. P124, 82

8. C126, 82
10. P120, 52 C19, 32 C18, 42

5. P152, 72

4.

30!
18!

7. C152, 72
9. P110, 42 C112, 62

11. A mathematics professor uses a computerized test bank to
prepare her final exam. If 25 different problems are avail-

7.5 EXPERIMENTS, SAMPLE SPACES, AND EVENTS

441

able for the first three exam questions, 40 different prob-
lems are available for the next five questions, and 30 dif-
ferent  problems  are  available  for  the  last  two  questions,
how many different ten-question exams can she prepare?
(Assume that the order of the questions within each group
is not important.)

12. S & S Brokerage has received 100 inquiries from prospec-
tive  clients.  In  how  many  ways  can  the  inquiries  be
directed  to  any  five  of  the  firm’s  brokers  if  each  broker
handles 20 inquiries?

7.5

Experiments, Sample Spaces, and Events

Terminology
A number of specialized terms are used in the study of probability. We begin by defin-
ing the term experiment.

Experiment
An experiment is an activity with observable results.

The results of the experiment are called the outcomes of the experiment. Three exam-
ples of experiments are the following:

■ Tossing a coin and observing whether it falls heads or tails
■ Rolling a die and observing whether the number 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 shows up
■ Testing a spark plug from a batch of 100 spark plugs and observing whether or not

it is defective

In our discussion of experiments, we use the following terms:

Sample Point, Sample Space, and Event
Sample point: An outcome of an experiment
Sample space: The set consisting of all possible sample points 

of an experiment

Event: A subset of a sample space of an experiment

The sample space of an experiment is a universal set whose elements are precisely
the outcomes, or the sample points, of the experiment; the events of the experiment are
the subsets of the universal set. A sample space associated with an experiment that has
a finite number of possible outcomes (sample points) is called a finite sample space.
Since the events of an experiment are subsets of a universal set (the sample space
of the experiment), we may use the results for set theory given earlier to help us study
probability. The event B is said to occur in a trial of an experiment whenever B con-
tains the observed outcome. We begin by explaining the roles played by the empty set

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

442

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

and a universal set when they are viewed as events associated with an experiment. The
empty set, ⭋, is called the impossible event; it cannot occur because ⭋ has no ele-
ments (outcomes). Next, the universal set S is referred to as the certain event; it must
occur because S contains all the outcomes of the experiment.

This terminology is illustrated in the next several examples.

EXAMPLE 1 Describe the sample space associated with the experiment of tossing a
coin and observing whether it falls heads or tails. What are the events of this experi-
ment?

Solution The two outcomes are heads and tails, and the required sample space is
given by S ⫽ {H, T}, where H denotes the outcome heads and T denotes the outcome
tails. The events of the experiment, the subsets of S, are

⭋, {H}, {T}, S

Note that we have included the impossible event, ⭋, and the certain event, S.

Since the events of an experiment are subsets of the sample space of the experiment,
we may talk about the union and intersection of any two events; we can also consider
the complement of an event with respect to the sample space.

Union of Two Events
The union of two events E and F is the event E 傼 F.

Thus, the event E 傼 F contains the set of outcomes of E and/or F.

Intersection of Two Events
The intersection of two events E and F is the event E 傽 F.

Thus, the event E 傽 F contains the set of outcomes common to E and F.

Complement of an Event
The complement of event E is the event Ec.

Thus, the event Ec is the set containing all the outcomes in the sample space S that are
not in E.

Venn diagrams depicting the union, intersection, and complement of events are

shown in Figure 20. These concepts are illustrated in the following example.

S

S

S

E

F

E

F

E

E c

E

F

(a) The union of two events
FIGURE 20

E

F

(b) The intersection of two events

(c) The complement of the event E

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

7.5 EXPERIMENTS, SAMPLE SPACES, AND EVENTS

443

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 2 Consider the experiment of rolling a die and observing the number that
falls uppermost. Let S ⫽ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6} denote the sample space of the experiment,
and let E ⫽ {2, 4, 6} and F ⫽ {1, 3} be events of this experiment. Compute 
(a) E 傼 F, (b) E 傽 F, and (c) Fc. Interpret your results.

Solution
a. E 傼 F ⫽ {1, 2, 3, 4, 6} and is the event that the outcome of the experiment is a 1,

a 2, a 3, a 4, or a 6.

b. E 傽 F ⫽ ⭋is the impossible event; the number appearing uppermost when a die
c. Fc ⫽ {2, 4, 5, 6} is precisely the event that the event F does not occur.

is rolled cannot be both even and odd at the same time.

If two events cannot occur at the same time, they are said to be mutually exclu-

sive. Using set notation, we have the following definition.

Mutually Exclusive Events
E and F are mutually exclusive if E 傽 F ⫽ ⭋.

As before, we may use Venn diagrams to illustrate these events. In this case, the two
mutually exclusive events are depicted as two nonintersecting circles (Figure 21).

S

E

F

EXAMPLE 3 An experiment consists of tossing a coin three times and observing the
resulting sequence of heads and tails.
a. Describe the sample space S of the experiment.
b. Determine the event E that exactly two heads appear.
c. Determine the event F that at least one head appears.

Solution

a. The sample points may be obtained with the aid of a tree diagram (Figure 22).

First
toss

Second

toss

Third
toss

Sample
points

H

T

H

T

H

T

H

T
H

T
H

T
H

T

(H, H, H)

(H, H, T)
(H, T, H)

(H, T, T)
(T, H, H)

(T, H, T)
(T, T, H)

(T, T, T)

FIGURE 21
Mutually exclusive events

Explore & Discuss
1. Suppose E and F are two

complementary events. Must
E and F be mutually exclu-
sive? Explain your answer.
2. Suppose E and F are mutu-
ally exclusive events. Must 
E and F be complementary?
Explain your answer.

FIGURE 22

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

444

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

The required sample space S is given by

S ⫽ {HHH, HHT, HTH, HTT, THH, THT, TTH, TTT}

b. By scanning the sample space S obtained in part (a), we see that the outcomes in

which exactly two heads appear are given by the event

E ⫽ {HHT, HTH, THH}

c. Proceeding as in part (b), we find

F ⫽ {HHH, HHT, HTH, HTT, THH, THT, TTH}

EXAMPLE 4 An experiment consists of rolling a pair of dice and observing the
number that falls uppermost on each die.
a. Describe an appropriate sample space S for this experiment.
b. Determine the events E2, E3, E4, . . . , E12 that the sum of the numbers falling

uppermost is 2, 3, 4, . . . , 12, respectively.

Solution

a. We may represent each outcome of the experiment by an ordered pair of num-

bers, the first representing the number that appears uppermost on the first die and
the second representing the number that appears uppermost on the second die. To
distinguish between the two dice, think of the first die as being red and the sec-
ond as being green. Since there are six possible outcomes for each die, the multi-
plication principle implies that there are 6 ⭈ 6, or 36, elements in the sample
space:

S ⫽ {(1, 1), (1, 2), (1, 3), (1, 4), (1, 5), (1, 6),
(2, 1), (2, 2), (2, 3), (2, 4), (2, 5), (2, 6),
(3, 1), (3, 2), (3, 3), (3, 4), (3, 5), (3, 6),
(4, 1), (4, 2), (4, 3), (4, 4), (4, 5), (4, 6),
(5, 1), (5, 2), (5, 3), (5, 4), (5, 5), (5, 6),
(6, 1), (6, 2), (6, 3), (6, 4), (6, 5), (6, 6)}

b. Referring to part (a), we obtain the required list of events, shown in Table 1.

TABLE 1

Sum of

Uppermost Numbers

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

Event
E2 ⫽ {(1, 1)}
E3 ⫽ {(1, 2), (2, 1)}
E4 ⫽ {(1, 3), (2, 2), (3, 1)}
E5 ⫽ {(1, 4), (2, 3), (3, 2), (4, 1)}
E6 ⫽ {(1, 5), (2, 4), (3, 3), (4, 2), (5, 1)}
E7 ⫽ {(1, 6), (2, 5), (3, 4), (4, 3), (5, 2), (6, 1)}
E8 ⫽ {(2, 6), (3, 5), (4, 4), (5, 3), (6, 2)}
E9 ⫽ {(3, 6), (4, 5), (5, 4), (6, 3)}
E10 ⫽ {(4, 6), (5, 5), (6, 4)}
E11 ⫽ {(5, 6), (6, 5)}
E12 ⫽ {(6, 6)} 

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.5 EXPERIMENTS, SAMPLE SPACES, AND EVENTS

445

APPLIED EXAMPLE 5 Movie Attendance The manager of a local cinema
records the number of patrons attending a first-run movie at the 1 P.M.

screening. The theater has a seating capacity of 500.
a. What is an appropriate sample space for this experiment?
b. Describe the event E that fewer than 50 people attend the screening.
c. Describe the event F that the theater is more than half full at the 

screening.

Solution

a. The number of patrons at the screening (the outcome) could run from 0 to

500. Therefore, a sample space for this experiment is

S ⫽ {0, 1, 2, 3, . . . , 500}

b. E ⫽ {0, 1, 2, 3, . . . , 49}
c. F ⫽ {251, 252, 253, . . . , 500}

APPLIED EXAMPLE 6 Family Composition An experiment consists of
recording, in order of their births, the sex composition of a three-child 

family in which the children were born at different times.
a. Describe an appropriate sample space S for this experiment.
b. Describe the event E that there are two girls and a boy in the family.
c. Describe the event F that the oldest child is a girl.
d. Describe the event G that the oldest child is a girl and the youngest child is a

boy.

Solution

a. The sample points of the experiment may be obtained with the aid of the tree

diagram shown in Figure 23, where b denotes a boy and t denotes a girl.

First
child

Second
child

Third
child

Sample
points

b

g

b

g

b

g

b
g
b
g
b
g
b
g

b b b
b b g
b g b
b g g
g b b
g b g
g g b
g g g

We see from the tree diagram that the required sample space is given by

S ⫽ {bbb, bbt, btb, btt, tbb, tbt, ttb, ttt}

Using the tree diagram, we find that:

b. E ⫽ {btt, tbt, ttb}
c. F ⫽ {tbb, tbt, ttb, ttt}
d. G ⫽ {tbb, ttb}

The next example shows that sample spaces may be infinite.

VIDEO

Explore & Discuss
Think of an experiment.

1. Describe the sample point(s)

and sample space of the
experiment.

2. Construct two events, E and

F, of the experiment.

3. Find the union and intersec-
tion of E and F and the com-
plement of E.

4. Are E and F mutually exclu-

sive? Explain your answer.

FIGURE 23
Tree diagram for three-child families

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

446

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

APPLIED EXAMPLE 7 Testing New Products EverBrite is developing a
high-amperage, high-capacity battery as a source for powering electric 
cars. The battery is tested by installing it in a prototype electric car and run-
ning the car with a fully charged battery on a test track at a constant speed of
55 mph until the car runs out of power. The distance covered by the car is then
observed.
a. What is the sample space for this experiment?
b. Describe the event E that the driving range under test conditions is less than

150 miles.

c. Describe the event F that the driving range is between 200 and 250 miles,

inclusive.

Solution

a. Since the distance d covered by the car in any run may be given by any non-

negative number, the sample space S is given by

b. The event E is given by

c. The event F is given by

S ⫽ 5d 0 d ⱖ 06
E ⫽ 5d 0 0 ⱕ d ⬍ 1506
F ⫽ 5d 0 200 ⱕ d ⱕ 2506

7.5 Self-Check Exercises

1. A sample of three apples taken from Cavallero’s Fruit
Stand is examined to determine whether the apples are
good or rotten.
a. What  is  an  appropriate  sample  space  for  this  experi-

ment?

b. Describe  the  event  E that  exactly  one  of  the  apples

picked is rotten.

c. Describe the event F that the first apple picked is rotten.

2. Refer to Self-Check Exercise 1.

a. Find E 傼 F.
b. Find E 傽 F.
c. Find Fc.
d. Are the events E and F mutually exclusive?

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 7.5 can be found on 
page 449.

7.5 Concept Questions

1. Explain what is meant by an experiment. Give an example.
For  the  example  you  have  chosen,  describe  (a)  a  sample
point, (b) the sample space, and (c) an event of the experi-
ment.

2. What  does  it  mean  for  two  events  to  be  mutually  exclu-
sive? Give an example of two mutually exclusive events E
and  F. How can you prove that they are mutually exclu-
sive?

7.5 Exercises

In Exercises 1–6, let  S ⫽ {a, b, c, d, e, f} be a sample  space  of  an
experiment and let E ⫽ {a, b}, F ⫽ {a, d, f}, and G ⫽ {b, c, e} be
events of this experiment.
1. Find the events E 傼 F and E 傽 F.
2. Find the events F 傼 G and F 傽 G.
3. Find the events Fc and E 傽 Gc.
4. Find the events Ec and Fc 傽 G.

5. Are the events E and F mutually exclusive?
6. Are the events E 傼 F and E 傽 Fc mutually exclusive?

In Exercises 7–14, let S ⫽ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}, E ⫽ {2, 4, 6}, 
F ⫽ {1, 3, 5}, and G ⫽ {5, 6}.
7. Find the event E 傼 F 傼 G.
8. Find the event E 傽 F 傽 G.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9. Find the event (E 傼 F 傼 G)c.
10. Find the event (E 傽 F 傽 G)c.
11. Are the events E and F mutually exclusive?
12. Are the events F and G mutually exclusive?
13. Are the events E and F complementary?
14. Are the events F and G complementary?

In Exercises 15–20, let S be any sample space, and let E, F, and G
be  any  three  events  associated  with  the  experiment.  Describe
the events using the symbols 傼, 傽, and c.
15. The event that E and/or G occurs
16. The event that both E and F occur
17. The event that F does not occur
18. The event that E but not F occurs
19. The event that none of the events E, F, and G occurs
20. The event that E occurs but neither of the events F or G

occurs

21. Consider the sample space S of Example 4, page 444.

a. Determine  the  event  that  the  number  that  falls  upper-
most on the first die is greater than the number that falls
uppermost on the second die.

b. Determine  the  event  that  the  number  that  falls  upper-
most on the second die is double the number that falls
uppermost on the first die.

22. Consider the sample space S of Example 4, page 444.

a. Determine the event that the sum of the numbers falling

uppermost is less than or equal to 7.

b. Determine the event that the number falling uppermost
on one die is a 4 and the number falling uppermost on
the other die is greater than 4.

23. Let S ⫽ {a, b, c} be a sample space of an experiment with
outcomes a, b, and c. List all the events of this experiment.
24. Let  S ⫽ {1,  2,  3} be  a  sample  space  associated  with  an

experiment.
a. List all events of this experiment.
b. How many subsets of S contain the number 3?
c. How many subsets of S contain either the number 2 or

the number 3?

25. An experiment consists of selecting a card from a standard
deck of playing cards and noting whether the card is black
(B) or red (R).
a. Describe an appropriate sample space for this experiment.
b. What are the events of this experiment?

26. An experiment consists of selecting a letter at random from
the letters in the word MASSACHUSETTS and observing
the outcomes.
a. What is an appropriate sample space for this experiment?
b. Describe the event “the letter selected is a vowel.”

27. An experiment consists of tossing a coin, rolling a die, and

observing the outcomes.
a. Describe an appropriate sample space for this experiment.
b. Describe the event “a head is tossed and an odd number

is rolled.”

7.5 EXPERIMENTS, SAMPLE SPACES, AND EVENTS

447

28. An  experiment  consists  of  spinning  the  hand  of  the  num-
bered disc shown in the following figure and then observing
the region in which the pointer stops. (If the needle stops on
a line, the result is discounted, and the needle is spun again.)

5

1

4

2

3

a. What is an appropriate sample space for this experiment?
b. Describe the event “the spinner points to the number 2.”
c. Describe the event “the spinner points to an odd number.”
29. A  die  is  rolled,  and  the  number  that  falls  uppermost  is
observed. Let E denote the event that the number shown is
a 2, and let F denote the event that the number shown is an
even number.
a. Are the events E and F mutually exclusive?
b. Are the events E and F complementary?

30. A  die  is  rolled,  and  the  number  that  falls  uppermost  is
observed. Let E denote the event that the number shown is
even, and let F denote the event that the number is an odd
number.
a. Are the events E and F mutually exclusive?
b. Are the events E and F complementary?

31. QUALITY CONTROL A sample of three transistors taken from
a local electronics store was examined to determine whether
the transistors were defective (d) or nondefective (n). What
is an appropriate sample space for this experiment?

32. MANAGEMENT DECISION From a list of five applicants for a
sales position, a, b, c, d, and e, two are selected for the next
round of interviews. 
a. Describe an appropriate sample space S for this experi-

ment.

b. Describe the event E that the interviewees include appli-

cant a.

c. Describe the event F that the interviewees include appli-

cants a and c.

d. Describe  the  event  G that  the  interviewees  include

applicants d and e.

33. FAMILY COMPOSITION An experiment consists of recording,
in order of their births, the sex composition of a four-child
family in which the children were born at different times.
a. Describe an appropriate sample space S for this experi-

ment.

b. Describe the event E that there are three boys and a girl

in the family.

c. Describe the event F that the youngest child is a girl.
d. Describe  the  event  G that  the  oldest  and  the  youngest

children are both girls.

34. BLOOD TYPING Human blood is classified by the presence or
absence  of  three  main  antigens  (A,  B,  and  Rh).  When  a
blood specimen is typed, the presence of the A and/or B anti-
gen is indicated by listing the letter A and/or the letter B. If
neither the A nor the B antigen is present, the letter O is used.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

448

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

The presence or absence of the Rh antigen is indicated by the
symbols ⫹ or ⫺, respectively. Thus, if a blood specimen is
classified as AB⫹, it contains the A and the B antigens as
well as the Rh antigen. Similarly, O⫺ blood contains none of
the  three  antigens.  Using  this  information,  determine  the
sample space corresponding to the different blood groups.

35. GAME SHOWS In  a  television  game  show,  the  winner  is
asked to select three prizes from five different prizes, A, B,
C, D, and E.
a. Describe a sample space of possible outcomes (order is

not important).

b. How many points are there in the sample space corre-

sponding to a selection that includes A?

c. How many points are there in the sample space corre-

sponding to a selection that includes A and B?

d. How many points are there in the sample space corre-

sponding to a selection that includes either A or B?

36. AUTOMATIC TELLERS The manager of a local bank observes
how long it takes a customer to complete his transactions
at the automatic bank teller machine.
a. Describe an appropriate sample space for this experiment.
b. Describe  the  event  that  it  takes  a  customer  between  2
and 3 min to complete his transactions at the automatic
teller machines.

37. COMMON STOCKS Robin purchased shares of a machine tool
company and shares of an airline company. Let E be the
event that the shares of the machine tool company increase
in value over the next 6 months, and let F be the event that
the shares of the airline company increase in value over the
next 6 months. Using the symbols 傼, 傽, and c, describe the
following events.
a. The shares in the machine tool company do not increase

in value.

b. The shares in both the machine tool company and the

airline company do not increase in value.

c. The shares of at least one of the two companies increase

in value.

d. The shares of only one of the two companies increase in

value.

38. CUSTOMER SERVICE SURVEYS The  customer  service  depart-
ment of Universal Instruments, manufacturer of the Galaxy
home computer, conducted a survey among customers who
had returned their purchase registration cards. Purchasers
of its deluxe model home computer were asked to report
the length of time (t) in days before service was required.
a. Describe a sample space corresponding to this survey.
b. Describe the event E that a home computer required ser-

vice before a period of 90 days had elapsed.

c. Describe the event F that a home computer did not re-

quire service before a period of 1 year had elapsed.

39. ASSEMBLY-TIME STUDIES A time study was conducted by the
production  manager  of  Vista  Vision  to  determine  the
length of time in minutes required by an assembly worker
to complete a certain task during the assembly of its Pulsar
HDTV sets.
a. Describe a sample space corresponding to this time study.

b. Describe  the  event  E that  an  assembly  worker  took 

2 min or less to complete the task.

c. Describe the event F that an assembly worker took more

than 2 min to complete the task.

40. POLITICAL POLLS An  opinion  poll  is  conducted  among  a
state’s  electorate  to  determine  the  relationship  between
their income levels and their stands on a proposition aimed
at  reducing  state  income  taxes.  Voters  are  classified  as
belonging  to  either  the  low-,  middle-,  or  upper-income
group. They are asked whether they favor, oppose, or are
undecided about the proposition. Let the letters L, M, and
U represent the low-, middle-, and upper-income groups,
respectively,  and  let  the  letters  f,  o,  and  u represent  the
responses—favor, oppose, and undecided, respectively.
a. Describe a sample space corresponding to this poll.
b. Describe  the  event  E1 that  a  respondent  favors  the

proposition.

c. Describe  the  event  E2 that  a  respondent  opposes  the
proposition and does not belong to the low-income group.
d. Describe the event E3 that a respondent does not favor
the proposition and does not belong to the upper-income
group.

41. QUALITY CONTROL As  part  of  a  quality-control  procedure,
an  inspector  at  Bristol  Farms  randomly  selects  ten  eggs
from each consignment of eggs he receives and records the
number of broken eggs.
a. What  is  an  appropriate  sample  space  for  this  experi-

ment?

b. Describe the event E that at most three eggs are broken.
c. Describe the event F that at least five eggs are broken.
42. POLITICAL POLLS In  the  opinion  poll  of  Exercise  40,  the
voters  were  also  asked  to  indicate  their  political  affilia-
tions—Democrat, Republican, or Independent. As before,
let the letters L, M, and U represent the low-, middle-, and
upper-income  groups,  respectively.  Let  the  letters  D,  R,
and  I represent  Democrat,  Republican,  and  Independent,
respectively.
a. Describe a sample space corresponding to this poll.
b. Describe the event E1 that a respondent is a Democrat.
c. Describe the event E2 that a respondent belongs to the

upper-income group and is a Republican.

d. Describe the event E3 that a respondent belongs to the

middle-income group and is not a Democrat.

43. SHUTTLE BUS USAGE A certain airport hotel operates a shut-
tle bus service between the hotel and the airport. The max-
imum capacity of a bus is 20 passengers. On alternate trips
of the shuttle bus over a period of 1 week, the hotel man-
ager kept a record of the number of passengers arriving at
the hotel in each bus.
a. What is an appropriate sample space for this experiment?
b. Describe  the  event  E that  a  shuttle  bus  carried  fewer

than ten passengers.

c. Describe  the  event  F that  a  shuttle  bus  arrived  with  a

full load.

44. SPORTS Eight players, A, B, C, D, E, F, G, and H, are com-
peting in a series of elimination matches of a tennis tour-

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.6 DEFINITION OF PROBABILITY

449

46. Let S be a sample space for an experiment. Show that if E
is any event of an experiment, then E and Ec are mutually
exclusive.

47. Let S be a sample space for an experiment, and let E and F
be events of this experiment. Show that the events E 傼 F
and Ec 傽 Fc are mutually exclusive.
Hint: Use De Morgan’s Law.

48. Let S be a sample space of an experiment with n outcomes.

Determine the number of events of this experiment.

In Exercises 49 and 50, determine whether the statement is true
or  false.  If  it  is  true,  explain  why  it  is  true.  If  it  is  false,  give  an
example to show why it is false.
49. If E and F are mutually exclusive and E and G are mutu-

ally exclusive, then F and G are mutually exclusive.

50. The  numbers  1,  2,  and  3  are  written  separately  on  three
pieces of paper. These slips of paper are then placed in a
bowl. If you draw two slips from the bowl, one at a time
and  without  replacement,  then  the  sample  space  for  this
experiment consists of six elements.

c. Proceeding as in part (b), we find
F ⫽ {rtt, rtr, rrt, rrr}

2. Using the results of Self-Check Exercise 1, we find:

a. E 傼 F ⫽ {ttr, trt, rtt, rtr, rrt, rrr}
b. E 傽 F ⫽ {rtt}
c. Fc is the set of outcomes in S but not in F. Thus,

F c ⫽ {ttt, ttr, trt, trr}

d. Since  E 傽 F ⫽ ⭋, we conclude that  E and  F are not

mutually exclusive.

nament in which the winner of each preliminary match will
advance to the semifinals and the winners of the semifinals
will  advance  to  the  finals.  An  outline  of  the  scheduled
matches follows. Describe a sample space listing the pos-
sible participants in the finals.

Match I
A vs. B

Match II
C vs. D

Match III
E vs. F

Match IV
G vs. H

Semiﬁnal

match

Semiﬁnal

match

Final
match

45. An  experiment  consists  of  selecting  a  card  at  random
from  a  well-shuffled  52-card  deck.  Let  E denote  the
event that an ace is drawn, and let F denote the event that
a spade is drawn. Show that n(E 傼 F) ⫽ n(E) ⫹ n(F) ⫺
n(E 傽 F ).

7.5 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises
1. a. Let  t denote  a  good  apple,  and  let  r donate  a  rotten
apple.  Thus,  the  required  sample  points  may  be
obtained with the aid of a tree diagram (compare with
Example 3). The required sample space is given by

S ⫽ {ttt, ttr, trt, trr, rtt, rtr, rrt, rrr}

b. By scanning the sample space S obtained in part (a), we
identify the outcomes in which exactly one apple is rot-
ten. We find

E ⫽ {ttr, trt, rtt}

7.6 Definition of Probability

Finding the Probability of an Event
Let’s return to the coin-tossing experiment. The sample space of this experiment is
given by S ⫽ {H, T}, where the sample points H and T correspond to the two possible
outcomes, heads and tails. If the coin is unbiased, then there is one chance out of two
of obtaining a head (or a tail), and we say that the probability of tossing a head (tail)
is  , abbreviated

1
2

P1H2 ⫽ 1

2

  and  P1T2 ⫽ 1

2

An alternative method of obtaining the values of P(H) and P(T) is based on con-
tinued experimentation and does not depend on the assumption that the two outcomes
are equally likely. Table 2 summarizes the results of such an exercise.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

450

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

TABLE 2
As the Number of Trials Increases, the Relative Frequency Approaches .5

Number

of Tosses, n

10
100
1,000
10,000
20,000
40,000

Number

of Heads, m

4
58
492
5,034
10,024
20,032

Relative Frequency

of Heads, m>n

.4000
.5800
.4920
.5034
.5012
.5008

1
2

Observe  that  the  relative  frequencies  (column  3)  differ  considerably  when  the
number of trials is small, but as the number of trials becomes very large, the relative
frequency approaches the number .5. This result suggests that we assign to P(H) the
value  , as before.

More generally, consider an experiment that may be repeated over and over again
under independent and similar conditions. Suppose that in n trials an event E occurs m

times. We call the ratio m>n the relative frequency of the event E after n repetitions. If

this relative frequency approaches some value P(E ) as n becomes larger and larger, then
P(E) is called the empirical probability of E. Thus, the probability P(E ) of an event
occurring is a measure of the proportion of the time that the event E will occur in the
long run. Observe that this method of computing the probability of a head occurring is
effective even when a biased coin is used in the experiment. The relative frequency dis-
tribution is often referred to as an observed or empirical probability distribution.

The probability of an event is a number that lies between 0 and 1, inclusive. In gen-
eral, the larger the probability of an event, the more likely that the event will occur. Thus,
an event with a probability of .8 is more likely to occur than an event with a probability 
of .6. An event with a probability of  , or .5, has a fifty-fifty chance of occurring.

1
2

Now suppose we are given an experiment and wish to determine the probabilities
associated  with  certain  events  of  the  experiment.  This  problem  could  be  solved  by
computing P(E ) directly for each event E of interest. In practice, however, the num-
ber of events of interest is usually quite large, so this approach is not satisfactory.

The  following  approach  is  particularly  suitable  when  the  sample  space  of  an

experiment is finite.* Let S be a finite sample space with n outcomes; that is,

Then the events

S ⫽ {s1, s2, s3, . . . , sn}

{s1}, {s2}, {s3}, . . . , {sn}

that consist of exactly one point are called the elementary, or simple, events of the
experiment. They are elementary in the sense that any (nonempty) event of the exper-
iment may be obtained by taking a finite union of suitable elementary events. The sim-
ple events of an experiment are also mutually exclusive; that is, given any two simple
events of the experiment, only one can occur.

By  assigning  probabilities  to  each  of  the  simple  events,  we  obtain  the  results
shown in Table 3. This table is called a probability distribution for the experiment.
The function P, which assigns a probability to each of the simple events, is called a
probability function.

The numbers P1 s12 , P1 s22 , . . . , P1 sn2 have the following properties:

1. 0 ⱕ P1 si2 ⱕ 1
2. P1 s12 ⫹ P1 s22 ⫹ . . . ⫹ P1 sn2 ⫽ 1
3. P1{si} 傼 {sj}2 ⫽ P1 si2 ⫹ P1 sj2 1 i ⫽ j2

i ⫽ 1, 2, . . . , n

i ⫽ 1, 2, . . . , n; j ⫽ 1, 2, . . . , n

Probability*

TABLE 3
A Probability Distribution
Simple
Event
{s1}
{s2}
{s3}
o
{sn}

P1 s12
P1 s22
P1 s32
o
P1 sn2
P1si2 instead of the technically more
correct P1{si}2 .

*For simplicity, we use the notation

*For the remainder of the chapter, we assume that all sample spaces are finite.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.6 DEFINITION OF PROBABILITY

451

The  first  property  simply  states  that  the  probability  of  a  simple  event  must  be
between 0 and 1, inclusive. The second property states that the sum of the probabili-
ties of all simple events of the sample space is 1. This follows from the fact that the
event S is certain to occur. The third property states that the probability of the union
of two simple events is given by the sum of their probabilities.

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
We  can  use  a  graphing  calculator  to  simulate  the  coin-tossing  experiment
described earlier.  Associate the outcome “a head” with the number 1 and the out-
come “a tail” with the number 0. Select the function randInt( on the TI-83/84.
and then moving the cursor to PRB.) Select
(You can find this by pressing 
randInt( and enter 0,1) and then press 
repeatedly. This generates 0s
and 1s randomly, which simulates the results of tossing an unbiased coin.

ENTER

MATH

As we saw earlier, there is no unique method for assigning probabilities to the
simple events of an experiment. In practice, the methods that are used to determine
these probabilities may range from theoretical considerations of the problem on the
one extreme to the reliance on “educated guesses” on the other.

Sample  spaces  in  which  the  outcomes  are  equally  likely  are  called  uniform 
sample spaces. Assigning probabilities to the simple events in these spaces is rela-
tively easy.

Probability of an Event in a Uniform Sample Space
If

S ⫽ {s1, s2, . . . , sn}

is the sample space for an experiment in which the outcomes are equally likely,
then we assign the probabilities

P1s12 ⫽ P1s22 ⫽ p ⫽ P1sn2 ⫽ 1

n

to each of the simple events {s1}, {s2}, . . . , {sn}.

EXAMPLE 1 A fair die is rolled, and the number that falls uppermost is observed.
Determine the probability distribution for the experiment.
Solution The sample space for the experiment is S ⫽ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}, and the sim-
ple events are accordingly given by the sets {1}, {2}, {3}, {4}, {5}, and {6}. Since the
die is assumed to be fair, the six outcomes are equally likely. We therefore assign a
probability of 
to each of the simple events and obtain the probability distribution
shown in Table 4.

1
6

Explore & Discuss
You suspect that a die is biased.

1. Describe a method you might use to show that your assertion is correct.
2. How would you assign the probability to each outcome 1 through 6 of an experiment that

consists of rolling the die and observing the number that lands uppermost?

The next example shows how the relative frequency interpretation of probability

lends itself to the computation of probabilities.

VIDEO

Probability

TABLE 4
A Probability Distribution
Simple
Event
{1}
{2}
{3}
{4}
{5}
{6}

1
6
1
6
1
6
1
6
1
6
1
6

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

452

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

TABLE 5
Data Obtained During 200 Test Runs 
of an Electric Car

Distance
Covered
in Miles, x

Frequency

of

Occurrence

0 ⬍ x ⱕ 50
50 ⬍ x ⱕ 100
100 ⬍ x ⱕ 150
150 ⬍ x ⱕ 200
200 ⬍ x ⱕ 250
250 ⬍ x

4
10
30
100
40
16 

TABLE 6
A Probability Distribution
Simple
Event
{s1}
{s2}
{s3}
{s4}
{s5}
{s6}

Probability

.02
.05
.15
.50
.20
.08

APPLIED EXAMPLE 2 Testing New Products Refer to Example 7, Section
7.5. The data shown in Table 5 were obtained in tests involving 200 test 

runs. Each run was made with a fully charged battery.
a. Describe an appropriate sample space for this experiment.
b. Find the empirical probability distribution for this experiment.

Solution
a. Let s1 denote the outcome that the distance covered by the car does not exceed

50 miles; let s2 denote the outcome that the distance covered by the car is
greater than 50 miles but does not exceed 100 miles, and so on. Finally, let s6
denote the outcome that the distance covered by the car is greater than 
250 miles. Then the required sample space is given by

S ⫽ {s1, s2, s3, s4, s5, s6}

b. To compute the empirical probability distribution for the experiment, we turn
to the relative frequency interpretation of probability. Accepting the inaccura-
cies inherent in a relatively small number of trials (200 runs), we take the
probability of s1 occurring as

P1s12 ⫽

Number of trials in which s1 occurs

Total number of trials

 ⫽ 4
200

⫽ .02

In a similar manner, we assign probabilities to the other simple events, obtain-
ing the probability distribution shown in Table 6.

We are now in a position to give a procedure for computing the probability P(E)

of an arbitrary event E of an experiment.

Finding the Probability of an Event E
1. Determine a sample space S associated with the experiment.
2. Assign probabilities to the simple events of S.
3. If E ⫽ {s1, s2, s3, . . . , sn}, where {s1}, {s2}, {s3}, . . . , {sn} are simple events,

then

P1 E2 ⫽ P1 s12 ⫹ P1 s22 ⫹ P1 s32 ⫹ . . . ⫹ P1 sn2

If E is the empty set, ⭋, then P1 E2 ⫽ 0.

The principle stated in Step 3 is called the addition principle and is a consequence
of Property 3 of the probability function (page 450). This principle allows us to find the
probabilities of all other events once the probabilities of the simple events are known.

The addition rule in Step 3 applies only to the addition of probabilities of simple
events.

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 3 Rolling Dice A pair of fair dice is rolled.

a. Calculate the probability that the two dice show the same number.
b. Calculate the probability that the sum of the numbers of the two dice is 6.

Solution From the results of Example 4, Section 7.5, page 444, we see that the
sample space S of the experiment consists of 36 outcomes:

S ⫽ {1 1, 12 , 1 1, 22 , . . . , 1 6, 52 , 1 6, 62}

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.6 DEFINITION OF PROBABILITY

453

Since both dice are fair, each of the 36 outcomes is equally likely. Accordingly,
we assign the probability of 
a. The event that the two dice show the same number is given by

to each simple event.

1
36

E ⫽ {1 1, 12 , 1 2, 22 , 1 3, 32 , 1 4, 42 , 1 5, 52 , 1 6, 62}

(Figure 24). Therefore, by the addition principle, the probability that the two
dice show the same number is given by

 P 1E2 ⫽ P 311, 124 ⫹ P 312, 224 ⫹ p ⫹ P 316, 624

⫹ 1
36

⫹ p ⫹ 1
36

Six terms

 ⫽ 1
36
 ⫽ 1
6

FIGURE 24
The event that the two dice show the
same number

b. The event that the sum of the numbers of the two dice is 6 is given by

E6 ⫽ {1 1, 52 , 1 2, 42 , 1 3, 32 , 1 4, 22 , 1 5, 12}

(Figure 25). Therefore, the probability that the sum of the numbers on the two
dice is 6 is given by

 P 1E62 ⫽ P 311, 524 ⫹ P 312, 424 ⫹ P 313, 324 ⫹ P 314, 224 ⫹ P 315, 124

⫹ 1
36

⫹ p ⫹ 1
36

Five terms

 ⫽ 1
36
 ⫽ 5
36

FIGURE 25
The event that the sum of the numbers
on the two dice is 6

APPLIED EXAMPLE 4 Testing New Products Consider the experiment by
EverBrite in Example 2. What is the probability that the prototype car will 

travel more than 150 miles on a fully charged battery?

Solution Using the results of Example 2, we see that the event that the car will
travel more than 150 miles on a fully charged battery is given by E ⫽ {s4, s5, s6}.
Therefore, the probability that the car will travel more than 150 miles on one
charge is given by

or, using the probability distribution for the experiment obtained in Example 2,

P1 E2 ⫽ P1 s42 ⫹ P1 s52 ⫹ P1 s62
P1 E2 ⫽ .50 ⫹ .20 ⫹ .08 ⫽ .78

7.6 Self-Check Exercises

1. A biased die was rolled repeatedly, and the results of the

experiment are summarized in the following table:

Outcome
Frequency of
Occurrence

1

2

3

4

5

6

142

173

158

175

162

190

Using the relative frequency interpretation of probability,
find  the  empirical  probability  distribution  for  this  exper-
iment.

2. In an experiment conducted to study the effectiveness of an
eye-level third brake light in the prevention of rear-end col-

lisions, 250 of the 500 highway patrol cars of a certain state
were equipped with such lights. At the end of the 1-year
trial  period,  the  records  revealed  that  for  those  equipped
with a third brake light there were 14 incidents of rear-end
collision. There were 22 such incidents involving the cars
not equipped with the accessory. On the basis of these data,
what is the probability that a highway patrol car equipped
with a third brake light will be rear-ended within a 1-year
period? What is the probability that a car not so equipped
will be rear-ended within a 1-year period?

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 7.6 can be found on 
page 458.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

454

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

7.6 Concept Questions

1. Define (a) a probability distribution and (b) a probability

function. Give examples of each.

2. If S ⫽ {s1, s2, . . . , sn} is the sample space for an experiment
in which the outcomes are equally likely, what is the prob-
ability of each of the simple events s1, s2, . . . , sn? What is
this type of sample space called?

7.6 Exercises

In  Exercises  1–8,  list  the  simple  events  associated  with  each
experiment.
1. A nickel and a dime are tossed, and the result of heads or

tails is recorded for each coin.

2. A card is selected at random from a standard 52-card deck,
and its suit—hearts (h), diamonds (d), spades (s), or clubs
(c)—is recorded.

3. OPINION POLLS An  opinion  poll  is  conducted  among  a
group  of  registered  voters.  Their  political  affiliation—
Democrat  (D),  Republican  (R),  or  Independent  (I)—and
their sex—male (m) or female ( f )—are recorded.

4. QUALITY CONTROL As  part  of  a  quality-control  procedure,
eight circuit boards are checked, and the number of defec-
tive boards is recorded.

5. MOVIE ATTENDANCE In  a  survey  conducted  to  determine
whether movie attendance is increasing (i), decreasing (d),
or holding steady (s) among various sectors of the popula-
tion, participants are classified as follows:

Group 1: Those aged 10–19
Group 2: Those aged 20–29
Group 3: Those aged 30–39
Group 4: Those aged 40–49
Group 5: Those aged 50 and older

The response and age group of each participant are recorded.

6. DURABLE GOODS ORDERS An  economist  obtains  data  con-
cerning durable goods orders each month. A record is kept
for  a  1-year  period  of  any  increase  (i),  decrease  (d ),  or
unchanged movement (u) in the number of durable goods
orders  for  each  month  as  compared  with  the  number  of
such orders in the same month of the previous year.

7. BLOOD TYPES Blood tests are given as a part of the admis-
sion procedure at the Monterey Garden Community Hos-
pital. The blood type of each patient (A, B, AB, or O) and
the presence or absence of the Rh factor in each patient’s
blood (Rh⫹ or Rh⫺) are recorded.

8. METEOROLOGY A  meteorologist  preparing  a  weather  map
classifies the expected average temperature in each of five
neighboring states (MN, WI, IA, IL, MO) for the upcom-
ing week as follows:

3. Suppose E ⫽ {s1, s2, s3, . . . , sn}, where E is an event of an
experiment and {s1}, {s2}, {s3}, . . . , {sn} are simple events. If
E is nonempty, what is P(E)? If E is empty, what is P(E)?

a. More than 10° below average
b. Normal to 10° below average
c. Higher than normal to 10° above average
d. More than 10° above average
Using  each  state’s  abbreviation  and  the  categories—(a),
(b), (c), and (d)—the meteorologist records these data.

9. GRADE DISTRIBUTIONS The  grade  distribution  for  a  certain
class is shown in the following table. Find the probability
distribution associated with these data.

Grade
Frequency of
Occurrence

A

4

B

10

C

18

D

6

F

2

10. BLOOD TYPES The percentage of the general population that
has each blood type is shown in the following table. Deter-
mine the probability distribution associated with these data.

Blood Type
Population, %

A
41

B
12

AB
3

O
44

11. FIGHTING INFLATION In a survey of 2000 adults 18 years old
and older conducted in 2007, the following question was
asked: Is your family income keeping pace with the cost of
living? The results of the survey follow:

Answer
Respondents

Falling
behind

800

Staying

Increasing

even
880

faster
240

Don’t
know

80

Determine the empirical probability distribution associated
with these data.
Source: Pew Research Center.

12. TRANSPORTATION FATALITIES The following breakdown of a
total  of  18,598  transportation  fatalities  that  occurred  in
2007  was  obtained  from  records  compiled  by  the  U.S.
Department of Transportation (DOT).

Mode of Transportation
Number of Fatalities

Car

16,520

Train
845

Bicycle

698

Plane
535

What is the probability that a victim randomly selected from
this list of transportation fatalities for 2007 died in:
a. A car crash or a bicycle accident?
b. A train or a plane accident?
Source: U.S. Department of Transportation.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

13. RED-LIGHT RUNNERS In  a  survey  of  800  likely  voters,  the
following question was asked: Do you support using cam-
eras to identify red-light runners? The results of the survey
follow:

17. POLITICAL VIEWS In  a  poll  conducted  among  2000  college
freshmen to ascertain the political views of college students,
the accompanying data were obtained. Determine the empir-
ical probability distribution associated with these data.

7.6 DEFINITION OF PROBABILITY

455

Answer

Strongly Somewhat
support

support

Somewhat

oppose

Strongly Don’t
know
oppose

Respondents

360

192

88

144

16

What is the probability that a person in the survey selected at
random favors using cameras to identify red-light runners?
Source: Public Opinion Strategies.

14. GREAT RECESSION In a survey conducted by AlixPartners of
4980 adults 18 years old and older in June 2009, during the
“Great Recession,” the following question was asked: How
long do you think it will take to recover your personal net
worth? The results of the survey follow: 

Answer (years)
Respondents

1–2
1006

3–4
1308

5–10
2113

ⱖ10
553

a. Determine the empirical probability distribution associ-

ated with these data.

b. If a person who participated in the survey is selected at
random, what is the probability that he or she expects
that it will take 5 or more years to recover his or her per-
sonal net worth?

Source: AlixPartners.

15. CONSUMER SURVEY In an online survey of 500 adults living
with  children  under  the  age  of  18  years,  the  participants
were asked how many days per week they cook at home.
The results of the survey are summarized below:

Number of Days
Respondents

0
25

1
30

2
45

3
75

4
55

5
100

6
85

7
85

Determine the empirical probability distribution associated
with these data.
Source: Super Target.

16. CHECKING INTO A HOTEL ROOM In a survey of 3019 guests,
the following question was asked: What is the first thing
you do after checking into a hotel room? The results of the
survey follow:

Political Views
Respondents

A
52

B
398

C

1140

D
386

E
24

A: Far left
B: Liberal
C: Middle of the road
D: Conservative
E: Far right

18. PRODUCT SAFETY SURVEYS The  accompanying  data  were
obtained  from  a  survey  of  1500  Americans  who  were
asked: How safe are American-made consumer products?
Determine the empirical probability distribution associated
with these data.

Rating
Respondents

A
285

B
915

C
225

D
30

E
45

A: Very safe
B: Somewhat safe
C: Not too safe
D: Not safe at all
E: Don’t know

19. TRAFFIC SURVEYS The number of cars entering a tunnel lead-
ing to an airport in a major city over a period of 200 peak
hours was observed, and the following data were obtained:

Number of
Cars, x

0 ⬍ x ⱕ 200
200 ⬍ x ⱕ 400
400 ⬍ x ⱕ 600
600 ⬍ x ⱕ 800
800 ⬍ x ⱕ 1000
x ⬎ 1000

Frequency of
Occurrence

15
20
35
70
45
15

a. Describe an appropriate sample space for this experiment.
b. Find  the  empirical  probability  distribution  for  this  ex-

Respondents

periment.

20. ARRIVAL TIMES The arrival times of the 8 A.M. Boston-based
commuter  train  as  observed  in  the  suburban  town  of
Sharon over 120 weekdays is summarized below:

Arrival Time, x
7:56 A.M. ⬍ x ⱕ 7:58 A.M.
7:58 A.M. ⬍ x ⱕ 8:00 A.M.
8:00 A.M. ⬍ x ⱕ 8:02 A.M.
8:02 A.M. ⬍ x ⱕ 8:04 A.M.
8:04 A.M. ⬍ x ⱕ 8:06 A.M.
8:06 A.M. ⬍ x ⱕ 8:08 A.M.
8:08 A.M. ⬍ x ⱕ 8:10 A.M.

Frequency of
Occurrence

4
18
50
32
9
4
3

Activity
Adjust the thermostat
Turn on the TV
Unpack
Check out the free toiletries
Plug in rechargeable electronics
Find the gym
Other

1027
755
634
211
60
30
302

What  is  the  probability  that  a  person  selected  at  random
from the list of guests surveyed would, as a first activity:
a. Adjust the thermostat or plug in rechargeable electronics?
b. Unpack or find the gym?
Source: Tripadvisor.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

456

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

a. Describe an appropriate sample space for this experiment.
b. Find  the  empirical  probability  distribution  for  this  ex-

periment.

21. CORRECTIVE LENS USE According  to  Mediamark  Research,
during a certain year 84 million out of 179 million adults
in  the  United  States  corrected  their  vision  by  using  pre-
scription  eyeglasses,  bifocals,  or  contact  lenses.  (Some
respondents use more than one type.) What is the probabil-
ity that an adult selected at random from the adult popula-
tion uses corrective lenses?
Source: Mediamark Research.

22. CORRECTIONAL SUPERVISION A study conducted by the Cor-
rections  Department  of  a  certain  state  revealed  that
163,605 people out of a total adult population of 1,778,314
were  under  correctional  supervision  (on  probation,  on
parole,  or  in  jail).  What  is  the  probability  that  a  person
selected at random from the adult population in that state is
under correctional supervision?

23. LIGHTNING DEATHS According  to  data  obtained  from  the
National  Weather  Service,  376  of  the  439  people  killed  by
lightning in the United States between 1985 and 1992 were
men. (Job and recreational habits of men make them more vul-
nerable  to  lightning.)  Assuming  that  this  trend  holds  in  the
future, what is the probability that a person killed by lightning:
a. Is a male?
Source: National Weather Service.

b. Is a female?

24. QUALITY CONTROL One  light  bulb  is  selected  at  random
from a lot of 120 light bulbs, of which 5% are defective.
What  is  the  probability  that  the  light  bulb  selected  is
defective?

25. EFFORTS TO STOP SHOPLIFTING According to a survey of 176
retailers,  46%  of  them  use  electronic  tags  as  protection
against  shoplifting  and  employee  theft.  If  one  of  these
retailers is selected at random, what is the probability that
the retailer uses electronic tags as antitheft devices?

26. If a ball is selected at random from an urn containing three
red balls, two white balls, and five blue balls, what is the
probability that it will be a white ball?

27. If a card is drawn at random from a standard 52-card deck,

what is the probability that the card drawn is:
a. A diamond?
c. An ace?

b. A black card?

28. A pair of fair dice is rolled. What is the probability that:

a. The sum of the numbers shown uppermost is less than 5?
b. At least one 6 is rolled?

29. TRAFFIC LIGHTS What is the probability of arriving at a traf-
fic light when it is red if the red signal is lit for 30 sec, the
yellow signal for 5 sec, and the green signal for 45 sec?

30. ROULETTE What is the probability that a roulette ball will
come  to  rest  on  an  even  number  other  than  0  or  00?
(Assume that there are 38 equally likely outcomes consist-
ing of the numbers 1–36, 0, and 00.)

31. MANAGEMENT DECISIONS Refer  to  Exercises  7.5,  Problem
32. From a list of five applicants for a sales position, a, b,

c,  d,  and  e,  two  are  selected  for  the  next  round  of  inter-
views. If the applicants are selected at random, what is the
probability that the two interviewees chosen:
a. Include applicant a?
b. Include applicants a and c?
c. Include applicants d and e?

32. FAMILY COMPOSITION Refer  to  Exercises  7.5,  Problem  33.
An experiment consists of recording the sex composition,
in order of their births, of a four-child family in which the
children were born at different times. Assuming that a boy
is equally likely as a girl to be born into a family, what is
the probability that a four-child family chosen at random
will have:
a. Three boys and a girl in the family?
b. A youngest child in the family who is a girl?
c. An oldest child and a youngest child in the family who

are both girls?

33. DISPOSITION OF CRIMINAL CASES Of the 98 first-degree mur-
der cases from 2002 through the first half of 2004 in the
Suffolk superior court, 9 cases were thrown out of the sys-
tem, 62 cases were plea-bargained, and 27 cases went to
trial. What is the probability that a case selected at random:
a. Was settled through plea bargaining?
b. Went to trial?
Source: Boston Globe.

34. SWEEPSTAKES In a sweepstakes sponsored by Gemini Paper
Products,  100,000  entries  have  been 
If 
1 grand prize, 5 first prizes, 25 second prizes, and 500 third
prizes are to be awarded, what is the probability that a per-
son who has submitted one entry will win:
a. The grand prize?
b. A prize?

received. 

35. POLITICAL POLLS An opinion poll was conducted among a
group  of  registered  voters  in  a  certain  state  concerning  a
proposition aimed at limiting state and local taxes. Results
of  the  poll  indicated  that  35%  of  the  voters  favored  the
proposition, 32% were against it, and the remaining group
were undecided. If the results of the poll are assumed to be
representative of the opinions of the state’s electorate, what
is the probability that a registered voter selected at random
from the electorate:
a. Favors the proposition?
b. Is undecided about the proposition?

36. PARENTAL INFLUENCE In  an  online  survey  of  1962  execu-
tives from 64 countries conducted by Korn/Ferry Interna-
tional  between  August  and  October  2006,  the  executives
were asked whether they would try to influence their chil-
dren’s  career  choices.  Their  replies:  A  (to  a  very  great
extent), B (to a great extent), C (to some extent), D (to a
small extent), and E (not at all) are recorded below:

Answer
Respondents

A
135

B
404

C

1057

D
211

E
155

What  is  the  probability  that  a  randomly  selected  respon-
dent’s answer was D (to a small extent) or E (not at all)?
Source: Korn/Ferry International.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

37. GREEN COMPANIES In a survey conducted in 2007 of 1004
adults 18 years old and older, the following question was
asked: How are American companies doing on protecting
the environment compared with companies in other coun-
tries? The results are summarized below:

Answer
Respondents

Behind

382

Equal
281

Ahead
251

Don’t know

90

If an adult in the survey is selected at random, what is the
probability that he or she said that American companies are
equal  or  ahead  on  protecting  the  environment  compared
with companies in other countries?
Source: GfK Roper.

38. STAYING IN TOUCH In a poll conducted in 2007, 2000 adults
ages  18  years  old  and  older  were  asked  how  frequently
they are in touch with their parents by phone. The results
of the poll are as follows:

Answer
Respondents, %

Monthly Weekly Daily Don’t know Less

11

47

32

2

8

If a person who participated in the poll is selected at ran-
dom, what is the probability that the person said he or she
kept in touch with his or her parents:
a. Once a week?
b. At least once a week?
Source: Pew Research Center.

39. SPENDING METHODS In a survey on consumer spending meth-
ods conducted in 2006, the following results were obtained:

Payment Method Checks Cash Credit cards
Transactions, %

37

14

25

Debit/ATM

cards
15

Other

9

If a transaction tracked in this survey is selected at random,
what is the probability that the transaction was paid for:
a. With a credit card or with a debit/ATM card?
b. With cash or some method other than with a check, a

credit card, or a debit/ATM card?

Source: Minute/Visa USA Research Services.

40. SECURITY BREACHES In a survey of 106 senior information
technology  and  data  security  professionals  at  major  U.S.
companies  regarding  their  confidence  that  they  had
detected all significant security breaches in the past year,
the following responses were obtained:

Answer
Respondents

Very

confident

Moderately
confident

Not very
confident

Not at all
confident

21

56

22

7

7.6 DEFINITION OF PROBABILITY

457

b. Was very confident that he or she had detected all sig-

nificant security breaches in the past year?

Source: Forsythe Solutions Group.

41. MUSIC VENUES In  a  survey  designed  to  determine  where
people  listen  to  music  in  their  home,  1000  people  were
asked in which room at home they were mostly likely to
listen to music. The results are tabulated below:

Living Master
room bedroom office Kitchen Bathroom Other
448
106

155

169

100

Study/
home

22

Room
Respondents

If a respondent is selected at random, what is the probabil-
ity that he or she most likely listens to music:
a. In the living room?
b. In the study/home office or the kitchen?
Source: Phillips Electronics.

42. RETIREMENT BENEFITS VERSUS SALARY In a survey conducted
in 2007 of 1402 workers 18 years old and older regarding
their  opinion  on  retirement  benefits,  the  following  data
were obtained: 827 said that it was better to have excellent
retirement benefits with a lower-than-expected salary, 477
said that it was better to have a higher-than-expected salary
with  poor  retirement  benefits,  42  said  “neither,”  and  56
said “not sure.” If a worker in the survey is selected at ran-
dom, what is the probability that he or she answered that it
was better to have:
a. Excellent retirement benefits with a lower-than-expected

salary?

b. A  higher-than-expected  salary  with  poor  retirement

benefits?

Source: Transamerica Center for Retirement.

43. AIRLINE SAFETY In an attempt to study the leading causes of
airline  crashes,  the  following  data  were  compiled  from
records  of  airline  crashes  from  1959  to  1994  (excluding
sabotage and military action):

Primary Factor
Pilot
Airplane
Maintenance
Weather
Airport/air traffic control
Miscellaneous/other

Accidents

327
49
14
22
19
15

Assume that you have just learned of an airline crash and 
that the data give a generally good indication of the causes
of airline crashes. Give an estimate of the probability that
the primary cause of the crash was due to pilot error or bad
weather.
Source: National Transportation Safety Board.

What  is  the  probability  that  a  respondent  in  the  survey
selected at random:
a. Had little or no confidence that he or she had detected

all significant security breaches in the past year?

44. HOUSING APPRECIATION In  a  survey  conducted  in  the  fall
2006,  800  homeowners  were  asked  about  their  expecta-
tions  regarding  the  value  of  their  home  in  the  next  few
years; the results of the survey are summarized as follows:

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

458

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

Expectations
Decrease
Stay the same
Increase less than 5%
Increase 5–10%
Increase more than 10%

Homeowners

48
152
232
240
128

49. Let S ⫽ {s1, s2, s3, s4, s5, s6} be the sample space associated
with an experiment having the following probability distri-
bution:

Outcome

Probability

s1
1
12

s2
1
4

s3
1
12

s4
1
6

s5
1
3

s6
1
12

If a homeowner in the survey is chosen at random, what is
the probability that he or she expected his or her home to:
a. Stay the same or decrease in value in the next few years?
b. Increase 5% or more in value in the next few years?
Source: S&P, RBC Capital Markets.

45. A pair of fair dice is rolled, and the sum of the two num-
bers  falling  uppermost  is  observed.  The  probability  of
obtaining a sum of 2 is the same as that of obtaining a 7
since  there  is  only  one  way  of  getting  a  2—namely,  by
each die showing a 1; and there is only one way of obtain-
ing a 7—namely, by one die showing a 3 and the other die
showing a 4. What is wrong with this argument?

In Exercises 46–48, determine whether the given experiment has
a sample space with equally likely outcomes.
46. A  loaded  die  is  rolled,  and  the  number  appearing  upper-

most on the die is recorded.

47. Two  fair  dice  are  rolled,  and  the  sum  of  the  numbers

appearing uppermost is recorded.

48. A  ball  is  selected  at  random  from  an  urn  containing  six
black  balls  and  six  red  balls,  and  the  color  of  the  ball  is
recorded.

Find the probability of the event:
a. A ⫽ {s1, s3}
b. B ⫽ {s2, s4, s5, s6}
c. C ⫽ S

50. Let S ⫽ {s1, s2, s3, s4, s5} be the sample space associated
with an experiment having the following probability distri-
bution:

Outcome

Probability

s1
1
ᎏ
14

s2
3
14

s3
6
14

s4
2
14

s5
2
14

Find the probability of the event:
a. A ⫽ {s1, s2, s4}
b. B ⫽ {s1, s5}
c. C ⫽ S

In Exercises 51 and 52, determine whether the statement is true
or  false.  If  it  is  true,  explain  why  it  is  true.  If  it  is  false,  give  an
example to show why it is false.
51. If S ⫽ {s1, s2, . . . , sn} is a uniform sample space with n out-

comes, then 0 ⱕ P(s1) ⫹ P(s2) ⫹ . . . ⫹ P(sn) ⱕ 1.

52. Let S ⫽ {s1, s2, . . . , sn} be a uniform sample space for an
experiment. If n ⱖ 5 and E ⫽ {s1, s2, s5}, then P(E) ⫽ 3>n.

7.6 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1.

Number of trials in which a

 P 112 ⫽

1 appears uppermost
Total number of trials

 ⫽ 142
1000
 ⫽ .142

Similarly, we compute P(2), . . . , P(6), obtaining the fol-
lowing probability distribution:

2. The probability that a highway patrol car equipped with a
third brake light will be rear-ended within a 1-year period
is given by

Number of rear៮end collisions involving
cars equipped with a third brake light

 

Total number of such cars

⫽ 14
250

⫽ .056

The  probability  that  a  highway  patrol  car  not  equipped
with a third brake light will be rear-ended within a 1-year
period is given by

Outcome
Probability

1

.142

2

.173

3

.158

4

.175

5

.162

6

.190

Number of rear៮end collisions involving cars

not equipped with a third brake light

Total number of such cars

 

⫽ 22
250

⫽ .088

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.7

Rules of Probability

7.7 RULES OF PROBABILITY

459

Properties of the Probability Function and Their Applications

In this section, we examine some of the properties of the probability function and look
at the role they play in solving certain problems. We begin by looking at the general-
ization of the three properties of the probability function, which were stated for sim-
ple events in Section 7.6. Let S be a sample space of an experiment and suppose E and
F are events of the experiment. We have the following properties:

S

E

F

Property 1. P1 E2 ⱖ 0 for any E.
Property 2. P1 S2 ⫽ 1.
Property  3. If  E and  F are  mutually  exclusive  (that  is,  only  one  of  them  can
occur or, equivalently, E 傽 F ⫽ ⭋), then

FIGURE 26
If E and F are mutually exclusive events,
then P(E 傼 F ) ⫽ P(E) ⫹ P(F ).

(Figure 26).

P1 E 傼 F2 ⫽ P1 E2 ⫹ P1 F2

Property 3 may be easily extended to the case involving any finite number of mutu-
ally exclusive events. Thus, if E1, E2, . . . , En are mutually exclusive events, then

P1 E1 傼 E2 傼 傼 En2 ⫽ P1 E12 ⫹ P1 E22 ⫹ ⫹ P1 En2

p

p

TABLE 7
Probability Distribution
Score, x

Probability

x ⬎ 700
600 ⬍ x ⱕ 700
500 ⬍ x ⱕ 600
400 ⬍ x ⱕ 500
300 ⬍ x ⱕ 400
x ⱕ 300

.01
.07
.19
.23
.31
.19 

APPLIED EXAMPLE 1 SAT Verbal Scores The superintendent of a metropol-
itan school district has estimated the probabilities associated with the SAT 
verbal scores of students from that district. The results are shown in Table 7. If a
student is selected at random, what is the probability that his or her SAT verbal
score will be:
a. More than 400?
b. Less than or equal to 500?
c. Greater than 400 but less than or equal to 600?

Solution Let A, B, C, D, E, and F denote, respectively, the event that the score
is greater than 700, greater than 600 but less than or equal to 700, greater than
500 but less than or equal to 600, and so forth. Then these events are mutually
exclusive. Therefore,
a. The probability that the student’s score will be more than 400 is given by

 P1D 傼 C 傼 B 傼 A2 ⫽ P1D2 ⫹ P1C2 ⫹ P1B2 ⫹ P1A2

 ⫽ .23 ⫹ .19 ⫹ .07 ⫹ .01
 ⫽ .5

b. The probability that the student’s score will be less than or equal to 500 is

given by

 P1D 傼 E 傼 F2 ⫽ P1D2 ⫹ P1E2 ⫹ P1F2
 ⫽ .23 ⫹ .31 ⫹ .19 ⫽ .73

c. The probability that the student’s score will be greater than 400 but less than

or equal to 600 is given by

 P1C 傼 D2 ⫽ P1C2 ⫹ P1D2
 ⫽ .19 ⫹ .23 ⫽ .42

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

460

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

Property 3 holds if and only if E and F are mutually exclusive. In the general case,

we have the following rule:

Property 4. Addition Rule
If E and F are any two events of an experiment, then

P1E 傼 F2 ⫽ P1E2 ⫹ P1F2 ⫺ P1E 艚 F2

To derive this property, refer to Figure 27. Observe that we can write

E ⫽ 1E 艚 Fc2 傼 1E 艚 F2  and  F ⫽ 1Ec 艚 F2 傼 1E 艚 F2

as a union of disjoint sets. Therefore,

P1E2 ⫽ P1E 艚 F 

c2 ⫹ P1E 艚 F2  or  P1E 艚 Fc2 ⫽ P1E2 ⫺ P1E 艚 F2

E

F

S

E

Fc

Ec

F

FIGURE 27
E 傼 F ⫽ (E 傽 F c) 傼 (E 傽 F) 傼
(E c 傽 F )

and

P1F2 ⫽ P1Ec 艚 F2 ⫹ P1E 艚 F2  or  P1Ec 艚 F2 ⫽ P1F2 ⫺ P1E 艚 F2

Finally, since E 傼 F ⫽ (E 傽 Fc) 傼 (E 傽 F) 傼 (Ec 傽 F) is a union of disjoint sets, we
have 
 P1E 傼 F2 ⫽ P1E 艚 Fc2 ⫹ P1E 艚 F2 ⫹ P1Ec 艚 F2

 ⫽ P1E2 ⫺ P1E 艚 F2 ⫹ P1E 艚 F2 ⫹ P1F2 ⫺ P1E 艚 F2
 ⫽ P1E2 ⫹ P1F2 ⫺ P1E 艚 F2

Use the earlier
results.

Note Observe  that  if  E and  F are  mutually  exclusive—that  is,  if  E 傽 F ⫽ ⭋—
then  the  equation  of  Property  4  reduces  to  that  of  Property  3.  In  other  words,  if  E
and F are mutually exclusive events, then P(E 傼 F) ⫽ P(E) ⫹ P(F). If E and F are
not mutually exclusive events, then P(E 傼 F) ⫽ P(E) ⫹ P(F) ⫺ P(E 傽 F).

EXAMPLE 2 A card is drawn from a well-shuffled deck of 52 playing cards. What is
the probability that it is an ace or a spade?

Solution Let E denote the event that the card drawn is an ace and let F denote the
event that the card drawn is a spade. Then

P1E2 ⫽ 4

52

  and  P1F2 ⫽ 13

52

Furthermore, E and F are not mutually exclusive events. In fact, E 傽 F is the event
that the card drawn is the ace of spades. Consequently,

P 1E 艚 F 2 ⫽ 1

52

Spades

Ace of spades
n(E  F) = 1 

Aces

E

F

The event that a card drawn is an ace or a spade is E 傼 F, with probability 
given by

 P1E 傼 F2 ⫽ P1E2 ⫹ P1F2 ⫺ P1E 艚 F2
⫽ 4
13

 ⫽ 4
52

⫽ 16
52

⫹ 13
52

⫺ 1
52

FIGURE 28
P(E 傼 F ) ⫽ P(E) ⫹ P(F ) ⫺ P(E 傽 F )

(Figure 28). This result, of course, can be obtained by arguing that 16 of the 52
cards are either spades or aces of other suits.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

7.7 RULES OF PROBABILITY

461

Explore & Discuss
Let E, F, and G be any three events of an experiment. Use Equation (5) of Section 7.2 to
show that

P1E 傼 F 傼 G2 ⫽ P1E2 ⫹ P1F2 ⫹ P1G2 ⫺ P1E 艚 F2 ⫺ P1E 艚 G2

⫺ P 1F 艚 G 2 ⫹ P 1E 艚 F 艚 G 2

If E, F, and G are pairwise mutually exclusive—that is, the intersection of any pair of
events is empty—what is P(E 傼 F 傼 G)?

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 3 Quality Control The quality-control department of
Vista Vision, manufacturer of the Pulsar 42-inch plasma TV, has determined
from records obtained from the company’s service centers that 3% of the sets sold
experience video problems, 1% experience audio problems, and 0.1% experience
both video and audio problems before the expiration of the 90-day warranty. Find
the probability that a plasma TV purchased by a consumer will experience video
or audio problems before the warranty expires.

Solution Let E denote the event that a plasma TV purchased will experience
video problems within 90 days, and let F denote the event that a plasma TV pur-
chased will experience audio problems within 90 days. Then

P1 E2 ⫽ .03

P1 F2 ⫽ .01

P1 E 傽 F2 ⫽ .001

The event that a plasma TV purchased will experience video problems or audio
problems before the warranty expires is E 傼 F, and the probability of this event
is given by

P1E 傼 F2 ⫽ P1E2 ⫹ P1F2 ⫺ P1E 艚 F2

 ⫽ .03 ⫹ .01 ⫺ .001
 ⫽ .039

P(E 

F) = .001

E

F

P(E) = .03

P(F) = .01

FIGURE 29
P(E 傼 F ) ⫽ P(E) ⫹ P(F ) ⫺ P(E 傽 F )

(Figure 29).

Here is another property of a probability function that is of considerable aid in

computing the probability of an event:

Property 5. Rule of Complements
If E is an event of an experiment and E c denotes the complement of E, then

P1E c2 ⫽ 1 ⫺ P1E2

Property  5  is  an  immediate  consequence  of  Properties  2  and  3.  Indeed,  we  have 
E 傼 E c ⫽ S and E 傽 E c ⫽ ⭋, so

and therefore,

1 ⫽ P1S2 ⫽ P 1E 傼 Ec2 ⫽ P1E2 ⫹ P1Ec2

P1Ec2 ⫽ 1 ⫺ P1E2

APPLIED EXAMPLE 4 Warranties Refer to Example 3. What is the proba-
bility that a Pulsar 42-inch plasma TV bought by a consumer will not

experience video or audio difficulties before the warranty expires?

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

462

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

Solution Let E denote the event that a plasma TV bought by a consumer will
experience video or audio difficulties before the warranty expires. Then the event
that the plasma TV will not experience either problem before the warranty 
expires is given by Ec, with probability

 P1Ec2 ⫽ 1 ⫺ P1E2
 ⫽ 1 ⫺ .039
 ⫽ .961

Computations Involving the Rules of Probability
We close this section by looking at two additional examples that illustrate the rules of
probability.

VIDEO

S

E

F

P(E) = .1

P(F) = .6

FIGURE 30
P(Ec 傽 F c) ⫽ P[(E 傼 F )c]

EXAMPLE 5 Let E and F be two mutually exclusive events, and suppose that 

P1 E2 ⫽ .1 and P1 F2 ⫽ .6. Compute:
a. P1 E 傽 F2
b. P1 E 傼 F2
d. P1 E c 傽 Fc2
e. P1 E c 傼 Fc2

c. P1 E c2

Solution
a. Since the events E and F are mutually exclusive—that is, E 傽 F ⫽ ⭋—we have
b. P1 E 傼 F2 ⫽ P1 E2 ⫹ P1 F2

P1 E 傽 F2 ⫽ 0.

Since E and F are mutually exclusive

⫽ .1 ⫹ .6
⫽ .7
c. P1 Ec2 ⫽ 1 ⫺ P1 E2

⫽ 1 ⫺ .1
⫽ .9

Property 5

d. Observe that, by De Morgan’s Law, E c 傽 Fc ⫽ 1 E 傼 F2 c. Hence,

P1 Ec 傽 F c2 ⫽ P[1 E 傼 F2 c]
⫽ 1 ⫺ P1 E 傼 F2
⫽ 1 ⫺ .7
⫽ .3

See Figure 30.

Property 5

Use the result of part (b).

e. Again using De Morgan’s Law, we find

P1 Ec 傼 Fc2 ⫽ P[1 E 傽 F2 c]
⫽ 1 ⫺ P1 E 傽 F2
⫽ 1 ⫺ 0
⫽ 1

Use the result of part (a).

EXAMPLE 6 Let E and F be two events of an experiment with sample space S. Sup-

pose P1 E2 ⫽ .2, P1 F2 ⫽ .1, and P1 E 傽 F2 ⫽ .05. Compute:
a. P1 E 傼 F2
b. P1 Ec 傽 Fc2
c. P1 Ec 傽 F2

Hint: Draw a Venn diagram.

Solution

a. P1 E 傼 F2 ⫽ P1 E2 ⫹ P1 F2 ⫺ P1 E 傽 F2

Property 4

⫽ .2 ⫹ .1 ⫺ .05
⫽ .25

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

7.7 RULES OF PROBABILITY

463

b. Using De Morgan’s Law, we have

P1 Ec 傽 Fc2 ⫽ P[1 E 傼 F2 c]
⫽ 1 ⫺ P1 E 傼 F2
⫽ 1 ⫺ .25
⫽ .75

Property 5

Use the result of part (a).

c. From the Venn diagram describing the relationship among E, F, and S (Figure 31),

we have

P1 Ec 傽 F2 ⫽ .05

The shaded subset is the event Ec 傽 F.

This result may also be obtained by using the relationship

E

.15

.05

.05

S

F

P(E) = .2

P(F) = .1

FIGURE 31
P(E c 傽 F ): the probability that the event F,
but not the event E, will occur

P1 Ec 傽 F2 ⫽ P1 F2 ⫺ P1 E 傽 F2

⫽ .1 ⫺ .05
⫽ .05

7.7 Self-Check Exercises

1. Let E and F be events of an experiment with sample space
S.  Suppose  P(E)  ⫽ .4,  P(F)  ⫽ .5,  and  P(E 傽 F)  ⫽ .1.
Compute:
a. P1E 傼 F2

b. P1E 傽 Fc2

2. Susan  Garcia  wishes  to  sell  or  lease  a  condominium
through  a  realty  company.  The  realtor  estimates  that  the
probability of finding a buyer within a month of the date

the property is listed for sale or lease is .3, the probability
of finding a lessee is .8, and the probability of finding both
a buyer and a lessee is .1. Determine the probability that
the property will be sold or leased within 1 month from the
date the property is listed for sale or lease.

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 7.7 can be found on 
page 468.

7.7 Concept Questions

1. Suppose that S is a sample space of an experiment, E and
F are events of the experiment, and P is a probability func-
tion. Give the meaning of each of the following statements:

2. Give an example, based on a real-life situation, illustrating
the property P(E c) ⫽ 1 ⫺ P(E), where E is an event and E c
is the complement of E.

a. P1E2 ⫽ 0
d. P1E 傼 F2 ⫽ P1E2 ⫹ P1F2 ⫺ P1E 傽 F2

b. P1F2 ⫽ 0.5

c. P1S2 ⫽ 1

7.7 Exercises

A pair of dice is rolled, and the number that appears uppermost
on  each  die  is  observed.  In  Exercises  1–6,  refer  to  this  experi-
ment, and find the probability of the given event.
1. The sum of the numbers is an even number.

An experiment consists of selecting a card at random from a 52-
card deck. In Exercises 7–12, refer to this experiment and find the
probability of the event.
7. A king of diamonds is drawn.

2. The sum of the numbers is either 7 or 11.

8. A diamond or a king is drawn.

3. A pair of 1s is thrown.

4. A double is thrown.

9. A face card (i.e., a jack, queen, or king) is drawn.

10. A red face card is drawn.

5. One die shows a 6, and the other is a number less than 4.

11. An ace is not drawn.

6. The sum of the numbers is at least 4.

12. A black face card is not drawn.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

464

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

13. RAFFLES Five hundred raffle tickets were sold. What is the
probability  that  a  person  holding  one  ticket  will  win  the
first prize? What is the probability that he or she will not
win the first prize?

14. TV HOUSEHOLDS The  results  of  a  recent  television  survey
of American TV households revealed that 87 out of every
100 TV households have at least one remote control. What
is the probability that a randomly selected TV household
does not have at least one remote control?

In Exercises 15–24, explain why the statement is incorrect.
15. The sample space associated with an experiment is given by

S ⫽ {a, b, c}, where P(a) ⫽ .3, P(b) ⫽ .4, and P(c) ⫽ .4.

16. The probability that a bus will arrive late at the Civic Cen-
ter is .35, and the probability that it will be on time or early 
is .60.

17. OFFICE POOLS A person participates in a weekly office pool
in which he has one chance in ten of winning the purse. If
he participates for 5 weeks in succession, the probability of
winning at least one purse is 

.

5
10

18. STOCK PRICES The  probability  that  a  certain  stock  will
increase in value over a period of 1 week is .6. Therefore,
the probability that the stock will decrease in value is .4.

19. A red die and a green die are tossed. The probability that a
6 will appear uppermost on the red die is  , and the proba-
bility  that  a  1  will  appear  uppermost  on  the  green  die  is 
1
. Hence, the probability that the red die will show a 6 or
6
the green die will show a 1 is 

1
6

.

1
6

⫹ 1
6

20. Joanne, a high school senior, has applied for admission to
four colleges, A, B, C, and D. She has estimated that the
probability that she will be accepted for admission by col-
lege A, B, C, and D is .5, .3, .1, and .08, respectively. Thus,
the probability that she will be accepted for admission by
at  least  one  college  is  P(A)  ⫹ P(B)  ⫹ P(C)  ⫹ P(D)  ⫽
.5 ⫹ .3 ⫹ .1 ⫹ .08 ⫽ .98.

21. The sample space associated with an experiment is given
by S ⫽ {a, b, c, d, e}. The events E ⫽ {a, b} and F ⫽ {c, d}
are  mutually  exclusive.  Hence,  the  events  Ec and  Fc are
mutually exclusive.

22. POKER Refer to the list of poker hands given on page 439.
A 5-card poker hand is dealt from a 52-card deck. Let A
denote the event that a flush is dealt, and let B be the event
that a straight is dealt. Then the events A and B are mutu-
ally exclusive.

23. RETAIL SALES Mark Owens, an optician, estimates that the
probability that a customer coming into his store will pur-
chase one or more pairs of glasses but not contact lenses is
.40, and the probability that he will purchase one or more
pairs of contact lenses but not glasses is .25. Hence, Owens
concludes that the probability that a customer coming into
his store will purchase neither a pair of glasses nor a pair
of contact lenses is .35.

24. There are eight grades in Garfield Elementary School. If a
student  is  selected  at  random  from  the  school,  then  the
1
probability that the student is in the first grade is  .
8

25. Let E and F be two events that are mutually exclusive, and

suppose P(E) ⫽ .2 and P(F) ⫽ .5. Compute:
a. P1E 傽 F2
c. P1Fc2

b. P1E 傼 F2
d. P1Ec 傽 Fc2

26. Let E and F be two events of an experiment with sample
space S. Suppose P(E) ⫽ .6, P(F) ⫽ .4, and P(E 傽 F) ⫽
.2. Compute:
a. P1E 傼 F2
c. P1Fc2

b. P1Ec2
d. P1Ec 傽 F2

27. Let S ⫽ {s1, s2, s3, s4} be the sample space associated with
an experiment having the probability distribution shown in
the accompanying table. If A ⫽ {s1, s2} and B ⫽ {s1, s3},
find:
a. P1A), P1B2
c. P1A 傽 B2

b. P1Ac2, P1Bc2
d. P1A 傼 B2

Outcome

Probability

s1
s2
s3
s4

1
8

3
8

1
4
1
4

28. Let S ⫽ {s1, s2, s3, s4, s5, s6} be the sample space associ-
ated  with  an  experiment  having  the  probability  distribu-
tion shown in the accompanying table. If A ⫽ {s1, s2} and 
B ⫽ {s1, s5, s6}, find:
a. P1A2, P1B2
c. P1A 傽 B2
e. P1Ac 傽 Bc2

b. P1Ac2, P1Bc2
d. P1A 傼 B2
f. P1Ac 傼 Bc2

Outcome

Probability

s1
s2
s3
s4
s5
s6

1
3

1
8

1
6

1
6

1
12
1
8

29. TIRE SAFETY A  team  of  automobile  safety  experts  was
asked  by  a  television  news  station  to  conduct  an  experi-
ment in which the tires of 100 randomly chosen cars of its
employees  were  subjected  to  a  safety  inspection.  It  was
determined that of the 100 cars inspected, 11 cars failed the
tread depth test (at least one tire on the car was worn exces-
sively), 45 cars failed the tire pressure test (at least one tire
on the car was overinflated or underinflated), and 4 failed
both the tread depth test and the tire pressure test. Find the
probability that a car selected at random from this group of
cars:
a. Failed only the tire pressure test.
b. Passed  both  the  tread  depth  test  and  the  tire  pressure

test.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

30. ALTERNATIVE FUEL VEHICLES A survey was conducted by the
local chapter of an environmental club regarding the own-
ership of alternative fuel vehicles (AFVs) among the mem-
bers of the group. An AFV is a vehicle that runs on fuel
other than petroleum fuels (petrol and diesel). It was found
that of the 80 members of the club surveyed, 22 of them
own at least one hybrid car, 12 of them own at least one
electric car, and 4 of them own at least one hybrid and at
least one electric car. If a member of the club is surveyed,
what is the probability that he or she:
a. Owns only hybrid cars?
b. Owns no alternative fuel vehicles?

31. TEACHER ATTITUDES A  nonprofit  organization  conducted  a
survey of 2140 metropolitan-area teachers regarding their
beliefs  about  educational  problems.  The  following  data
were obtained:

900 said that lack of parental support is a problem.
890 said that abused or neglected children are problems.
680 said that malnutrition or students in poor health is a

problem.

120 said that lack of parental support and abused or ne-

glected children are problems.

110 said that lack of parental support and malnutrition or

poor health are problems.

140 said that abused or neglected children and malnutrition

or poor health are problems.

40 said that lack of parental support, abuse or neglect, and

malnutrition or poor health are problems.

What  is  the  probability  that  a  teacher  selected  at  random
from this group said that lack of parental support is the only
problem hampering a student’s schooling?
Hint: Draw a Venn diagram.

7.7 RULES OF PROBABILITY

465

33. RETAIL SALES The  probability  that  a  shopper  in  a  certain
boutique will buy a blouse is .35, that she will buy a pair of
pants is .30, and that she will buy a skirt is .27. The prob-
ability that she will buy both a blouse and a skirt is .15, that
she will buy both a skirt and a pair of pants is .19, and that
she  will  buy  both  a  blouse  and  a  pair  of  pants  is  .12.
Finally, the probability that she will buy all three items is
.08. What is the probability that a customer will buy:
a. Exactly one of these items?
b. None of these items?

34. COURSE ENROLLMENTS Among  500  freshmen  pursuing  a
business degree at a university, 320 are enrolled in an eco-
nomics course, 225 are enrolled in a mathematics course,
and  140  are  enrolled  in  both  an  economics  and  a  mathe-
matics  course.  What  is  the  probability  that  a  freshman
selected at random from this group is enrolled in:
a. An economics and/or a mathematics course?
b. Exactly one of these two courses?
c. Neither an economics course nor a mathematics course?

35. CONSUMER SURVEYS A  leading  manufacturer  of  kitchen
appliances advertised its products in two magazines: Good
Housekeeping and the Ladies Home Journal. A survey of
500  customers  revealed  that  140  learned  of  its  products
from Good Housekeeping, 130 learned of its products from
the  Ladies  Home  Journal,  and  80  learned  of  its  products
from both magazines. What is the probability that a person
selected at random from this group saw the manufacturer’s
advertisement in:
a. Both magazines?
b. At least one of the two magazines?
c. Exactly one magazine?

36. ROLLOVER DEATHS The following table gives the number of
people killed in rollover crashes in various types of vehi-
cles in 2002:

32. INVESTMENTS In a survey of 200 employees of a company
regarding  their  401(k)  investments,  the  following  data
were obtained:

Types of Vehicles
Deaths

Cars
4768

Pickups

2742

SUVs
2448

Vans
698

141 had investments in stock funds.
91 had investments in bond funds.
60 had investments in money market funds.
47 had investments in stock funds and bond funds.
36 had investments in stock funds and money market

funds.

36 had investments in bond funds and money market

funds.

22 had investments in stock funds, bond funds, and

money market funds.

What is the probability that an employee of the company
chosen at random:
a. Had  investments  in  exactly  two  kinds  of  investment

funds?

b. Had  investments  in  exactly  one  kind  of  investment

fund?

c. Had no investment in any of the three types of funds?

Find the empirical probability distribution associated with
these data. If a fatality due to a rollover crash in 2002 is
picked  at  random,  what  is  the  probability  that  the  victim
was in:
a. A car?
Source: National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.

c. A pickup or an SUV?

b. An SUV?

37. TAX PREPARATION A  survey  in  which  people  were  asked
how  they  were  planning  to  prepare  their  taxes  in  2007
revealed the following:

Method of
Preparation
Computer software
Accountant
Tax preparation service
Spouse, friend, or other
relative will prepare
By hand

Percentage

33.9
23.6
17.4

10.8
14.3

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

466

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

What is the probability that a randomly chosen participant
in the survey:
a. Was planning to use an accountant or a tax preparation

service to prepare his or her taxes?

b. Was not planning to use computer software to prepare
his  or  her  taxes  and  was  not  planning  to  do  taxes  by
hand?

Source: National Retail Federation.

38. WOMEN’S APPAREL In an online survey for Talbots of 1095
women ages 35 years old and older, the participants were
asked what article of clothing women most want to fit per-
fectly. A summary of the results of the survey follows:

Article of Clothing
Jeans
Black pantsuit
Cocktail dress
White shirt
Gown
Other

Respondents

470
307
230
22
11
55

If a woman who participated in the survey is chosen at ran-
dom, what is the probability that she most wants:
a. Jeans to fit perfectly?
b. A black pantsuit or a cocktail dress to fit perfectly?
Source: Market Tool’s Zoom Panel.

39. SWITCHING JOBS Two hundred workers were asked: Would
a better economy lead you to switch jobs? The results of
the survey follow:

Answer
Respondents

Very
likely

40

Somewhat

likely
28

Somewhat
unlikely

Very

unlikely

26

104

Don’t
know

2

If a worker is chosen at random, what is the probability that
he or she:
a. Is very unlikely to switch jobs?
b. Is somewhat likely or very likely to switch jobs?
Source: Accountemps.

40. 401(K) INVESTORS According to a study conducted in 2003
concerning  the  participation,  by  age,  of  401(k)  investors,
the following data were obtained:

Age
Percent

20s
11

30s
28

40s
32

50s
22

60s
7

a. What is the probability that a 401(k) investor selected at

random in 2003 was in his or her 20s or 60s?

b. What is the probability that a 401(k) investor selected at

random in 2003 was under the age of 50?

Source: Investment Company Institute.

41. ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SOURCES In  a  poll  conducted  among
likely  voters  by  Zogby  International,  voters  were  asked
their  opinion  on  the  best  alternative  to  oil  and  coal.  The
results are as follows:

Nuclear Wind cells Biofuels Solar no answer

Fuel

Other/

Source
Respondents, % 14.2

16.0

3.8

24.3

27.9

13.8

What is the probability that a randomly selected participant
in the poll mentioned:
a. Wind or solar energy sources as the best alternative to

oil and coal?

b. Nuclear  or  biofuels  as  the  best  alternative  to  oil  and

coal?

Source: Zogby International.

42. ELECTRICITY GENERATION Electricity in the United States is
generated  from  many  sources.  The  following  table  gives
the sources as well as their shares in the production of elec-
tricity:

Source
Share, % 50.0

Coal Nuclear Natural gas Hydropower Oil Other
2.3

19.3

18.7

6.7

3.0

If a source for generating electricity is picked at random,
what is the probability that it comes from:
a. Coal or natural gas?
b. Nonnuclear sources?
Source: Energy Information Administration.

43. DOWNLOADING MUSIC The  following  table,  compiled  in
2004, gives the percentage of music downloaded from the
United States and other countries by U.S. users:

Country U.S. Germany
Percent

45.1

16.5

Canada

Italy U.K.

France

Japan Other

6.9

6.1

4.2

3.8

2.5

14.9

a. Verify that the table does give a probability distribution

for the experiment.

b. What  is  the  probability  that  a  user  who  downloads
music,  selected  at  random,  obtained  it  from  either  the
United States or Canada?

c. What is the probability that a U.S. user who downloads
music, selected at random, does not obtain it from Italy,
the United Kingdom (U.K.), or France?

Source: Felix Oberholtzer-Gee and Koleman Strumpf.

44. PLANS TO KEEP CARS In  a  survey  conducted  to  determine
how  long  Americans  keep  their  cars,  2000  automobile
owners  were  asked  how  long  they  planned  to  keep  their
present cars. The results of the survey follow:

Years Car Is Kept, x

Respondents

0 ⱕ x ⬍ 1
1 ⱕ x ⬍ 3
3 ⱕ x ⬍ 5
5 ⱕ x ⬍ 7
7 ⱕ x ⬍ 10
10 ⱕ x

60
440
360
340
240
560

Find the probability distribution associated with these data.
What is the probability that an automobile owner selected

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

at random from those surveyed planned to keep his or her
present car:
a. Less than 5 years?
b. 3 years or more?

45. ASSEMBLY-TIME STUDIES A time study was conducted by the
production manager of Universal Instruments to determine
how much time it took an assembly worker to complete a
certain task during the assembly of its Galaxy home com-
puters. Results of the study indicated that 20% of the work-
ers were able to complete the task in less than 3 min, 60%
of the workers were able to complete the task in 4 min or
less, and 10% of the workers required more than 5 min to
complete the task. If an assembly-line worker is selected at
random from this group, what is the probability that:
a. He or she will be able to complete the task in 5 min or less?
b. He or she will not be able to complete the task within

4 min?

c. The time taken for the worker to complete the task will

be between 3 and 4 min (inclusive)?

46. DISTRACTED DRIVING According to a study of 100 drivers in
metropolitan Washington, D.C., whose cars were equipped
with cameras with sensors, the distractions and the number
of  incidents  (crashes,  near  crashes,  and  situations  that
require  an  evasive  maneuver  after  the  driver  was  dis-
tracted) caused by these distractions are as follows:

Distraction
E
Driving Incidents 668 378 194 163 133

D

C

A

B

G

I
F
134 111 111 89

H

where A ⫽ Wireless device (cell phone, PDA)

B ⫽ Passenger
C ⫽ Something inside car
D ⫽ Vehicle
E ⫽ Personal hygiene
F ⫽ Eating
G ⫽ Something outside car
H ⫽ Talking/singing
I ⫽ Other

If an incident caused by a distraction is picked at random,
what is the probability that it was caused by:
a. The use of a wireless device?
b. Something other than personal hygiene or eating?
Source: Virginia Tech Transportation Institute and NHTSA.

47. GUN-CONTROL LAWS A poll was conducted among 250 res-
idents of a certain city regarding tougher gun-control laws.
The results of the poll are shown in the table:

Own
Only a
Handgun

Favor
Tougher Laws
Oppose
Tougher Laws
No Opinion
Total

0

58
0
58

Own a

Own
Only a Handgun
Rifle

Own

and a Rifle Neither Total

12

5
0
17

0

25
0
25

138

0
12
150

150

88
12
250

7.7 RULES OF PROBABILITY

467

If one of the participants in this poll is selected at random,
what is the probability that he or she:
a. Favors tougher gun-control laws?
b. Owns a handgun?
c. Owns a handgun but not a rifle?
d. Favors  tougher  gun-control  laws  and  does  not  own  a

handgun?

48. RISK OF AN AIRPLANE CRASH According to a study of Western-
built commercial jets involved in crashes from 1988 to 1998,
the percentage of airplane crashes that occur at each stage of
flight are as follows:

Phase
On ground, taxiing
During takeoff
Climbing to cruise altitude
En route
Descent and approach
Landing

Percent

4
10
19
5
31
31

If  one  of  the  doomed  flights  in  the  period  1988–1998  is
picked at random, what is the probability that it crashed:
a. While taxiing on the ground or while en route?
b. During takeoff or landing?
If  the  study  is  indicative  of  airplane  crashes  in  general,
when is the risk of a plane crash the highest?
Source: National Transportation Safety Board.

49. Suppose the probability that Bill can solve a problem is p1
and the probability that Mike can solve it is p2. Show that
the probability that Bill and Mike working independently
can solve the problem is p1 ⫹ p2 ⫺ p1p2.

50. Fifty raffle tickets are numbered 1 through 50, and one
of them is drawn at random. What is the probability that
the number is a multiple of 5 or 7? Consider the follow-
ing  “solution”:  Since  10  tickets  bear  numbers  that  are
multiples  of  5  and  since  7  tickets  bear  numbers  that 
are multiples of 7, we conclude that the required proba-
bility is

10
50

⫹ 7
50

⫽ 17
50

What  is  wrong  with  this  argument?  What  is  the  correct
answer?

In Exercises 51–54, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
51. If A is a subset of B and P(B) ⫽ 0, then P(A) ⫽ 0.

52. If A is a subset of B, then P(A) ⱕ P(B).

53. If E1, E2, . . . , En are events of an experiment, then 

P(E1 傼 E2 傼 . . . 傼 En) ⫽ P(E1) ⫹ P(E2) ⫹ . . . ⫹ P(En).

54. If E is an event of an experiment, then P(E) ⫹ P(E c) ⫽ 1.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

468

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

7.7 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. a. Using Property 4, we find

The result may also be obtained by using the relationship

 P1E 傼 F2 ⫽ P1E2 ⫹ P1F2 ⫺ P1E 艚 F2

 ⫽ .4 ⫹ .5 ⫺ .1
 ⫽ .8

b. From  the  accompanying  Venn  diagram,  in  which  the

subset E 傽 Fc is shaded, we see that

P1E 傽 Fc2 ⫽ .3

E

.3

.1

.4

S

F

 P1E 艚 Fc2 ⫽ P 1E2 ⫺ P1E 艚 F2

 ⫽ .4 ⫺ .1 ⫽ .3

2. Let  E denote  the  event  that  the  realtor  will  find  a  buyer
within 1 month of the date the property is listed for sale or
lease, and let F denote the event that the realtor will find a
lessee within the same time period. Then

P1E2 ⫽ .3

P1F2 ⫽ .8

P1E 傽 F2 ⫽ .1

The  probability  of  the  event  that  the  realtor  will  find  a
buyer or a lessee within 1 month of the date the property is
listed for sale or lease is given by

 P1E 傼 F2 ⫽ P1E2 ⫹ P1F2 ⫺ P1E 艚 F2

 ⫽ .3 ⫹ .8 ⫺ .1 ⫽ 1

—that is, a certainty.

CHAPTER 7

Summary of Principal Formulas and Terms

FORMULAS
1. Commutative laws

2. Associative laws

3. Distributive laws

4. De Morgan’s Laws

5. Number of elements in the

union of two finite sets

6. Permutation of n distinct objects,

taken r at a time

7. Permutation of n objects, not
all distinct, taken n at a time

8. Combination of n distinct
objects, taken r at a time

9. Probability of an event in a uniform

sample space

10. Probability of the union of two

mutually exclusive events

11. Addition rule

12. Rule of complements

A 傼 B ⫽ B 傼 A
A 傽 B ⫽ B 傽 A
A 傼 1B 傼 C2 ⫽ 1A 傼 B2 傼 C
A 傽 1B 傽 C2 ⫽ 1A 傽 B2 傽 C
A 傼 1B 傽 C2 ⫽ 1A 傼 B2 傽 1A 傼 C2
A 傽 1B 傼 C2 ⫽ 1A 傽 B2 傼 1A 傽 C2
1A 傼 B2 c ⫽ Ac 傽 Bc
1A 傽 B2 c ⫽ Ac 傼 Bc
n1A 傼 B2 ⫽ n1A2 ⫹ n1B2 ⫺ n1A 傽 B2

P1n, r2 ⫽ n!

1n ⫺ r2!

n!

n!

n1! n2! p nm!
C1n, r2 ⫽
P1E2 ⫽
P(E 傼 F) ⫽ P(E) ⫹ P(F)

r! 1n ⫺ r2!
n1E2
n1S2

P(E 傼 F) ⫽ P(E) ⫹ P(F) ⫺ P(E 傽 F)
P(Ec) ⫽ 1 ⫺ P(E)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

REVIEW EXERCISES

469

TERMS
set (406)
element of a set (406)
roster notation (406)
set-builder notation (406)
set equality (406)
subset (407)
empty set (407)
universal set (408)
Venn diagram (408)
set union (409)
set intersection (409)
disjoint set (409)

complement of a set (409)
set complementation (410)
multiplication principle (422)
generalized multiplication principle (423)
permutation (427)
n-factorial (429)
combination (432)
experiment (441)
outcome (441)
sample point (441)
sample space (441)
event (441)
finite sample space (441)

union of two events (442)
intersection of two events (442)
complement of an event (442)
mutually exclusive events (443)
relative frequency (450)
empirical probability (450)
probability of an event (450)
elementary (simple) event (450)
probability distribution (450)
probability function (450)
uniform sample space (451)
addition principle (452)

CHAPTER 7

Concept Review Questions

Fill in the blanks.
1. A well-defined collection of objects is called a/an ______.

These objects are also called ______ of the ______.

2. Two sets having exactly the same elements are said to be

______.

3. If every element of a set A is also an element of a set B,

then A is a/an ______ of B.

4. a. The empty set ⭋ is the set containing ______ elements.
b. The universal set is the set containing ______ elements.

5. a. The set of all elements in A and/or B is called the ______

of A and B.

b. The set of all elements in A and B is called the ______ of

A and B.

6. The set of all elements in U that are not in A is called the

______ of A.

CHAPTER 7

Review Exercises

In Exercises 1–4, list the elements of each set in roster notation.
1. {x 兩 3x ⫺ 2 ⫽ 7; x, an integer}
2. {x 兩 x is a letter of the word TALLAHASSEE}
3. The set whose elements are the even numbers between 3 

and 11

4. {x 兩 (x ⫺ 3)(x ⫹ 4) ⫽ 0; x, a negative integer}
Let A ⫽ {a, c, e, r}. In Exercises 5–8, determine whether the set is
equal to A.
5. {r, e, c, a}
6. {x 兩 x is a letter of the word career}
7. {x 兩 x is a letter of the word racer}

7. Applying De Morgan’s Law, we can write 1 A 傼 B 傼 C2 c ⫽

_____.

8. An  arrangement  of  a  set  of  distinct  objects  in  a  definite
order  is  called  a/an  ______;  an  arrangement  in  which  the
order is not important is a/an ______.

9. An activity with observable results is called a/an ______; an
outcome of an experiment is called a ______ point, and the
set consisting of all possible sample points of an experiment
is called a sample ______; a  subset of a sample space of an
experiment is called a/an ______.

10. The  events  E and  F are  mutually  exclusive  if  E 傽 F ⫽

______.

11. A sample space in which the outcomes are equally likely is
called a/an ______ sample space; if such a space contains n
simple events, then the probability of each simple event is
______.

8. {x 兩 x is a letter of the word cares}

In Exercises 9–12, shade the portion of the accompanying figure
that represents the set.

U

A

B

C

9. A 傼 1B 傽 C2
11. Ac 傽 Bc 傽 Cc

10.

1A 傽 B 傽 C2 c
12. Ac 傽 1Bc 傼 Cc2

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

470

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

In Exercises 13–16, let U ⫽ {a, b, c, d, e}, A ⫽ {a, b}, B ⫽ {b, c, d}, and
C ⫽ {a, d, e}. Verify the equation by direct computation.
13. A 傼 1B 傼 C2 ⫽ 1A 傼 B2 傼 C
14. A 傽 1B 傽 C2 ⫽ 1A 傽 B2 傽 C
15. A 傽 1B 傼 C2 ⫽ 1A 傽 B2 傼 1A 傽 C2
16. A 傼 1B 傽 C2 ⫽ 1A 傼 B2 傽 1A 傼 C2

In Exercises 17–20, let U denote all participants in a consumer-
behavior survey conducted by a national polling group. Let

A ⫽ {consumers who avoided buying a product because it

is not recyclable}

B ⫽ {consumers who used cloth rather than disposable

diapers}

C ⫽ {consumers who boycotted a company’s products

because of its record on the environment}

D ⫽ {consumers who voluntarily recycled their garbage}

Describe each set in words.
17. A 傽 C
19. Bc 傽 D

18. A 傼 D
20. Cc 傼 Dc

In Exercises 21–26, let A and B be subsets of a universal set U and
suppose n(U) ⫽ 350, n(A) ⫽ 120, n(B) ⫽ 80, and n(A 傽 B) ⫽ 50.
Find the number of elements in each set.

21. n1A 傼 B2
23. n1Bc2
25. n1A 傽 Bc2

22. n1Ac2
24. n1Ac 傽 B2
26. n1Ac 傽 Bc2

In Exercises 27–30, evaluate each quantity.

27. C120, 182
29. C15, 32 ⭈ P14, 22

28. P19, 72
30. 4 ⭈ P15, 32 ⭈ C17, 42

31. Let E and F be two mutually exclusive events and suppose

32. Let  E and  F be  two  events  of  an  experiment  with  sample

b. P1E 傼 F2
d. P1E c 傽 Fc2

P1E2 ⫽ .4 and P1F2 ⫽ .2. Compute:
a. P1E 傽 F2
c. P1E c2
e. P1Ec 傼 Fc2
space S. Suppose P1E2 ⫽ .3, P1F2 ⫽ .2, and P1E 傽 F2 ⫽ .15.
a. P1E 傼 F2
b. P1Ec 傽 Fc2
c. P1Ec 傽 F2

33. A die is loaded, and it was determined that the probability
distribution associated with the experiment of casting the die
and observing which number falls uppermost is given by the
following:

Compute:

Simple
Event
{1}
{2}
{3}
{4}
{5}
{6}

Probability

.20
.12
.16
.18
.15
.19

a. What is the probability of the number being even?
b. What is the probability of the number being either a 1 

or a 6?

c. What is the probability of the number being less than 4?

34. An urn contains six red, five black, and four green balls. If
two balls are selected at random without replacement from
the urn, what is the probability that a red ball and a black
ball will be selected?

35. CREDIT CARD COMPARISONS A  comparison  of  five  major

credit cards showed that:

3 offered cash advances.

3 offered extended payments for all goods and services

purchased.

2 required an annual fee of less than $35.

2 offered both cash advances and extended payments.

1 offered extended payments and had an annual fee less

than $35.

No  card  had  an  annual  fee  less  than  $35  and  offered 

both cash advances and extended payments.

How  many  cards  had  an  annual  fee  less  than  $35  and
offered  cash  advances?  (Assume  that  every  card  had  at
least one of the three mentioned features.)

36. STUDENT SURVEYS The  Department  of  Foreign  Languages
of  a  liberal  arts  college  conducted  a  survey  of  its  recent
graduates to determine the foreign language courses they
had taken while undergraduates at the college. Of the 480
graduates:

200 had at least 1 year of Spanish.

178 had at least 1 year of French.

140 had at least 1 year of German.

33 had at least 1 year of Spanish and French.

24 had at least 1 year of Spanish and German.

18 had at least 1 year of French and German.

3 had at least 1 year of all three languages.

How many of the graduates had
a. At least 1 year of at least one of the three languages?
b. At least 1 year of exactly one of the three languages?
c. Less than 1 year of any of the three languages?

37. In  how  many  ways  can  six  different  compact  discs  be

arranged on a shelf?

38. In how many ways can three pictures be selected from a

group of six different pictures?

39. Find the number of distinguishable permutations that can

be formed from the letters of each word.
a. CINCINNATI

b. HONOLULU

40. How  many  three-digit  numbers  can  be  formed  from  the

numerals in the set {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} if
a. Repetition of digits is not allowed?
b. Repetition of digits is allowed?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

41. INVESTMENTS In a survey conducted by Helena, a financial

consultant, it was revealed that of her 400 clients:

300 own stocks.

180 own bonds.

160 own mutual funds.

110 own both stocks and bonds.

120 own both stocks and mutual funds.

90 own both bonds and mutual funds.

How  many  of  Helena’s  clients  own  stocks,  bonds,  and
mutual funds?

42. POKER From  a  standard  52-card  deck,  how  many  5-card

poker hands can be dealt consisting of:
a. Five clubs?

b. Three kings and one pair?

43. ELECTIONS In an election being held by the Associated Stu-
dents Organization, there are six candidates for president,
four for vice-president, five for secretary, and six for trea-
surer. How many different possible outcomes are there for
this election?

44. TEAM SELECTION There are eight seniors and six juniors in
the  Math  Club  at  Jefferson  High  School.  In  how  many
ways can a math team consisting of four seniors and two
juniors be selected from the members of the Math Club?

45. SEATING ARRANGEMENTS In how many ways can seven stu-
dents be assigned seats in a row containing seven desks if:
a. There are no restrictions?
b. Two  of  the  students  must  not  be  seated  next  to  each

other?

46. QUALITY CONTROL From a shipment of 60 CPUs, 5 of which

are defective, a sample of 4 CPUs is selected at random.
a. In how many different ways can the sample be selected?
b. How many samples contain 3 defective CPUs?
c. How many samples do not contain any defective CPUs?

47. RANDOM SAMPLES A sample of 4 balls is to be selected at
random from an urn containing 15 balls numbered 1 to 15.
If 6 balls are green, 5 are white, and 4 are black,
a. How many different samples can be selected?
b. How many samples can be selected that contain at least

1 white ball?

48. QUALITY CONTROL The quality-control department of Starr
Communications,  the  manufacturer  of  video-game  car-

REVIEW EXERCISES

471

tridges, has determined from records that 1.5% of the car-
tridges sold have video defects, 0.8% have audio defects,
and 0.4% have both audio and video defects. What is the
probability that a cartridge purchased by a customer:
a. Will have a video or audio defect?
b. Will not have a video or audio defect?

49. CONSUMER DECISIONS Olivia is contemplating buying a laser
printer. The probability that she will buy a printer manufac-
tured by Epson, Brother, Canon, and Hewlett-Packard is .23,
.18, .31, and .28, respectively. Find the probability that she
will buy a laser printer manufactured by:
a. Epson or Canon

b. Epson, Brother, or Canon

50. SALES OF PLASMA TVS The records of Ace Electronics show
that  of  the  plasma  TVs  sold  by  the  company,  26%  were
manufactured by Panasonic, 15.4% were manufactured by
LG, 13.7% were manufactured by Samsung, 13.3% were
manufactured by Philips, and 7.3% were manufactured by
Hitachi.  If  a  customer  chosen  at  random  purchases  a
plasma TV from Ace Electronics, what is the probability
that the set was manufactured by:
a. Panasonic, LG, Samsung, Philips, or Hitachi?
b. A company other than those mentioned in part (a)?

51. FIGHTING INFLATION In a survey of 2000 adults, 18 years old
and older, conducted in 2007, the following question was
asked: Is your family income keeping pace with the cost of
living? The results of the survey follow:

Answer
Respondents

Falling
behind

800

Staying

Increasing

even
880

faster
240

Don’t
know

80

According  to  the  survey,  what  percentage  of  the  people
polled said their family income is: 
a. At least keeping pace with the cost of living?
b. Falling behind the cost of living?
Source: Pew Research Center.

52. SALES OF DISASTER-RECOVERY SYSTEMS Jay  sells  disaster-
recovery  computer  systems  to  hedge  funds.  He  estimates
the probability of Hedge Fund A purchasing a system to be
.6 and that of Hedge Fund B purchasing a system to be .5.
He also estimates that the probability of both hedge funds
purchasing a system is .3. What is the probability that only
Hedge Fund A or only Hedge Fund B will purchase a sys-
tem?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

472

CHAPTER 7 SETS AND PROBABILITY

CHAPTER 7

Before Moving On . . .

1. Let U ⫽ {a, b, c, d, e, f, t}, A ⫽ {a, d, f, t}, B ⫽ {d, f, t}, and

C ⫽ {b, c, e, f }. Find:
a. A 傽 1B 傼 C2
1A 傽 C2 傼 1B 傼 C2

b.
c. Ac

2. In how many ways can four compact discs be selected from

six different compact discs?

3. There are six seniors and five juniors in the Chess Club at
Madison High School. In how many ways can a team con-
sisting of three seniors and two juniors be selected from the
members of the Chess Club?

4. Let S ⫽ {s1, s2, s3, s4, s5, s6} be the sample space associated
with an experiment having the following probability distri-
bution:

Outcome
Probability

s1
1
12

s2
2
12

s3
3
12

s4
2
12

s5
3
12

s6
1
12

Find the probability of the event A ⫽ {s1, s3, s6}.

5. A card is drawn from a well-shuffled 52-card deck. What
is the probability that the card drawn is a deuce or a face
card?

6. Let E and F be events of an experiment with sample space S.

Suppose P1E2 ⫽ .5, P1F2 ⫽ .6, and P1E 傽 F2 ⫽ .2. Com-
a. P1E 傼 F2

b. P1E 傽 Fc2

pute:

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8

ADDITIONAL TOPICS
IN PROBABILITY

Michael Poehlman/Getty Images

IN THIS CHAPTER, we develop additional techniques for

computing the probabilities of certain events, and we take a

look at descriptive statistics. We begin by looking at problems

involving large sample spaces. In Section 8.2, we consider the

effect that the occurrence of prior events has on the probability of

an event occurring, and in Section 8.3 we learn how to compute

the probabilities of certain events after the occurrence of an event.

Throughout our discussion, we will see how these techniques are

applied to many practical problems in fields as diverse as quality

control and medical research. In the rest of the chapter, we take a

glimpse at statistics, the branch of mathematics concerned with

the collection, analysis, and interpretation of data.

Which of two motels should a certain

private equity firm purchase? In

Example 4, page 518, we show how the

occupancy rate and the average daily

profit for each motel can be used to help

us determine which motel will generate

the higher daily profit.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

473

474

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

8.1 Use of Counting Techniques in Probability

Further Applications of Counting Techniques
As we have seen many times before, a problem in which the underlying sample space
has a small number of elements may be solved by first determining all such sample
points. However, for problems involving sample spaces with a large number of sam-
ple points, this approach is neither practical nor desirable.

In this section, we see how the counting techniques studied in Chapter 7 may be
employed to help us solve problems in which the associated sample spaces contain
large numbers of sample points. In particular, we restrict our attention to the study of
uniform  sample  spaces—that  is,  sample  spaces  in  which  the  outcomes  are  equally
likely. For such spaces, we have the following result:

Computing the Probability of an Event in a Uniform Sample Space
Let S be a uniform sample space, and let E be any event. Then

P1E2 ⫽ Number of outcomes in E

Number of outcomes in S

⫽

(1)

n1E2
n1S2

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 1 An unbiased coin is tossed six times. What is the probability that the
coin will land heads:
a. Exactly three times?
b. At most three times?
c. On the first and the last toss?

Solution

a. Each outcome of the experiment may be represented as a sequence of heads and

tails. Using the generalized multiplication principle, we see that the number of
outcomes of this experiment is given by 26, or 64. Let E denote the event that the
coin lands heads exactly three times. Since there are C(6, 3) ways this can occur,
we see that the required probability is

 P1E2 ⫽

 ⫽

n1E2
n1S2 ⫽
6 # 5 # 4
3 # 2

64

C16, 32

64

⫽

6!
3! 3!
64

S is a sample space of
the experiment.

⫽ 20
64

⫽ 5
16

⫽ .3125

b. Let F denote the event that the coin lands heads at most three times. Then n(F) is

given by the sum of the number of ways the coin lands heads zero times (no
heads!), the number of ways it lands heads exactly once, the number of ways it
lands heads exactly twice, and the number of ways it lands heads exactly three
times. That is,

 n1F 2 ⫽ C16, 02 ⫹ C16, 12 ⫹ C16, 22 ⫹ C16, 32

 ⫽ 6!
⫹ 6!
 ⫽ 1 ⫹ 6 ⫹ 6 # 5
0! 6!
1! 5!

2

⫹ 6!
⫹ 6 # 5 # 4
2! 4!
3 # 2

⫹ 6!
3! 3!

⫽ 42

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8.1 USE OF COUNTING TECHNIQUES IN PROBABILITY

475

Therefore, the required probability is

P1F2 ⫽

n1F2
n1S2 ⫽ 42

64

⫽ 21
32

⬇ .6563

c. Let F denote the event that the coin lands heads on the first and the last toss. Then

n(F) ⫽ 1 ⭈ 2 ⭈ 2 ⭈ 2 ⭈ 2 ⭈ 1 ⫽ 24, so the probability that this event occurs is

 P1F2 ⫽ 24
26
 ⫽ 1
22
 ⫽ 1
4

EXAMPLE 2 Two cards are selected at random (without replacement) from a well-
shuffled deck of 52 playing cards. What is the probability that:
a. They are both aces?

b. Neither of them is an ace?

Solution

a. The experiment consists of selecting 2 cards from a pack of 52 playing cards.

Since the order in which the cards are selected is immaterial, the sample points
are combinations of 52 cards taken 2 at a time. Now there are C(52, 2) ways of
selecting 52 cards taken 2 at a time, so the number of elements in the sample
space S is given by C(52, 2). Next, we observe that there are C(4, 2) ways of
selecting 2 aces from the 4 in the deck. Therefore, if E denotes the event that the
cards selected are both aces, then

 P1E2 ⫽

 ⫽

n1E2
n1S2
C14, 22
C152, 22 ⫽

⫽ 4 # 3

2

#

2

52 # 51

4!
2! 2!
52!
2! 50!

 ⫽ 1
221

⬇ .0045

b. Let F denote the event that neither of the two cards selected is an ace. Since there are

C(48, 2) ways of selecting two cards neither of which is an ace, we find that

 P1F2 ⫽

n1F2
n1S2 ⫽

C148, 22
C152, 22 ⫽

⫽ 48 # 47

2

#

2

52 # 51

48!
2! 46!
52!
2! 50!

 ⫽ 188
221

⬇ .8507

APPLIED EXAMPLE 3 Quality Control A bin in the hi-fi department of
Building 20, a bargain outlet, contains 100 blank DVDs, of which 10 are 
known to be defective. If a customer selects 6 of these DVDs at random, deter-
mine the probability:
a. That 2 of them are defective.
b. That at least 1 of them is defective.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

476

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

8

defective
DVDs

Sample
4

2

86

nondefective

DVDs

FIGURE 1
A sample of 6 DVDs selected from 
90 nondefective DVDs and 10 defective
DVDs

Solution

a. There are C(100, 6) ways of selecting a set of 6 DVDs from the 100, and

this gives n(S ), the number of outcomes in the sample space associated
with the experiment. Next, we observe that there are C(10, 2) ways of
selecting a set of 2 defective DVDs from the 10 defective DVDs and 
C(90, 4) ways of selecting a set of 4 nondefective DVDs from the 90 non-
defective DVDs (Figure 1). Thus, by the multiplication principle, there are
C(10, 2) ⭈ C(90, 4) ways of selecting 2 defective and 4 nondefective DVDs.
Therefore, the probability of selecting 6 DVDs of which 2 are defective is
given by

C110, 22 # C190, 42

 

C1100, 62

10!
2! 8!

 

90!
4! 86!

⫽

100!
6! 94!

# 90 # 89 # 88 # 87

4 # 3 # 2

#

6 # 5 # 4 # 3 # 2

100 # 99 # 98 # 97 # 96 # 95

 ⫽ 10 # 9

2
 ⬇ .096

b. Let E denote the event that none of the DVDs selected is defective. Then E c

gives the event that at least 1 of the DVDs is defective. By the rule of comple-
ments,

P1 E c2 ⫽ 1 ⫺ P1 E2

To compute P(E), we observe that there are C(90, 6) ways of selecting a set
of 6 DVDs that are nondefective. Therefore,

C190, 62
C1100, 62

 P1E2 ⫽
 P1Ec2 ⫽ 1 ⫺

C190, 62
C1100, 62

 ⫽ 1 ⫺

90!
6! 84!
100!
6! 94!

 ⬇ .4777

The Birthday Problem

 ⫽ 1 ⫺ 90 # 89 # 88 # 87 # 86 # 85

6 # 5 # 4 # 3 # 2

#

6 # 5 # 4 # 3 # 2

100 # 99 # 98 # 97 # 96 # 95

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 4 The Birthday Problem A group of five people is
selected at random. What is the probability that at least two of them have 

the same birthday?

Solution For simplicity, we assume that none of the five people was born on 
February 29 of a leap year. Since the five people were selected at random, we
also assume that each of them is equally likely to have any of the 365 days of a
year as his or her birthday. If we let A, B, C, D, and F represent the five people,

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

8.1 USE OF COUNTING TECHNIQUES IN PROBABILITY

477

then an outcome of the experiment may be represented by (a, b, c, d, f ), where
the dates a, b, c, d, and f give the birthdays of A, B, C, D, and F, respectively.

We first observe that since there are 365 possibilities for each of the dates a,

b, c, d, and f, the multiplication principle implies that there are

365
a

⭈

365
b

⭈

365

⭈

c

365
d

⭈

365

f

or 3655 outcomes of the experiment. Therefore,

n1 S2 ⫽ 3655

where S denotes the sample space of the experiment.

Next, let E denote the event that two or more of the five people have the same

birthday. It is now necessary to compute P(E). However, a direct computation of
P(E) is relatively difficult. It is much easier to compute P(Ec), where Ec is the
event that no two of the five people have the same birthday, and then use the 
relation

P1 E2 ⫽ 1 ⫺ P1 Ec2

To compute P(Ec), observe that there are 365 ways (corresponding to the 

365 dates) on which A’s birthday can occur, followed by 364 ways on which B’s
birthday could occur if B were not to have the same birthday as A, and so on.
Therefore, by the generalized multiplication principle,
363  ⭈
C’s

n1 Ec2 ⫽ 365  ⭈

364  ⭈
B’s

362  ⭈
D’s

361 
F’s

A’s

birthday

birthday

birthday

birthday

birthday

Thus,

 P1Ec2 ⫽

n1Ec2
n1S2
 ⫽ 365 # 364 # 363 # 362 # 361

3655

 P1E2 ⫽ 1 ⫺ P1Ec2

 ⫽ 1 ⫺ 365 # 364 # 363 # 362 # 361

3655

 ⬇ .0271

TABLE 1
Probability That at Least Two People 
in a Randomly Selected Group of r
People Have the Same Birthday
P(E)
r

5
10
15
20
22
23
25
30
40
50

.027
.117
.253
.411
.476
.507
.569
.706
.891
.970

We can extend the result obtained in Example 4 to the general case involving r
people. In fact, if E denotes the event that at least two of the r people have the same
birthday, an argument similar to that used in Example 4 leads to the result

P1E2 ⫽ 1 ⫺

365 # 364 # 363 # p # 1365 ⫺ r ⫹ 12

365r

By letting r take on the values 5, 10, 15, 20, . . . , 50, in turn, we obtain the probabil-
ities that at least 2 of 5, 10, 15, 20, . . . , 50 people, respectively, have the same birth-
day. These results are summarized in Table 1.

The results show that in a group of 23 randomly selected people, the chances are
greater than 50% that at least 2 of them will have the same birthday. In a group of 
50 people, it is an excellent bet that at least 2 people in the group will have the same
birthday.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

478

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

Explore & Discuss
During an episode of the Tonight Show, a talk show host related “The Birthday Problem” to
the audience—noting that in a group of 50 or more people, probabilists have calculated that
the probability of at least 2 people having the same birthday is very high. To illustrate this
point, he proceeded to conduct his own experiment. A person selected at random from the
audience was asked to state his birthday. The host then asked whether anyone in the audi-
ence had the same birthday. The response was negative. He repeated the experiment. Once
again, the response was negative. These results, observed the host, were contrary to expec-
tations. In a later episode of the show, the host explained why this experiment had been
improperly conducted. Explain why the host failed to illustrate the point he was trying to
make in the earlier episode.

8.1 Self-Check Exercises

1. Four  balls  are  selected  at  random  without  replacement
from an urn containing ten white balls and eight red balls.
What is the probability that all the chosen balls are white?

2. A box contains 20 microchips, of which 4 are substandard.
If 2 of the chips are taken from the box, what is the proba-
bility that they are both substandard?

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 8.1 can be found on 
page 480.

8.1 Concept Questions

1. What is the probability of an event E in a uniform sample

a. If S denotes the sample space of this experiment, what 

space S?

2. Suppose we want to find the probability that at least two
people in a group of six randomly selected people have the
same birthday.

is n(S)?

b. If E is the event that two or more of the six people in the
group have the same birthday, explain how you would
use P(E c) to determine P(E).

8.1 Exercises

In Exercises 1–4, an unbiased coin is tossed five times. Find the
probability of the given event.
1. The coin lands heads all five times.

2. The coin lands heads exactly once.

3. The coin lands heads at least once.

4. The coin lands heads more than once.

In  Exercises  5–8,  two  cards  are  selected  at  random  without  re-
placement  from  a  well-shuffled  deck  of  52  playing  cards.  Find
the probability of the given event.
5. A pair is drawn.

6. A pair is not drawn.

7. Two black cards are drawn.

8. Two cards of the same suit are drawn.

In Exercises 9–12, four balls are selected at random without re-
placement  from  an  urn  containing  three  white  balls  and  five
blue balls. Find the probability of the given event.
9. Two of the balls are white, and two are blue.

10. All of the balls are blue.

11. Exactly one of the balls is blue.

12. Two or three of the balls are white.

In  Exercises  13–16,  assume  that  the  probability  of  a  boy  being
born is the same as the probability of a girl being born. Find the
probability that a family with three children will have the given
composition.
13. Two boys and one girl

14. At least one girl

15. No girls

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

16. The two oldest children are girls.

17. An exam consists of ten true-or-false questions. If a student
guesses at every answer, what is the probability that he or
she will answer exactly six questions correctly?

18. PERSONNEL SELECTION Jacobs  &  Johnson,  an  accounting
firm, employs 14 accountants, of whom 8 are CPAs. If a
delegation of 3 accountants is randomly selected from the
firm  to  attend  a  conference,  what  is  the  probability  that 
3 CPAs will be selected?

19. QUALITY CONTROL Two light bulbs are selected at random
from a lot of 24, of which 4 are defective. What is the prob-
ability that:
a. Both of the light bulbs are defective?
b. At least 1 of the light bulbs is defective?

20. A  customer  at  Cavallaro’s  Fruit  Stand  picks  a  sample  of
3 oranges at random from a crate containing 60 oranges, of
which 4 are rotten. What is the probability that the sample
contains 1 or more rotten oranges?

21. QUALITY CONTROL A  shelf  in  the  Metro  Department  Store
contains  80  colored  ink  cartridges  for  a  popular  ink-jet
printer. Six of the cartridges are defective. If a customer se-
lects  2  cartridges  at  random  from  the  shelf,  what  is  the
probability that:
a. Both are defective?
b. At least 1 is defective?

22. QUALITY CONTROL Electronic baseball games manufactured
by  Tempco  Electronics  are  shipped  in  lots  of  24.  Before
shipping,  a  quality-control  inspector  randomly  selects  a
sample of 8 from each lot for testing. If the sample contains
any defective games, the entire lot is rejected. What is the
probability that a lot containing exactly 2 defective games
will still be shipped?

23. PERSONNEL SELECTION The  City  Transit  Authority  plans  to
hire  12  new  bus  drivers.  From  a  group  of  100  qualified
applicants,  of  whom  60  are  men  and  40  are  women,  12
names are to be selected by lot. Suppose that Mary Smith
and John Lewis are among the 100 qualified applicants.
a. What is the probability that Mary will be selected? That

both Mary and John will be selected?

b. If it is stipulated that an equal number of men and women
are to be selected (6 men from the group of 60 men and
6 women from the group of 40 women), what is the prob-
ability that Mary will be selected? That Mary and John
will be selected?

24. PUBLIC HOUSING The City Housing Authority has received
50  applications  from  qualified  applicants  for  eight  low-
income  apartments.  Three  of  the  apartments  are  on  the
north  side  of  town,  and  five  are  on  the  south  side.  If  the
apartments are to be assigned by means of a lottery, what
is the probability that:
a. A specific qualified applicant will be selected for one of

these apartments?

8.1 USE OF COUNTING TECHNIQUES IN PROBABILITY

479

b. Two  specific  qualified  applicants  will  be  selected  for

apartments on the same side of town?

25. A student studying for a vocabulary test knows the mean-
ings of 12 words from a list of 20 words. If the test contains 
10 words from the study list, what is the probability that at
least 8 of the words on the test are words that the student
knows?

26. DRIVING TESTS Four  different  written  driving  tests  are
administered  by  the  Motor  Vehicle  Department.  One  of
these four tests is selected at random for each applicant for
a driver’s license. If a group consisting of two women and
three men apply for a license, what is the probability that:
a. Exactly two of the five will take the same test?
b. The two women will take the same test?

27. BRAND SELECTION A druggist wishes to select three brands
of aspirin to sell in his store. He has five major brands to
choose  from:  A,  B,  C,  D,  and  E.  If  he  selects  the  three
brands  at  random,  what  is  the  probability  that  he  will
select:
a. Brand B?
b. Brands B and C?
c. At least one of the two brands B and C?

28. BLACKJACK In  the  game  of  blackjack,  a  2-card  hand  con-
sisting of an ace and a face card or a 10 is called a black-
jack.
a. If  a  player  is  dealt  2  cards  from  a  standard  deck  of 
52 well-shuffled cards, what is the probability that the
player will receive a blackjack?

b. If a player is dealt 2 cards from 2 well-shuffled standard
decks,  what  is  the  probability  that  the  player  will
receive a blackjack?

29. SLOT MACHINES Refer to Exercise 27, Section 7.3, in which
the “lucky dollar” slot machine was described. What is the
probability  that  the  three  “lucky  dollar”  symbols  will
appear in the window of the slot machine?

30. ROULETTE In 1959, a world record was set for the longest
run on an ungaffed (fair) roulette wheel at the El San Juan
Hotel in Puerto Rico. The number 10 appeared six times in
a  row.  What  is  the  probability  of  the  occurrence  of  this
event? (Assume that there are 38 equally likely outcomes
consisting of the numbers 1–36, 0, and 00.)

In the Numbers Game, a state lottery, four numbers are drawn
with replacement from an urn containing balls numbered 0–9,
inclusive.  In  Exercises  31–34,  find  the  probability  that  a  ticket
holder has the indicated winning ticket.
31. All four digits in exact order (the grand prize)

32. Two specified, consecutive digits in exact order (the first

two digits, the middle two digits, or the last two digits)

33. One digit (the first, second, third, or fourth digit)

34. Three digits in exact order

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

480

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

A  list  of  poker  hands,  ranked  in  order  from  the  highest  to  the
lowest,  is  shown  in  the  accompanying  table  along  with  a
description and example of each hand. Use the table to answer
Exercises 35–40.

Hand

Description

Example

Straight
flush

Four of
a kind

Full
house

Flush

Straight

Three
of a
kind

Two
pair

One
pair

5 cards in sequence
in the same suit

4 cards of the same
rank and any other 
card

3 of a kind and a 
pair

5 cards of the same
suit that are not
all in sequence

5 cards in sequence 
but not all of the
same suit

3 cards of the
same rank and 2
unmatched cards

2 cards of the same
rank and 2 cards 
of any other rank
with an unmatched
card

2 cards of the 
same rank and 3 
unmatched cards

4

K

7

J

5

2

7

K

A

K

3

5

10

2

3

K

K

3

9

3

6

J

Q

K

A

K

K

K

K

K

2

2

2

4

4

K

K

5

2

4

If  a  5-card  poker  hand  is  dealt  from  a  well-shuffled  deck  of  52
cards, what is the probability of being dealt the given hand?
35. A straight flush (Note that an ace may be played as either
a high or a low card in a straight sequence—that is, A, 2,
3,  4,  5  or  10,  J,  Q,  K,  A.  Hence,  there  are  ten  possible
sequences for a straight in one suit.)
36. A straight (but not a straight flush)
37. A flush (but not a straight flush)
38. Four of a kind
39. A full house
40. Two pairs
41. ZODIAC SIGNS There are 12 signs of the Zodiac: Aries, Tau-
rus,  Gemini,  Cancer,  Leo,  Virgo,  Libra,  Scorpio,  Sagit-
tarius,  Capricorn,  Aquarius,  and  Pisces.  Each  sign  corre-
sponds  to  a  different  calendar  period  of  approximately 
1 month. Assuming that a person is just as likely to be born
under one sign as another, what is the probability that in a
group of five people at least two of them:
a. Have the same sign?
b. Were born under the sign of Aries?

42. BIRTHDAY PROBLEM What is the probability that at least two
of  the  nine  justices  of  the  U.S.  Supreme  Court  have  the
same birthday?

43. BIRTHDAY PROBLEM Fifty  people  are  selected  at  random.
What is the probability that none of the people in this group
have the same birthday?

44. BIRTHDAY PROBLEM There  were  42  different  presidents  of
the  United  States  from  1789  through  2000.  What  is  the
probability that at least two of them had the same birthday?
Compare  your  calculation  with  the  facts  by  checking  an
almanac or some other source.

8.1 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. The  probability  that  all  four  balls  selected  are  white  is

2. The probability that both chips are substandard is given by

given by

The number of ways of selecting 4 white

balls from the 10 in the urn

The number of ways of selecting any
4 balls from the 18 balls in the urn

⫽

 ⫽

C110, 42
C118, 42

10!
4! 6!
18!
4! 14!

⫽ 10 # 9 # 8 # 7
4 # 3 # 2
⬇ .069

#

4 # 3 # 2

18 # 17 # 16 # 15

The number of ways of choosing any

2 of the 4 substandard chips

The number of ways of choosing any

2 of the 20 chips

C14, 22
C120, 22

⫽

 ⫽

4!
2! 2!
20!
2! 18!
#

⫽ 4 # 3
2
⬇ .032

2

20 # 19

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

8.2 Conditional Probability and Independent Events

8.2 CONDITIONAL PROBABILITY AND INDEPENDENT EVENTS

481

Conditional Probability
Suppose that three cities, A, B, and C, are vying to play host to the Summer Olympic
Games in 2020. If each city has the same chance of winning the right to host the Games,
then the probability of  City A hosting the Games is  . Now suppose City B decides to
pull  out  of  contention  because  of  fiscal  problems.  Then  it  would  seem  that  City  A’s
chances  of  playing  host  will  increase.  In  fact,  if  the  two  remaining  cities  have  equal
1
chances of winning, then the probability of City A playing host to the Games is  .
2

In general, the probability of an event is affected by the occurrence of other events
and/or by the knowledge of information relevant to the event. Basically, the injection
of  conditions  into  a  problem  modifies  the  underlying  sample  space  of  the  original
problem. This in turn leads to a change in the probability of the event.

1
3

EXAMPLE 1 Two cards are drawn without replacement from a well-shuffled deck
of 52 playing cards.
a. What is the probability that the first card drawn is an ace?
b. What is the probability that the second card drawn is an ace given that the first

card drawn was not an ace?

c. What is the probability that the second card drawn is an ace given that the first

card drawn was an ace?

Solution

a. The sample space here consists of 52 equally likely outcomes, 4 of which are
.
b. The first card having been drawn, there are 51 cards left in the deck. In other

aces. Therefore, the probability that the first card drawn is an ace is 

, or 

1
13

4
52

words, for the second phase of the experiment, we are working in a reduced sam-
ple space. If the first card drawn was not an ace, then this modified sample space
of 51 points contains 4 “favorable” outcomes (the 4 aces), so the probability that
the second card drawn is an ace is given by 

.

4
51

c. If the first card drawn was an ace, then there are 3 aces left in the deck of 51 

playing cards, so the probability that the second card drawn is an ace is 
given by 

, or 

.

3
51

1
17

Observe that in Example 1, the occurrence of the first event reduces the size of
the original sample space. The information concerning the first card drawn also leads
us to the consideration of modified sample spaces: In part (b), the deck contained four
aces, and in part (c), the deck contained three aces.

The probability found in part (b) or part (c) of Example 1 is known as a condi-
tional probability, since it is the probability of an event occurring given that another
event has already occurred. For example, in part (b), we computed the probability of
the event that the second card drawn is an ace given that the first card drawn was not
an ace. In general, given two events A and B of an experiment, under certain circum-
stances one may compute the probability of the event B given that the event A has
already occurred. This probability, denoted by P(B 兩 A), is called the conditional
probability of B given A.

A  formula  for  computing  the  conditional  probability  of  B given  A may  be 
discovered  with  the  aid  of  a  Venn  diagram.  Consider  an  experiment  with  a  uni-
form sample space S, and suppose that A and B are two events of the experiment
(Figure 2).

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

482

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

S

A

B

A

FIGURE 2

(a) Original sample space

(b) Reduced sample space A. The
shaded area is A 傽 B.

The condition that the event A has occurred tells us that the possible outcomes of
the experiment in the second phase are restricted to those outcomes (elements) in the
set A. In other words, we may work with the reduced sample space A instead of the
original sample space S in the experiment. Next we observe that, with respect to the
reduced sample space A, the outcomes in the event B are precisely those elements in
the set A 傽 B. Consequently, the conditional probability of B given A is

P1B 0 A2 ⫽ Number of elements in A 艚 B

Number of elements in A

 ⫽

n1A 艚 B2
n1A2

n(A) ⫽ 0

Dividing the numerator and the denominator by n(S), the number of elements in S, we
have

P1B 0 A2 ⫽

n1A 艚 B2
n1S2
n1A2
n1S2

which is equivalent to the following formula:

Conditional Probability of an Event
If A and B are events in an experiment and P(A) ⫽ 0, then the conditional prob-
ability that the event B will occur given that the event A has already occurred is

P1B 0 A2 ⫽

P1A 艚 B2
P1A2

(2)

EXAMPLE 2 A pair of fair dice is rolled. What is the probability that the sum of the
numbers falling uppermost is 7 if it is known that one of the numbers is a 5?

Solution Let A denote the event that the sum of the numbers falling uppermost is
7, and let B denote the event that one of the numbers is a 5. From the results of
Example 4, Section 7.5, we find that

A ⫽ {1 6, 12 , 1 5, 22 , 1 4, 32 , 1 3, 42 , 1 2, 52 , 1 1, 62}
B ⫽ {1 5, 12 , 1 5, 22 , 1 5, 32 , 1 5, 42 , 1 5, 52 , 1 5, 62 ,

1 1, 52 , 1 2, 52 , 1 3, 52 , 1 4, 52 , 1 6, 52}

A 傽 B ⫽ {1 5, 22 , 1 2, 52}

so

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

8.2 CONDITIONAL PROBABILITY AND INDEPENDENT EVENTS

483

(Figure 3). Since the dice are fair, each outcome of the experiment is equally likely;
therefore,

P1A 艚 B2 ⫽ 2

36

  and  P1B2 ⫽ 11

36

Recall that n(S ) ⫽ 36.

Thus, the probability that the sum of the numbers falling uppermost is 7 given that 
one of the numbers is a 5 is, by virtue of Equation (2),

FIGURE 3
A 傽 B ⫽ {(5, 2), (2, 5)}

P1A 0 B2 ⫽

2
36
11
36

⫽ 2
11

APPLIED EXAMPLE 3 Color Blindness In a test conducted by the U.S. Army,
it was found that of 1000 new recruits (600 men and 400 women), 50 of the 
men and 4 of the women were red-green color-blind. Given that a recruit selected at
random from this group is red-green color-blind, what is the probability that the
recruit is a male?

Solution Let C denote the event that a randomly selected subject is red-green
color-blind, and let M denote the event that the subject is a male recruit. Since 54
out of the 1000 subjects are color-blind, we have

P1C2 ⫽ 54

1000

⫽ .054

Therefore, by Equation (2), the probability that a subject is male given that the
subject is red-green color-blind is

 P1M 0 C2 ⫽

P1M 艚 C2
P1C2
⬇ .926

 ⫽ .05
.054

Explore & Discuss
Let A and B be events in an experiment, and suppose that P(A) ⫽ 0. In n trials, the event A
occurs m times, the event B occurs k times, and the events A and B occur together l times.

1. Explain why it makes good sense to call the ratio l>m the conditional relative frequency
2. Show that the relative frequencies l>m, m>n, and l>n satisfy the equation

of the event B given the event A.

l
m

⫽

l
n
m
n

3. Explain why the result of part 2 suggests that Equation (2),

P1B 0 A2 ⫽

P1A 艚 B2
P1A2

     3P1A2 ⫽ 04

is plausible.

In  certain  problems,  the  probability  of  an  event  B occurring  given  that  A has
occurred, written P(B 兩 A), is known, and we wish to find the probability of A and B

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

484

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

occurring. The solution to such a problem is facilitated by the use of the following 
formula:

Product Rule

P1A 艚 B2 ⫽ P1A2 # P1B 0 A2

(3)

This formula is obtained from Equation (2) by multiplying both sides of the equa-
tion by P(A). We illustrate the use of the Product Rule in the next several examples.

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 4 Seniors with Driver’s Licenses There are 300
seniors at Jefferson High School, of which 140 are males. It is known 
that 80% of the males and 60% of the females have their driver’s license. If a
student is selected at random from this senior class, what is the probability that
the student is:
a. A male and has a driver’s license?
b. A female and does not have a driver’s license?

Solution

a. Let M denote the event that the student is a male, and let D denote the event

that the student has a driver’s license. Then

P1M2 ⫽ 140

300

  and  P1D 0 M2 ⫽ .8

The event that the student selected at random is a male and has a driver’s 
license is M 傽 D, and by the Product Rule, the probability of this event oc-
curring is given by

 P1M 艚 D2 ⫽ P1M2 # P1D 0 M2
300b1.82 ⬇ .373

 ⫽ a 140

b. Let F denote the event that the student is a female. Then Dc is the event that

the student does not have a driver’s license. We have

P1F2 ⫽ 160

300

  and  P1Dc 0 F2 ⫽ 1 ⫺ .6 ⫽ .4

Note that we have used the rule of complements in the computation of 
P(Dc 兩 F). The event that the student selected at random is a female and does
not have a driver’s license is F 傽 Dc, so, by the Product Rule, the probability
of this event occurring is given by

 P 1F 艚 D  

c2 ⫽ P1F2 # P1Dc 0 F2
 ⫽ a 160
300b1.42 ⬇ .213

EXAMPLE 5 Two cards are drawn without replacement from a well-shuffled deck
of 52 playing cards. What is the probability that the first card drawn is an ace and
the second card drawn is a face card?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8.2 CONDITIONAL PROBABILITY AND INDEPENDENT EVENTS

485

Solution Let A denote the event that the first card drawn is an ace, and let F
denote the event that the second card drawn is a face card. Then 
the first card is drawn, there are 51 cards left in the deck, of which 12 are face cards.
Therefore, the probability of drawing a face card given that the first card drawn was
an ace is given by

P1A2 ⫽ 4

. After

52

P1F 0 A2 ⫽ 12

51

By the Product Rule, the probability that the first card drawn is an ace and the sec-
ond card drawn is a face card is given by

 P1A 艚 F2 ⫽ P1A2 # P1F 0 A2
⫽ 4
221

 ⫽ 4
52

# 12
51

⬇ .018

Explore & Discuss
The Product Rule can be extended to the case involving three or more events. For example,
if A, B, and C are three events in an experiment, then it can be shown that

P1A 艚 B 艚 C 2 ⫽ P1A 2 # P1B 0 A2 # P1C 0

 A 艚 B2

1. Explain the formula in words.
2. Suppose 3 cards are drawn without replacement from a well-shuffled deck of 52 playing

cards. Use the given formula to find the probability that the 3 cards are aces.

The Product Rule may be generalized to the case involving any finite number of
events. For example, in the case involving the three events  E,  F, and  G, it may be
shown that

P1 E 傽 F 傽 G2 ⫽ P1 E2 ⭈ P1 F 兩 E2 ⭈ P1 G 兩 E 傽 F2

(4)

More on Tree Diagrams
Equation  (4)  and  its  generalizations  may  be  used  to  help  us  solve  problems  that
involve  finite  stochastic  processes.  A  finite  stochastic  process is  an  experiment
consisting of a finite number of stages in which the outcomes and associated prob-
abilities of each stage depend on the outcomes and associated probabilities of the
preceding stages.

We can use tree diagrams to help us solve problems involving finite stochastic
processes. Consider, for example, the experiment consisting of drawing 2 cards with-
out replacement from a well-shuffled deck of 52 playing cards. What is the probabil-
ity that the second card drawn is a face card?

We  may  think  of  this  experiment  as  a  stochastic  process  with  two  stages.  The
events associated with the first stage are F, that the card drawn is a face card, and Fc,
that the card drawn is not a face card. Since there are 12 face cards, we have

P1F2 ⫽ 12

52

  and  P1F c2 ⫽ 1 ⫺ 12

52

⫽ 40
52

The outcomes of this trial, together with the associated probabilities, may be repre-
sented along two branches of a tree diagram as shown in Figure 4.

In the second trial, we again have two events: G, that the card drawn is a face card,
and  Gc,  that  the  card  drawn  is  not  a  face  card.  But  the  outcome  of  the  second  trial

)   =   1

2

5

2

P ( F

P(Fc) = 40

52

F

Fc

FIGURE 4
F is the event that a face card is drawn.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

486

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

depends on the outcome of the first trial. For example, if the first card drawn was a face
card, then the event G that the second card drawn is a face card has probability given
by the conditional probability P(G 兩 F ). Since the occurrence of a face card in the first
draw leaves 11 face cards in a deck of 51 cards for the second draw, we see that

P1G 0 F2 ⫽ 11

51

The probability of drawing a
face card given that a face
card has already been drawn

Similarly, the occurrence of a face card in the first draw leaves 40 that are other than
face cards in a deck of 51 cards for the second draw. Therefore, the probability of
drawing a card other than a face card in the second draw given that the first card drawn
is a face card is

P1G 

c 0 F2 ⫽ 40

51

Using these results, we extend the tree diagram of Figure 4 by displaying another two
branches of the tree growing from its upper branch (Figure 5).

To complete the tree diagram, we compute P(G 兩 F c) and P(Gc 兩 F c), the condi-
tional probabilities that the second card drawn is a face card and other than a face card,
respectively, given that the first card drawn is not a face card. We find that

)   =   1

1

5

1

G

P ( G |  F

P(Gc | F) = 40

51

G c

)   =   1

2

5

2

P ( F

P(Fc) = 40

52

F

F c

FIGURE 5
G is the event that the second card drawn
is a face card.

  =   1

1

5

1

G

P ( G |  F )

P1G 0

 F c2 ⫽ 12

51

  and  P1G c 0 F c2 ⫽ 39

51

)   =  1

2

5

2

P ( F

F

P(Fc) = 40

52

Fc

P(Gc | F) = 40
  F c )   =   1 2
5 1

51

|

P ( G 

P(Gc | Fc) = 39

51

Gc

G

Gc

FIGURE 6
Tree diagram showing the two trials of
the experiment

This  leads  to  the  completion  of  the  tree  diagram,  shown  in  Figure  6,  in  which  the
branches of the tree that lead to the two outcomes of interest have been highlighted.
Having constructed the tree diagram associated with the problem, we are now in a
position to answer the question posed earlier: What is the probability of the second card
being a face card? Observe that Figure 6 shows the two ways in which a face card may
result in the second draw—namely, the two Gs on the extreme right of the diagram.

Now, by the Product Rule, the probability that the second card drawn is a face
card and the first card drawn is a face card (this is represented by the upper branch) is

P1G 艚 F 2 ⫽ P1F 2 # P1G 0 F 2

P1G 艚 F 

c2 ⫽ P1F 

c2 # P1G 0 F 

c2

Similarly, the probability that the second card drawn is a face card and the first card
drawn is other than a face card (this corresponds to the other branch) is

Observe that each of these probabilities is obtained by taking the product of the
probabilities  appearing  on  the  respective  branches.  Since  G 傽 F and  G 傽 F c are
mutually exclusive events (why?), the probability that the second card drawn is a face
card is given by

P1G 艚 F2 ⫹ P1G 艚 F 

c2 ⫽ P1F2 # P1G 0 F2 ⫹ P1F 

c2 # P1G 0 Fc2

or, upon replacing the probabilities on the right of the expression by their numerical
values,

 P1G 艚 F2 ⫹ P1G 艚 F 

c2 ⫽ 12
52
 ⫽ 3
13

# 11
51

⫹ 40
52

# 12
51

APPLIED EXAMPLE 6 Quality Control The panels for the Pulsar 32-inch 
widescreen LCD HDTVs are manufactured in three locations and then 

shipped to the main plant of Vista Vision for final assembly. Plants A, B, and C
supply 50%, 30%, and 20%, respectively, of the panels used by the company.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

8.2 CONDITIONAL PROBABILITY AND INDEPENDENT EVENTS

487

The quality-control department of the company has determined that 1% of the
panels produced by Plant A are defective, whereas 2% of the panels produced by
Plants B and C are defective. What is the probability that a randomly selected
Pulsar 32-inch HDTV will have a defective panel?

Solution Let A, B, and C denote the events that the HDTV chosen has a panel
manufactured in Plant A, Plant B, and Plant C, respectively. Also, let D denote
the event that a HDTV has a defective panel. Using the given information, we
draw the tree diagram shown in Figure 7. (The events that result in a HDTV with
a defective panel being selected are circled.) Taking the product of the probabili-
ties along each branch leading to such an event and then adding them, we obtain
the probability that a HDTV chosen at random has a defective panel. Thus, the
required probability is given by

 1.521.012 ⫹ 1.321.022 ⫹ 1.221.022 ⫽ .005 ⫹ .006 ⫹ .004

 ⫽ .015

.5

.3

.2

Plant

A

B

C

. 0 1

.99

. 0 2

.98

. 0 2

.98

D

Dc

D

Dc

D

c

D

FIGURE 7
Tree diagram showing the probabilities of
producing defective panels at each plant

APPLIED EXAMPLE 7 Quality Control A box contains eight 9-volt batter-
ies, of which two are known to be defective. The batteries are selected 

one at a time without replacement and tested until a nondefective one is found.
What is the probability that the number of batteries tested is (a) One? (b) Two?
(c) Three?

2
8

Solution We may view this experiment as a multistage process with up to 
three stages. In the first stage, a battery is selected with a probability of  of being
nondefective and a probability of  of being defective. If the battery selected is
good, the experiment is terminated. Otherwise, a second battery is selected with
probability of  and  , respectively, of being nondefective and defective. If the
second battery selected is good, the experiment is terminated. Otherwise, a third
battery is selected with probability of 1 and 0, respectively, of its being nondefec-
tive and defective. The tree diagram associated with this experiment is shown in
Figure 8, where N denotes the event that the battery selected is nondefective and
D denotes the event that the battery selected is defective.

6
8

6
7

1
7

FIGURE 8
In this experiment, batteries are selected
until a nondefective one is found.

6
8

2
8

N

D

6
7

1
7

N

D

N

1

With the aid of the tree diagram, we see that (a) the probability that only one

battery is selected is  ⫽ , (b) the probability that two batteries are selected is 12
8216
72,

, and (c) the probability that three batteries are selected is 

or 

6
8

3
4

3
14

8211
12
72112 ⫽ 1

28

.

Independent Events
Let’s return to the experiment of drawing 2 cards in succession without replacement
from  a  well-shuffled  deck  of  52  playing  cards  as  considered  in  Example  5.  Let  E
denote the event that the first card drawn is not a face card, and let F denote the event
that the second card drawn is a face card. Intuitively, it is clear that the events E and
F are not independent of each other, because whether or not the first card drawn is a
face card affects the likelihood that the second card drawn is a face card.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

488

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

Next, let’s consider the experiment of tossing a coin twice and observing the out-
comes:  If  H  denotes  the  event  that  the  first  toss  produces  heads  and  T  denotes  the
event that the second toss produces tails, then it is intuitively clear that H and T are
independent of each other because the outcome of the first toss does not affect the out-
come of the second.

In general, two events A and B are independent if the outcome of one does not

affect the outcome of the other. Thus, we have

Independent Events
If A and B are independent events, then

P1A 0 B2 ⫽ P1A2  and  P1B 0 A2 ⫽ P1B2

Using  the  Product  Rule,  we  can  find  a  simple  test  to  determine  the  indepen-
dence of two events. Suppose that A and B are independent and that P(A) ⫽ 0 and 
P(B) ⫽ 0. Then

P1B 0 A2 ⫽ P1B2

Thus, by the Product Rule, we have

P1A 艚 B2 ⫽ P1A2 # P1B 0 A2 ⫽ P1A2 # P1B2

Conversely, if this equation holds, then it can be seen that P(B 兩 A) ⫽ P(B); that is, A
and B are independent. Accordingly, we have the following test for the independence
of two events:

Test for the Independence of Two Events
Two events A and B are independent if and only if
P(A 傽 B) ⫽ P(A) ⭈ P(B)

(5)

Do not confuse independent events with mutually exclusive events. The former
pertains  to  how  the  occurrence  of  one  event  affects  the  occurrence  of  another
event, whereas the latter pertains to the question of whether the events can occur
at the same time.

EXAMPLE 8 Consider the experiment consisting of tossing a fair coin twice and
observing the outcomes. Show that the event of heads on the first toss and the event
of tails on the second toss are independent events.

Solution Let A denote the event that the outcome of the first toss is a head, and let
B denote the event that the outcome of the second toss is a tail. The sample space of
the experiment is

so 

Next, we compute

S ⫽ 51 HH2 , 1 HT2 , 1 TH2 , 1 TT26
A ⫽ 51 HH2 , 1 HT26
B ⫽ 51 HT2 , 1 TT26

A 傽 B ⫽ 51 HT26

P1A 艚 B2 ⫽ 1

4

    P1A2 ⫽ 1

2

    P1B2 ⫽ 1

2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8.2 CONDITIONAL PROBABILITY AND INDEPENDENT EVENTS

489

and observe that Equation (5) is satisfied in this case. Hence, A and B are indepen-
dent events, as we set out to show.

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 9 Medical Surveys A survey conducted by an indepen-
dent agency for the National Lung Society found that of 2000 women, 

680 were heavy smokers and 50 had emphysema. Of those who had emphysema,
42 were also heavy smokers. Using the data in this survey, determine whether the
events “being a heavy smoker” and “having emphysema” are independent events.

Solution Let A denote the event that a woman chosen at random in this survey
is a heavy smoker, and let B denote the event that a woman chosen at random in
this survey has emphysema. Then the probability that a woman is a heavy smoker
and has emphysema is given by

P1A 艚 B2 ⫽ 42

2000

⫽ .021

Next,

so

P1A2 ⫽ 680

2000

⫽ .34  and  P1B2 ⫽ 50
P1A2 # P1B2 ⫽ 1.3421.0252 ⫽ .0085

2000

⫽ .025

Since P(A 傽 B) ⫽ P(A) ⭈ P(B), we conclude that A and B are not independent
events.

The  solution  of  many  practical  problems  involves  more  than  two  independent

events. In such cases, we use the following result.

Explore & Discuss
Let E and F be independent
events in a sample space S. Are
E c and Fc independent?

Independence of More Than Two Events
If E1, E2, . . . , En are independent events, then

P1 E1 傽 E2 傽 ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ 傽 En2 ⫽ P1 E1) ⭈ P1 E22 ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ P1 En2

(6)

Formula (6) states that the probability of the simultaneous occurrence of n indepen-
dent events is equal to the product of the probabilities of the n events.

It is important to note that the mere requirement that the n events E1, E2, . . . , En
satisfy Formula (6) is not sufficient to guarantee that the n events are indeed inde-
pendent. However, a criterion does exist for determining the independence of n
events and may be found in more advanced texts on probability.

EXAMPLE 10 It is known that the three events A, B, and C are independent and that
P(A) ⫽ .2, P(B) ⫽ .4, and P(C) ⫽ .5. Compute:
a. P1 A 傽 B2

b. P1 A 傽 B 傽 C2

Solution Using Formulas (5) and (6), we find

a. P1 A 傽 B2 ⫽ P1 A2 ⭈ P1 B2
⫽ 1 .221.42 ⫽ .08
b. P1 A 傽 B 傽 C2 ⫽ P1 A2 ⭈ P1 B2 ⭈ P1 C2
⫽ 1 .221.421.52 ⫽ .04

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

490

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

APPLIED EXAMPLE 11 Quality Control The Acrosonic model F loud-
speaker system has four loudspeaker components: a woofer, a mid-

range, a tweeter, and an electrical crossover. The quality-control manager of
Acrosonic has determined that on the average, 1% of the woofers, 0.8% of the
midranges, and 0.5% of the tweeters are defective, while 1.5% of the electrical
crossovers are defective. Determine the probability that a loudspeaker system
selected at random as it comes off the assembly line (and before final inspec-
tion) is not defective. Assume that the defects in the manufacturing of the
components are unrelated.

Solution Let A, B, C, and D denote, respectively, the events that the woofer, the
midrange, the tweeter, and the electrical crossover are defective. Then

and the probabilities of the corresponding complementary events are

P1 A2 ⫽ .01
P1 Ac2 ⫽ .99

P1 B2 ⫽ .008
P1 Bc) ⫽ .992

P1 C2 ⫽ .005
P1 Cc2 ⫽ .995

P1 D2 ⫽ .015
P1 Dc2 ⫽ .985

The event that a loudspeaker system selected at random is not defective is given
by Ac 傽 Bc 傽 C c 傽 Dc. Because the events A, B, C, and D (and therefore also Ac,
Bc, C c, and Dc) are assumed to be independent, we find that the required proba-
bility is given by

 P1Ac 艚 Bc 艚 Cc 艚 Dc2 ⫽ P1Ac2 # P1B 

c2 # P1Cc2 # P1Dc2

 ⫽ 1.9921.99221.99521.9852
 ⬇ .96

8.2 Self-Check Exercises

1. Let A and B be events in a sample space S such that

P1 A2 ⫽ .4, P1 B2 ⫽ .8, and P1 A 傽 B2 ⫽ .3. Find:
a. P1 A 兩 B2

b. P1 B 兩 A2

2. According to a survey cited in Newsweek, 29.7% of mar-
ried survey respondents who married between the ages of
20  and  22  (inclusive),  26.9%  of  those  who  married
between the ages of 23 and 27, and 45.1% of those who
married at age 28 or older said that “their marriage was less

8.2 Concept Questions

than ‘very happy.’ ” Suppose that a survey respondent from
each of the three age groups was selected at random. What
is the probability that all three respondents said that their
marriage was “less than very happy”?
Source: Marc Bain, Newsweek.

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 8.2 can be found on 
page 494.

1. What is conditional probability? Illustrate the concept with

an example.

2. If A and B are events in an experiment and P(A) ⫽ 0, then

what is the formula for computing P(B 兩 A)?

3. If A and B are events in an experiment and the conditional
probability P(B 兩 A) is known, give the formula that can be

used  to  compute  the  probability  of  the  event  that  both  A
and B will occur.

4. a. What  is  the  test  for  determining  the  independence  of

two events?

b. What  is  the  difference  between  mutually  exclusive

events and independent events?

8.2 Exercises

1. Let A and B be two events in a sample space S such that 

P1 A2 ⫽ .6, P1 B2 ⫽ .5, and P1 A 傽 B2 ⫽ .3. Find:
a. P1 A 兩 B2

b. P1 B 兩 A2

2. Let A and B be two events in a sample space S such that 

P1 A2 ⫽ .4, P1 B2 ⫽ .6, and P1 A 傽 B2 ⫽ .3. Find:
a. P1 A 兩 B2

b. P1 B 兩 A2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

3. Let A and B be two events in a sample space S such that 

4. Let A and B be the events described in Exercise 1. Find:

P1 A2 ⫽ .6 and P1 B 兩 A2 ⫽ .5. Find P1 A 傽 B2.
a. P1 A 兩 Bc2

b. P1 B 兩 Ac2

Hint: (A 傽 Bc) 傼 (A 傽 B) ⫽ A

In Exercises 5–8, determine whether the events A and B are inde-
pendent.

5. P1 A2 ⫽ .3, P1 B2 ⫽ .6, P1 A 傽 B2 ⫽ .2
6. P1 A2 ⫽ .6, P1 B2 ⫽ .8, P1 A 傽 B2 ⫽ .2
7. P1 A2 ⫽ .5, P1 B2 ⫽ .7, P1 A 傼 B2 ⫽ .85
8. P1 Ac2 ⫽ .3, P1 Bc2 ⫽ .4, P1 A 傽 B2 ⫽ .42
9. If A and B are independent events, P1 A2 ⫽ .5, and 

P1 B2 ⫽ .6, find:
a. P1 A 傽 B2
c. P1 A 兩 B2
P1 B2 ⫽ .45, find:
a. P1 A 傽 B2
c. P1 A 兩 B2

b. P1 A 傼 B2
d. P1 Ac 傼 B c2

b. P1 A 傼 B2
d. P1 Ac 傼 B c2

10. If A and B are independent events, P1 A2 ⫽ .35, and 

11. The accompanying tree diagram represents an experiment

consisting of two trials. Use the diagram to find:

a. P1A2
b. P1E 兩 A2
c. P1A 傽 E2
d. P1E2
e. Does P1A 傽 E2 ⫽ P1A2 ⭈ P1E2?

f. Are A and E independent events?

. 5

.5

A

B

. 4

.6

. 3

.7

E

Ec

E

Ec

12. The accompanying tree diagram represents an experiment

consisting of two trials. Use the diagram to find:

a. P1A2
b. P1E 兩 A2
c. P1A 傽 E2
d. P1E2
e. Does P1A 傽 E2 ⫽ P1A2 ⭈ P1E2?

f. Are A and E independent events?

. 4

.4

.2

A

B

C

. 5

.5

. 3

.7

. 4

.6

E

Ec
E

Ec

E

Ec

8.2 CONDITIONAL PROBABILITY AND INDEPENDENT EVENTS

491

13. An experiment consists of two independent trials. The out-
comes of the first trial are A and B with probabilities of occur-
ring equal to .4 and .6. There are also two outcomes, C and
D, in the second trial with probabilities of .3 and .7. Draw a
tree diagram representing this experiment, and use it to find:

a. P1A2
b. P1C 兩 A2
d. P1C2
c. P1A 傽 C2
e. Does P1A 傽 C2 ⫽ P1A2 ⭈ P1C2?

f. Are A and C independent events?

14. An experiment consists of two independent trials. The out-
comes of the first trial are A, B, and C, with probabilities of
occurring  equal  to  .2,  .5,  and  .3,  respectively.  The  out-
comes of the second trial are E and F, with probabilities of
occurring  equal  to  .6  and  .4.  Draw  a  tree  diagram  repre-
senting this experiment. Use this diagram to find:

a. P1B2
b. P1F 兩 B2
d. P1F2
c. P1B 傽 F2
e. Does P1B 傽 F2 ⫽ P1B2 ⭈ P1F2?

f. Are B and F independent events?

15. A pair of fair dice is rolled. Let E denote the event that the
number falling uppermost on the first die is 5, and let F de-
note the event that the sum of the numbers falling upper-
most is 10.

a. Compute P1F2.
c. Compute P1F 兩 E2.

b. Compute P1E 傽 F2.
d. Compute P1E2.

e. Are E and F independent events?

16. A pair of fair dice is rolled. Let E denote the event that the
number falling uppermost on the first die is 4, and let F de-
note the event that the sum of the numbers falling upper-
most is 6.

a. Compute P1F2.
c. Compute P1F 兩 E2.

b. Compute P1E 傽 F2.
d. Compute P1E2.

e. Are E and F independent events?

17. A pair of fair dice is rolled. What is the probability that the
sum of the numbers falling uppermost is less than 9, given
that at least one of the numbers is a 6?

18. A pair of fair dice is rolled. What is the probability that
the number landing uppermost on the first die is a 4 if it
is known that the sum of the numbers landing uppermost 
is 7?

19. A pair of fair dice is rolled. Let E denote the event that the
number landing uppermost on the first die is a 3, and let F
denote  the  event  that  the  sum  of  the  numbers  landing
uppermost is 7. Determine whether E and F are indepen-
dent events.

20. A pair of fair dice is rolled. Let E denote the event that the
number landing uppermost on the first die is a 3, and let F
denote  the  event  that  the  sum  of  the  numbers  landing
uppermost is 6. Determine whether E and F are indepen-
dent events.

21. A card is drawn from a well-shuffled deck of 52 playing
cards. Let E denote the event that the card drawn is black
and let F denote the event that the card drawn is a spade.
Determine whether E and F are independent events. Give
an intuitive explanation for your answer.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

492

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

22. A card is drawn from a well-shuffled deck of 52 playing
cards. Let E denote the event that the card drawn is an ace
and let F denote the event that the card drawn is a diamond.
Determine whether E and F are independent events. Give
an intuitive explanation for your answer.

23. BATTERY LIFE The probability that a battery will last 10 hr
or more is .80, and the probability that it will last 15 hr or
more is .15. Given that a battery has lasted 10 hr, find the
probability that it will last 15 hr or more.

24. Two  cards  are  drawn  without  replacement  from  a  well-

shuffled deck of 52 playing cards.
a. What  is  the  probability  that  the  first  card  drawn  is  a

heart?

b. What is the probability that the second card drawn is a

heart if the first card drawn was not a heart?

c. What is the probability that the second card drawn is a

heart if the first card drawn was a heart?

25. Five black balls and four white balls are placed in an urn.
Two balls are then drawn in succession. What is the prob-
ability that the second ball drawn is a white ball if
a. The second ball is drawn without replacing the first?
b. The first ball is replaced before the second is drawn?

26. AUDITING TAX RETURNS A tax specialist has estimated that
the probability that a tax return selected at random will be
audited is .02. Furthermore, he estimates that the probabil-
ity  that  an  audited  return  will  result  in  additional  assess-
ments being levied on the taxpayer is .60. What is the prob-
ability  that  a  tax  return  selected  at  random  will  result  in
additional assessments being levied on the taxpayer?
1
7

27. STUDENT ENROLLMENT At a certain medical school,  of the
students  are  from  a  minority  group.  Of  the  students  who
belong to a minority group,  are black.
a. What is the probability that a student selected at random

1
3

from this medical school is black?

b. What is the probability that a student selected at random
from this medical school is black if it is known that the
student is a member of a minority group?

28. EDUCATIONAL LEVEL OF VOTERS In a survey of 1000 eligible
voters selected at random, it was found that 80 had a college
degree. Additionally, it was found that 80% of those who
had a college degree voted in the last presidential election,
whereas  55%  of  the  people  who  did  not  have  a  college
degree voted in the last presidential election. Assuming that
the poll is representative of all eligible voters, find the prob-
ability that an eligible voter selected at random:
a. Had a college degree and voted in the last presidential

election.

b. Did not have a college degree and did not vote in the

last presidential election.

c. Voted in the last presidential election.
d. Did not vote in the last presidential election.

29. The probability that Sandy takes her daughter Olivia to the
supermarket on Friday is .6. If  Sandy does bring Olivia to
the  supermarket  on  Friday,  the  probability  that  she  buys
Olivia a popsicle is .8. What is the probability that Sandy
takes Olivia to the supermarket on Friday and buys her a
popsicle?

30. Three  cards  are  drawn  without  replacement  from  a  well-
shuffled deck of 52 playing cards. What is the probability
that the third card drawn is a diamond?

31. SELLING A CAR Jack has decided to advertise the sale of his
car  by  placing  flyers  in  the  student  union  and  the  dining
hall of the college. He estimates that there is a probability
of 0.3 that a potential buyer will read the advertisement and
that, if it is read, the probability that the reader will buy his
car will be 0.2. Using these estimates, find the probability
that the person who reads the ad will buy Jack’s car.

32. WINNING BIDS Brian, a landscape architect, submitted a bid
on each of three home landscaping projects. He estimates
that  the  probabilities  of  winning  the  bid  on  Project  A, 
Project B, and Project C are 0.7, 0.6, and 0.5, respectively.
Also, the probability of winning a bid on one of the three
projects is independent of winning or losing the bids on the
other two projects. Find the probability that Brian will:
a. Win all three of the bids.
b. Win exactly two of the bids.
c. Win exactly one bid.

33. FAMILY COMPOSITION In  a  three-child  family,  what  is  the
probability  that  all  three  children  are  girls  given  that  at
least one of the children is a girl? (Assume that the proba-
bility of a boy being born is the same as the probability of
a girl being born.)

34. A coin is tossed three times. What is the probability that

the coin will land heads:
a. At least twice?
b. On the second toss, given that heads were thrown on the

first toss?

c. On  the  third  toss,  given  that  tails  were  thrown  on  the

first toss?

35. CAR THEFT Figures obtained from a city’s police department
seem  to  indicate  that  of  all  motor  vehicles  reported  as
stolen,  64%  were  stolen  by  professionals,  whereas  36%
were  stolen  by  amateurs  (primarily  for  joy  rides).  Of  the
vehicles  presumed  stolen  by  professionals,  24%  were
recovered within 48 hr, 16% were recovered after 48 hr, and
60% were never recovered. Of the vehicles presumed stolen
by amateurs, 38% were recovered within 48 hr, 58% were
recovered after 48 hr, and 4% were never recovered.
a. Draw a tree diagram representing these data.
b. What is the probability that a vehicle stolen by a pro-

fessional in this city will be recovered within 48 hr?

c. What is the probability that a vehicle stolen in this city

will never be recovered?

36. QUALITY CONTROL An  automobile  manufacturer  obtains  the
microprocessors  used  to  regulate  fuel  consumption  in  its
automobiles from three microelectronic firms: A, B, and C.
The  quality-control  department  of  the  company  has  deter-
mined that 1% of the microprocessors produced by Firm A
are defective, 2% of those produced by Firm B are defective,
and 1.5% of those produced by Firm C are defective. Firms
A, B, and C supply 45%, 25%, and 30%, respectively, of the
microprocessors used by the company. What is the probabil-
ity that a randomly selected automobile manufactured by the
company will have a defective microprocessor?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

37. COLLEGE ADMISSIONS The  admissions  office  of  a  private
university  released  the  following  admission  data  for  the
preceding academic year: From a pool of 3900 male appli-
cants,  40%  were  accepted  by  the  university,  and  40%  of
these subsequently enrolled. Additionally, from a pool of
3600 female applicants, 45% were accepted by the univer-
sity, and 40% of these subsequently enrolled. What is the
probability that:
a. A male applicant will be accepted by and subsequently

will enroll in the university?

b. A student who applies for admissions will be accepted

by the university?

c. A student who applies for admission will be accepted by

the university and subsequently will enroll?

the  housing 

38. HOUSING LOANS The chief loan officer of La Crosse Home
Mortgage  Company  summarized 
loans
extended  by  the  company  in  2010  according  to  type  and
term of the loan. Her list shows that 70% of the loans were
fixed-rate mortgages (F ), 25% were adjustable-rate mort-
gages  (A),  and  5%  belong  to  some  other  category  (O)
(mostly second trust-deed loans and loans extended under
the graduated payment plan). Of the fixed-rate mortgages,
80% were 30-year loans and 20% were 15-year loans; of
the adjustable-rate mortgages, 40% were 30-year loans and
60%  were  15-year  loans;  finally,  of  the  other  loans
extended,  30%  were  20-year  loans,  60%  were  10-year
loans, and 10% were for a term of 5 years or less.
a. Draw a tree diagram representing these data.
b. What is the probability that a home loan extended by
La Crosse has an adjustable rate and is for a term of
15 years?

c. What is the probability that a home loan extended by La

Crosse is for a term of 15 years?

39. QUALITY CONTROL It is estimated that 0.80% of a large con-

signment of eggs in a certain supermarket is broken.
a. What is the probability that a customer who randomly
selects a dozen of these eggs receives at least one bro-
ken egg?

b. What  is  the  probability  that  a  customer  who  selects
these eggs at random will have to check three cartons
before finding a carton without any broken eggs? (Each
carton contains a dozen eggs.)

40. QUALITY CONTROL A box contains two defective Christmas
tree  lights  that  have  been  inadvertently  mixed  with  eight
nondefective lights. If the lights are selected one at a time
without replacement and tested until both defective lights
are found, what is the probability that both defective lights
will be found after exactly three trials?

41. EMPLOYEE EDUCATION AND INCOME The  personnel  depart-
ment of Franklin National Life Insurance Company com-
piled  the  accompanying  data  regarding  the  income  and
education of its employees:

Income

$60,000 or Below

Income

Above $60,000

Noncollege Graduate
College Graduate

2040
400

840
720

8.2 CONDITIONAL PROBABILITY AND INDEPENDENT EVENTS

493

Let A be the event that a randomly chosen employee has a
college  degree,  and  let  B be  the  event  that  the  chosen
employee’s income is more than $60,000.
a. Find  each  of  the  following  probabilities:  P(A),  P(B), 

P(A 傽 B), P(B 兩 A), and P(B 兩 Ac).

b. Are the events A and B independent events?

42. STUDENT FINANCIAL AID The  accompanying  data  were 
obtained  from  the  financial  aid  office  of  a  certain  uni-
versity:

Receiving
Financial

Aid
4,222
1,879
6,101

Undergraduates
Graduates
Total

Not

Receiving
Financial

Aid
3,898
731
4,629

Total
8,120
2,610
10,730

Let A be the event that a student selected at random from
this university is an undergraduate student, and let B be the
event that a student selected at random is receiving finan-
cial aid.
a. Find  each  of  the  following  probabilities:  P(A),  P(B), 

P(A 傽 B), P(B 兩 A), and P(B 兩 Ac).

b. Are the events A and B independent events?

43. MEDICAL RESEARCH A nationwide survey conducted by the
National  Cancer  Society  revealed  the  following  informa-
tion. Of 10,000 people surveyed, 3200 were “heavy coffee
drinkers,”  and  160  had  cancer  of  the  pancreas.  Of  those
who  had  cancer  of  the  pancreas,  132  were  heavy  coffee
drinkers. Using the data in this survey, determine whether
the events “being a heavy coffee drinker” and “having can-
cer of the pancreas” are independent events.

44. Two  cards  are  drawn  without  replacement  from  a  well-
shuffled deck of 52 cards. Let A be the event that the first
card drawn is a heart, and let B be the event that the second
card drawn is a red card. Show that the events A and B are
not independent events.

45. RELIABILITY OF SECURITY SYSTEMS Before  being  allowed  to
enter a maximum-security area at a military installation, a
person  must  pass  three  independent  identification  tests: 
a voice-pattern test, a fingerprint test, and a handwriting
test. If the reliability of the first test is 97%, that of the sec-
ond test is 98.5%, and that of the third is 98.5%, what is
the  probability  that  this  security  system  will  allow  an
improperly identified person to enter the maximum-secu-
rity area?

46. SWITCHING INTERNET SERVICE PROVIDERS (ISPS) According to
a survey conducted in 2004 of 1000 American adults with
Internet access, one in four households planned to switch
ISPs  in  the  next  6  months.  Of  those  who  planned  to
switch,  1%  of  the  households  were  likely  to  switch  to  a
satellite  connection,  27%  to  a  digital  subscriber  line
(DSL), 28% to cable modem, and 35% to dial-up modem,
and  9%  didn’t  know  what  kind  of  service  provider  they
would switch to.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

494

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

a. What is the probability that a randomly selected survey
participant who was planning to switch ISPs switched to
a dial-up modem connection?

b. What is the probability that a randomly selected survey
participant  upgraded  to  high-speed  service  (satellite,
DSL, or cable)?
Source: Ipsos-Insight.

47. PROBABILITY OF TRANSPLANT REJECTION The probabilities that
the  three  patients  who  are  scheduled  to  receive  kidney
transplants at General Hospital will suffer rejection are  ,  , 1
3
and 
. Assuming that the events (kidney rejection) are inde-
pendent, find the probability that:
a. At least one patient will suffer rejection.
b. Exactly two patients will suffer rejection.

1
10

1
2

48. RELIABILITY OF A HOME THEATER SYSTEM In  a  home  theater
system,  the  probability  that  the  video  components  need
repair  within  1  year  is  .01,  the  probability  that  the  elec-
tronic components need repair within 1 year is .005, and
the  probability  that  the  audio  components  need  repair
within 1 year is .001. Assuming that the events are inde-
pendent, find the probability that:
a. At least one of these components will need repair within

1 year.

b. Exactly one of these components will need repair within

1 year.

49. PRODUCT RELIABILITY The proprietor of Cunningham’s Hard-
ware Store has decided to install floodlights on the premises
as a measure against vandalism and theft. If the probability is
.01 that a certain brand of floodlight will burn out within a
year, find the minimum number of floodlights that must be
installed  to  ensure  that  the  probability  that  at  least  one  of
them  will  remain  functional  for  the  whole  year  is  at  least
.99999. (Assume that the floodlights operate independently.)
50. QUALITY CONTROL Copykwik has four photocopy machines:
A, B, C, and  D. The probability that a given machine will
break down on a particular day is

1. a.

b.

8.2 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises
P1A 艚 B2
P1A2
⫽ 3
4

P1A 0 B2 ⫽
 ⫽ .3
.8

P1B 0 A2 ⫽
 ⫽ .3
.4

P1A 艚 B2
P1B2
⫽ 3
8

2. Let A, B, and C denote the events that a respondent who mar-
ried between the ages of 20 and 22, between the ages of 23
and 27, and at age 28 or older (respectively) said that his or

P1A2 ⫽ 1

50

     P1B2 ⫽ 1

60

     P1C2 ⫽ 1

75

     P1D2 ⫽ 1

40

Assuming independence, what is the probability on a par-
ticular day that:
a. All four machines will break down?
b. None of the machines will break down?

51. Suppose the probability that an event will occur in one trial
is p. Show that the probability that the event will occur at
least once in n independent trials is 1 ⫺ (1 ⫺ p)n.

52. Let E be any event in a sample space S.

a. Are E and S independent? Explain your answer.
b. Are E and ⭋ independent? Explain your answer.

53. Let E and F be events such that F 傺 E. Find P(E 兩 F ), and

interpret your result.

54. Let  E and  F be  mutually  exclusive  events,  and  suppose 

P(F ) ⫽ 0. Find P(E 兩 F ), and interpret your result.

55. Let E and F be independent events; show that E and Fc are

independent.

56. Suppose  that  A and  B are  mutually  exclusive  events  and 

that P(A 傼 B) ⫽ 0. What is P(A 兩 A 傼 B)?

In Exercises 57–60, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
57. If  A and  B are  mutually  exclusive  and  P(B)  ⫽ 0,  then 

P(A 兩 B) ⫽ 0.

58. If A is an event of an experiment, then P(A 兩 Ac) ⫽ 0.

59. If A and B are events of an experiment, then

P1A 傽 B2 ⫽ P1A 兩 B2 ⭈ P1B2 ⫽ P1B 兩 A2 ⭈ P1A2

60. If  A and  B are  independent  events  with  P(A)  ⫽ 0  and 

P(B) ⫽ 0, then A 傽 B ⫽ ⭋.

her marriage was “less than very happy.” Then the probabil-
ity  of  each  of  these  events  occurring  is  P(A)  ⫽ .297, 
P(B)  ⫽ .269, and  P(C) ⫽ .451. So the probability that all
three  of  the  respondents  said  that  his  or  her  marriage  was
“less than very happy” is

P1A2 # P1B2 # P1C2 ⫽ 1.29721.26921.4512 ⬇ .036

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8.3

Bayes’ Theorem

FIGURE 9
D is the event that a defective component
is produced by Machine A, Machine B, or
Machine C.

8.3 BAYES’ THEOREM

495

A Posteriori Probabilities
Suppose three machines, A, B, and C, produce similar engine components. Machine A
produces  45%  of  the  total  components,  Machine  B produces  30%,  and  Machine  C
produces 25%. For the usual production schedule, 6% of the components produced by
Machine A do not meet established specifications; for Machine B and Machine C, the
corresponding figures are 4% and 3%, respectively. One component is selected at ran-
dom from the total output and is found to be defective. What is the probability that the
component selected was produced by Machine A? 

The answer to this question is found by calculating the probability after the out-
comes of the experiment have been observed. Such probabilities are called a posteriori
probabilities in contrast to a priori probabilities—probabilities that give the likelihood
that an event will occur, the subject of the previous sections.

Returning to the example under consideration, we need to determine the a poste-
riori probability for the event that the component selected was produced by Machine
A. Toward this end, let A, B, and C denote the events that a component is produced by
Machine A, Machine B, and Machine C, respectively. We may represent this experi-
ment with a Venn diagram (Figure 9).

A

B

D

C

S

A

D

B

D

C

D

The three mutually exclusive events A, B, and C form a partition of the sample
space S; that is, aside from being mutually exclusive, their union is precisely S. The
event  D that  a  component  is  defective  is  the  shaded  area.  Again  referring  to  Fig-
ure 9, we see that

1. The event D may be expressed as

D ⫽ 1A 艚 D2 傼 1B 艚 D2 傼 1C 艚 D2

2. The event that a component is defective and is produced by Machine A is given by

A 傽 D.

Thus, the a posteriori probability that a defective component selected was produced
by Machine A is given by

P1A 0 D2 ⫽

P1A 艚 D2
P1D2

Upon dividing both the numerator and the denominator by P(S) and observing that the
events A 傽 D, B 傽 D, and C 傽 D are mutually exclusive, we obtain

P1A 0 D2 ⫽

 ⫽

P1A 艚 D2
P1D2
P1A 艚 D2 ⫹ P1B 艚 D2 ⫹ P1C 艚 D2

P1A 艚 D2

(7)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

496

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

Next, using the Product Rule, we may express

P(A 傽 D) ⫽ P(A) ⭈ P(D 兩 A)
P(B 傽 D) ⫽ P(B) ⭈ P(D 兩 B)
P(C 傽 D) ⫽ P(C) ⭈ P(D 兩 C)

so Equation (7) may be expressed in the form

P1A2 # P1D 0 A2

P1A 0 D2 ⫽

P1A2 # P1D 0 A2 ⫹ P1B2 # P1D 0 B2 ⫹ P1C2 # P1D 0 C2

(8)

which is a special case of a result known as Bayes’ Theorem.

Observe that the expression on the right of Equation (8) involves the probabilities
P(A), P(B), and P(C) as well as the conditional probabilities P(D 兩 A), P(D 兩 B), and 
P(D 兩 C). In fact, by displaying these probabilities on a tree diagram, we obtain Fig-
ure 10. We may compute the required probability by substituting the relevant quanti-
ties into Equation (8), or we may make use of the following device:

P1A 0 D2 ⫽

Product of probabilities along the branch through A terminating at D

Sum of products of the probabilities along each branch terminating at D

FIGURE 10
A tree diagram displaying the probabili-
ties that a defective component is pro-
duced by Machine A, Machine B, or
Machine C

In either case, we obtain

 P1A 0 D2 ⫽

P ( A ) = .4 5

P(B) = .30

P(C) = .25

. 0 6

  =  

  A )

. 0 4

  =  

  B )

. 0 3

  =  

  C )

P ( D  

P ( D  

P ( D  

|

|

|

A

B

C

D

Dc
D

Dc
D

c

D

1.4521.062

1.4521.062 ⫹ 1.3021.042 ⫹ 1.2521.032

 ⬇ .58

Before  looking  at  any  further  examples,  let’s  state  the  general  form  of  Bayes’ 

Theorem.

Bayes’ Theorem
Let A1, A2, . . . , An be a partition of a sample space S, and let E be an event
of the experiment such that P(E ) ⫽ 0 and P(Ai) ⫽ 0 for 1 ⱕ i ⱕ n. Then the
a posteriori probability P(Ai 兩 E ) (1 ⱕ i ⱕ n) is given by
P 1Ai 0 E2 ⫽

P 1A12 # P 1E 0 A12 ⫹ P 1A22 # P 1E 0 A22 ⫹ p ⫹ P 1An2 # P 1E 0 An2

P 1Ai2 # P 1E 0 Ai2

(9)

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 1 Quality Control The panels for the Pulsar 32-inch 
widescreen LCD HDTVs are manufactured in three locations and then 

shipped to the main plant of Vista Vision for final assembly. Plants A, B, and C
supply 50%, 30%, and 20%, respectively, of the panels used by Vista Vision. The
quality-control department of the company has determined that 1% of the panels
produced by Plant A are defective, whereas 2% of the panels produced by Plants

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

P ( A )  =  .5

P(B) = .3

P(C) = .2

P ( D  

P ( D  

P ( D  

|

|

|

A

B

C

. 0 1

  =  

  A )

D

. 0 2

  =  

  B )

. 0 2

  =  

  C )

Dc
D

Dc
D

c

D

FIGURE 11

P(C 兩 D) ⫽ 

Product of probabilities of
branches to D through C

Sum of product of probabilities

of branches leading to D

 P1C 0 D2 ⫽

⫽

⬇ .27

8.3 BAYES’ THEOREM

497

B and C are defective. If a Pulsar 32-inch HDTV is selected at random and the
panel is found to be defective, what is the probability that the panel was manufac-
tured in Plant C? (Compare with Example 6, page 486.)

Solution Let A, B, and C denote the events that the set chosen has a panel man-
ufactured in Plant A, Plant B, and Plant C, respectively. Also, let D denote the
event that a set has a defective panel. Using the given information, we may draw
the tree diagram shown in Figure 11. Next, using Formula (9), we find that the
required a posteriori probability is given by

P 1C2 # P 1D 0 C2

P 1A2 # P 1D 0 A2 ⫹ P 1B2 # P 1D 0 B2 ⫹ P 1C2 # P 1D 0 C2
1.5021.012 ⫹ 1.3021.022 ⫹ 1.2021.022

1.2021.022

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 2 Income Distributions A study was conducted in a
large metropolitan area to determine the annual incomes of married 

couples in which the husbands were the sole providers and of those in which the
husbands and wives were both employed. Table 2 gives the results of this study.

TABLE 2
Annual Family

Income, $

150,000 and over
100,000–149,999
75,000–99,999
50,000–74,999
30,000–49,999
Under 30,000

Married Couples, %

with Both Spouses Employed, %

Income Group

4
10
21
24
30
11

65
73
68
63
43
28 

a. What is the probability that a couple selected at random from this area has two

incomes?

b. If a randomly chosen couple has two incomes, what is the probability that the

annual income of this couple is $150,000 or more?

c. If a randomly chosen couple has two incomes, what is the probability that the

annual income of this couple is greater than $49,999?

Solution Let A denote the event that the annual income of the couple is
$150,000 or more; let B denote the event that the annual income is between
$100,000 and $149,999; let C denote the event that the annual income is 
between $75,000 and $99,999; and so on. Finally, let T denote the event that 
both spouses are employed. The probabilities of the occurrence of these events
are displayed in Figure 12.
a. The probability that a couple selected at random from this group has two

incomes is given by

 P1T2 ⫽ P1A2 # P1T 0 A2 ⫹ P1B2 # P1T 0 B2 ⫹ P1C2 # P1T 0 C2
  ⫹ P1D2 # P1T 0 D2 ⫹ P1E2 # P1T 0 E2 ⫹ P1F2 # P1T 0 F2
 ⫽ 1.0421.652 ⫹ 1.1021.732 ⫹ 1.2121.682 ⫹ 1.2421.632
  ⫹ 1.3021.432 ⫹ 1.1121.282
 ⫽ .5528

P(A) = .04

P(B) = .10

P(C) = .21

P(D) = .24

P(E) = .30

P(F) = .11

A

B

C

D

E

F

  . 6 5

 .35

  . 7 3

 .27

  . 6 8

 .32

  . 6 3

 .37

  . 4 3

 .57

  . 2 8

 .72

T

Tc

T

Tc

T

Tc

T

Tc

T

Tc

T
Tc

FIGURE 12

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

498

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

b. Using the results of part (a) and Bayes’ Theorem, we find that the probability

that a randomly chosen couple has an annual income of $150,000 or more,
given that both spouses are employed, is

P1A2 # P1T 0 A2

P1T2

⫽ 1.0421.652

.5528

 P1A 0 T2 ⫽

 ⬇ .047

c. The probability that a randomly chosen couple has an annual income greater

than $49,999, given that both spouses are employed, is

 ⫽

P1A 0  T2 ⫹ P1B 0 T2 ⫹ P1C 0 T2 ⫹ P1D 0 T2
P1T2

P1A2 # P1T 0 A2 ⫹ P1B2 # P1T 0 B2 ⫹ P1C2 # P1T 0 C2 ⫹ P1D2 # P1T 0 D2
 ⫽ 1.0421.652 ⫹ 1.121.732 ⫹ 1.2121.682 ⫹ 1.2421.632
 ⬇ .711

.5528

8.3 Self-Check Exercises

1. The  accompanying  tree  diagram  represents  a  two-stage

experiment. Use the diagram to find P(B 兩 D).

1
4

1
2

1
4

A

B

C

1
3

2
3

1
4

3
4

1
2

1
2

D

Dc

D

Dc

D

Dc

8.3 Concept Questions

1. What are a priori probabilities and a posteriori probabili-

ties? Give an example of each.

2. Suppose the events A, B, and C form the partition of a sam-
ple  space  S,  and  suppose  E is  an  event  of  an  experiment
such that P(E) ⫽ 0. Use Bayes’ Theorem to write the for-

3
5

2
5

2. In a recent presidential election, it was estimated that the
probability that the Republican candidate would be elected
and  therefore  the  probability  that  the  Democratic 
was 
candidate  would  be  elected  was 
(the  two  Independent
candidates  were  given  little  chance  of  being  elected).  It
was also estimated that if the Republican candidate were
elected,  then  the  probability  that  research  for  a  new
manned bomber would continue was  . But if the Demo-
cratic candidate were successful, then the probability that
the  research  would  continue  was 
.  Research  was  termi-
nated  shortly  after  the  successful  presidential  candidate
took  office.  What  is  the  probability  that  the  Republican
candidate won that election?

3
10

4
5

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 8.3 can be found on 
page 504.

mula for the a posteriori probability 
P(A), P(B), P(C) ⫽ 0.)

P1A 0 E2

. (Assume that

3. Refer to Question 2. If E is the event that a product was pro-
duced in Factory A, Factory B, or Factory C and P(E) ⫽ 0,
what does 

represent?

P1A 0 E2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

8.3 Exercises

In  Exercises  1–3,  refer  to  the  accompanying  Venn  diagram.  An
experiment  in  which  the  three  mutually  exclusive  events  A,  B,
and C form a partition of the uniform sample space S is depicted
in the diagram.

A

15

20

B

D

25

10

C

S

10

20

1. Using the information given in the Venn diagram, draw a
tree diagram illustrating the probabilities of the events A,
B, C, and D.

2. Find: a. P1D2
3. Find: a. P1Dc2

b.

b.

P1A 0 D2
P1B 0 D c2

In  Exercises  4–6,  refer  to  the  accompanying  Venn  diagram.  An
experiment  in  which  the  three  mutually  exclusive  events  A,  B,
and C form a partition of the uniform sample space S is depicted
in the diagram.

A

25

25

B

D

20

20

C

S

15

20

4. Using the information given in the Venn diagram, draw a
tree diagram illustrating the probabilities of the events A,
B, C, and D.

7. The accompanying tree diagram represents a two-stage ex-

5. Find: a. P1D2
6. Find: a. P1D c2
P1A2 # P1D 0 A2
P1A 0 D2

periment. Use the diagram to find:
a.
c.

b.

b.

b.

P1B 0 D2
P1B 0 D c2
P1B2 # P1D 0 B2

. 4

.6

A

B

. 2

.8

5

. 2

D

Dc

D

.75

Dc

8.3 BAYES’ THEOREM

499

8. The accompanying tree diagram represents a two-stage ex-

periment. Use the diagram to find:
a.
c.

P1A2 # P1D 0 A2
P1A 0 D2

P1B2 # P1D 0 B2

b.

5

. 3

.65

A

B

. 7

.3

. 6

.4

D

Dc

D

D c

9. The accompanying tree diagram represents a two-stage ex-

periment. Use the diagram to find:
a.
c.

P1A2 # P1D 0 A2
P1C2 # P1D 0 C2

P1B2 # P1D 0 B2
P1A 0 D2

b.
d.

1
3

1
2

1
6

A

B

C

1
4

3
4

1
3

2
3

1
2

1
2

D

Dc

D

Dc

D

Dc

10. The accompanying tree diagram represents a two-stage ex-

periment. Use this diagram to find

a. P1A 傽 D2

e. Verify:

b. P1B 傽 D2

c. P1C 傽 D2

d. P1D2

 P1A 0 D2 ⫽

P1A 艚 D2
P1D2

P1A2 # P1D 0 A2

⫽

P1A2 # P1D 0 A2 ⫹ P1B2 # P1D 0 B2 ⫹ P1C2 # P1D 0 C2

1
5

2
5

2
5

A

B

C

1
2

1
2

3
4

1
4

1
3

2
3

D

Dc

D

Dc

D

Dc

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

500

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

11. The accompanying diagram represents a two-stage experi-
ment. Complete the information on the diagram, and use it
to find:
a.
c.

b.
d.

P1A 0 B2
P1A 0 Bc2

P1B2
P1Bc2

. 3

A

Ac

. 2

.7

B

B c

B

B c

12. The accompanying diagram represents a two-stage experi-

ment. Here, B ⫽ 1A 傼 C2 c. Complete the information on
P1D2
P1Dc2

the diagram, and use it to find:
a.
c.

P1B 0 D2
P1A 0 Dc2

b.
d.

1
4

1
3

A

B

C

1
5

2
5

1
4

D

D c

D

D c

D

D c

In Exercises 13–16, refer to the following experiment: Two cards
are  drawn  in  succession  without  replacement  from  a  standard
deck of 52 cards.
13. What is the probability that the first card is a heart given

that the second card is a heart?

14. What is the probability that the first card is a heart given

that the second card is a diamond?

15. What  is  the  probability  that  the  first  card  is  a  jack  given

that the second card is an ace?

16. What  is  the  probability  that  the  first  card  is  a  face  card

given that the second card is an ace?

In Exercises 17–20, refer to the following experiment: Urn A con-
tains  four  white  balls  and  six  black  balls.  Urn  B contains  three
white balls and five black balls. A ball is drawn from Urn A and
then transferred to Urn B. A ball is then drawn from Urn B.
17. Represent the probabilities associated with this two-stage

experiment in the form of a tree diagram.

18. What is the probability that the transferred ball was white

given that the second ball drawn was white?

19. What is the probability that the transferred ball was black

given that the second ball drawn was white?

20. What is the probability that the transferred ball was black

given that the second ball drawn was black?

21. POLITICS The  1992  U.S.  Senate  was  composed  of 
57  Democrats  and  43  Republicans.  Of  the  Democrats, 
38 had served in the military, whereas 28 of the Repub-
licans had seen military service. If a senator selected at
random had served in the military, what is the probabil-
ity that he or she was Republican?

22. RETIREMENT NEEDS In a survey of 2000 adults 50 years old
and older of whom 60% were retired and 40% were pre-
retired, the following question was asked: Do you expect
your income needs to vary from year to year in retirement?
Of  those  who  were  retired,  33%  answered  no,  and  67%
answered  yes.  Of  those  who  were  pre-retired,  28%
answered no, and 72% answered yes. If a respondent in the
survey was selected at random and had answered yes to the
question, what is the probability that he or she was retired?
Source: Sun Life Financial.

23. An experiment consists of randomly selecting one of three
coins, tossing it, and observing the outcome—heads or tails.
The first coin is a two-headed coin, the second is a biased
coin such that P(H) ⫽ .75, and the third is a fair coin.
a. What is the probability that the coin that is tossed will

show heads?

b. If the coin selected shows heads, what is the probability

that this coin is the fair coin?

24. SEAT-BELT COMPLIANCE Data  compiled  by  the  Highway
Patrol Department regarding the use of seat-belts by driv-
ers in a certain area after the passage of a compulsory seat-
belt law are shown in the accompanying table.

Drivers
Group I
(using seat-belts)
Group II
(not using seat-belts)

Percentage
of Drivers
in Group

64

36

Percent of

Group Stopped

for Moving
Violation

.2

.5

If a driver in that area is stopped for a moving violation,
what is the probability that he or she:
a. Will have a seat-belt on?
b. Will not have a seat-belt on?

25. BLOOD TESTS If  a  certain  disease  is  present,  then  a  blood
test  will  reveal  it  95%  of  the  time.  But  the  test  will  also
indicate the presence of the disease 2% of the time when in
fact the person tested is free of that disease; that is, the test
gives a false positive 2% of the time. If 0.3% of the general
population actually has the disease, what is the probability
that a person chosen at random from the population has the
disease given that he or she tested positive?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

26. OPINION POLLS In  a  survey  to  determine  the  opinions  of
Americans on health insurers, 400 baby boomers and 600
pre-boomers were asked this question: Do you believe that
insurers are very responsible for high health costs? Of the
baby  boomers,  212  answered  in  the  affirmative,  whereas
198  of  the  pre-boomers  answered  in  the  affirmative.  If  a
respondent  chosen  at  random  from 
those  surveyed
answered the question in the affirmative, what is the prob-
ability that he or she is a baby boomer? A pre-boomer?
Source: GfK Roper Consulting.

27. QUALITY CONTROL A Luminar halogen desk lamp selected
at  random  was  found  to  be  defective.  The  company  has
three factories where the lamps are manufactured. The per-
centage  of  the  total  number  of  halogen  desk  lamps  pro-
duced by each factory and the probability that a lamp man-
ufactured  by  that  factory  is  defective  are  shown  in  the
accompanying table. What is the probability that the defec-
tive lamp was manufactured in Factory III?

Factory

I
II
III

Percent of

Total Production

35
35
30

Probability of

Defective
Component

.015
.01
.02

28. OPINION POLLS A survey involving 400 likely Democratic
voters  and  300  likely  Republican  voters  asked  the  ques-
tion:  Do  you  support  or  oppose  legislation  that  would
require registration of all handguns? The following results
were obtained:

Answer
Support
Oppose
Don’t know/refused

Democrats, %

Republicans, %

77
14
9

59
31
10

If  a  randomly  chosen  respondent  in  the  survey  answered
“oppose,” what is the probability that he or she is a likely
Democratic voter?

29. AGE DISTRIBUTION OF RENTERS A  study  conducted  by  the
Metro Housing Agency in a midwestern city revealed the
following  information  concerning  the  age  distribution  of
renters within the city.

Age
21–44
45–64
65 and over

Adult Population, % Who Are Renters, %

Group

51
31
18

58
45
60

a. What is the probability that an adult selected at random

from this population is a renter?

b. If a renter is selected at random, what is the probability

that he or she is in the 21–44 age bracket?

c. If a renter is selected at random, what is the probability

that he or she is 45 years old or older?

8.3 BAYES’ THEOREM

501

30. PRODUCT RELIABILITY The  estimated  probability  that  a
Brand A, a Brand B, and a Brand C plasma TV will last at
least  30,000  hr  is  .90,  .85,  and  .80,  respectively.  Of  the
4500 plasma TVs that Ace TV sold in a certain year, 1000
were Brand A, 1500 were Brand B, and 2000 were Brand
C. If a plasma TV set sold by Ace TV that year is selected
at random and is still working after 30,000 hr of use:
a. What is the probability that it was a Brand A TV?
b. What is the probability that it was not a Brand A TV?

31. OPINION POLLS A survey involving 400 likely Democratic
voters  and  300  likely  Republican  voters  asked  the  ques-
tion:  Do  you  support  or  oppose  legislation  that  would
require  trigger  locks  on  guns,  to  prevent  misuse  by  chil-
dren? The following results were obtained:

Answer
Support
Oppose
Don’t know/refused

Democrats, %

Republicans, %

88
7
5

71
20
9

If  a  randomly  chosen  respondent  in  the  survey  answered
“support,” what is the probability that he or she is a likely
Republican voter?

32. QUALITY CONTROL Jansen  Electronics  has  four  machines
that produce identical components for use in its DVD play-
ers. The proportion of the components produced by each
machine and the probability of a component produced by
that machine being defective are shown in the accompany-
ing table. What is the probability that a component selected
at random:
a. Is defective?
b. Was produced by Machine I, given that it is defective?
c. Was produced by Machine II, given that it is defective?

Machine

I
II
III
IV

Proportion of
Components

Produced

Probability of

Defective
Component

.15
.30
.35
.20

.04
.02
.02
.03

33. CRIME RATES Data compiled by the Department of Justice
on the number of people arrested in a certain year for seri-
ous crimes (murder, forcible rape, robbery, etc.) revealed
that 89% were male and 11% were female. Of the males,
30% were under 18, whereas 27% of the females arrested
were under 18.
a. What is the probability that a person arrested for a seri-

ous crime in that year was under 18?

b. If  a  person  arrested  for  a  serious  crime  in  that  year  is
known to be under 18, what is the probability that the
person is female?

Source: Department of Justice.

34. RELIABILITY OF MEDICAL TESTS A medical test has been de-
signed to detect the presence of a certain disease. Among

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

502

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

people who have the disease, the probability that the dis-
ease will be detected by the test is .95. However, the prob-
ability that the test will erroneously indicate the presence
of the disease in those who do not actually have it is .04. It
is  estimated  that  4%  of  the  population  who  take  this  test
have the disease.
a. If the test administered to an individual is positive, what
is the probability that the person actually has the disease?
b. If an individual takes the test twice and the test is positive
both times, what is the probability that the person actually
has the disease? (Assume that the tests are independent.)
35. RELIABILITY OF MEDICAL TESTS Refer  to  Exercise  34.  Sup-
pose 20% of the people who were referred to a clinic for
the test did in fact have the disease. If the test administered
to  an  individual  from  this  group  is  positive,  what  is  the
probability that the person actually has the disease?

36. GENDER GAP A study of the faculty at U.S. medical schools
in 2006 revealed that 32% of the faculty were women and
68%  were  men.  Of  the  female  faculty,  31%  were  full/
associate professors, 47% were assistant professors, and 22%
were instructors. Of the male faculty, 51% were full/associ-
ate professors, 37% were assistant professors, and 12% were
instructors.  If  a  faculty  member  at  a  U.S.  medical  school
selected at random in 2006 held the rank of full/associate pro-
fessor, what is the probability that the faculty member was
female?
Source: Association of American Medical Colleges.

37. BEVERAGE RESEARCH In a study of the scientific research on
soft  drinks,  juices,  and  milk,  50  studies  were  fully  spon-
sored by the food industry, and 30 studies were conducted
with no corporate ties. Of those that were fully sponsored
by  the  food  industry,  14%  of  the  participants  found  the
products  unfavorable,  23%  were  neutral,  and  63%  found
the products favorable. Of those that had no industry fund-
ing, 38% found the products unfavorable, 15% were neu-
tral, and 47% found the products favorable.
a. What is the probability that a participant selected at ran-

dom found the products favorable?

b. If  a  participant  selected  at  random  found  the  product
favorable, what is the probability that he or she belongs
to  a  group  that  participated  in  a  corporate-sponsored
study?

Source: Children’s Hospital, Boston.

2
5

3
5

38. SELECTION OF SUPREME COURT JUDGES In a past presidential
election, it was estimated that the probability that the Re-
publican  candidate  would  be  elected  was  and  therefore
the  probability  that  the  Democratic  candidate  would  be
elected was 
(the two Independent candidates were given
no chance of being elected). It was also estimated that if
the Republican candidate were elected, the probability that
a  conservative,  moderate,  or  liberal  judge  would  be
appointed  to  the  Supreme  Court  (one  retirement  was
1
expected  during  the  presidential  term)  was 
,
6
respectively. If the Democratic candidate were elected, the
probabilities that a conservative, moderate, or liberal judge
would  be  appointed  to  the  Supreme  Court  would  be  ,  ,3
8

,  and 

1
2

, 

1
3

1
8

1
2

and  , respectively. A conservative judge was appointed to
the  Supreme  Court  during  the  presidential  term.  What  is
the probability that the Democratic candidate was elected?

39. PERSONNEL SELECTION Applicants  for  temporary  office
work  at  Carter  Temporary  Help  Agency  who  have  suc-
cessfully completed a typing test are then placed in suit-
able  positions  by  Nancy  Dwyer  and  Darla  Newberg.
Employers  who  hire  temporary  help  through  the  agency
return a card indicating satisfaction or dissatisfaction with
the  work  performance  of  those  hired.  From  past  experi-
ence  it  is  known  that  80%  of  the employees  placed  by
Nancy are rated as satisfactory, and 70% of those placed
by Darla are rated as satisfactory. Darla places 55% of the
temporary office help at the agency, and Nancy places the
remaining  45%.  If  a  randomly  selected  Carter  office
worker is rated unsatisfactory, what is the probability that
he or she was placed by Darla?

40. MEDICAL RESEARCH On the basis of data obtained from the
National  Institute  of  Dental  Research,  it  has  been  deter-
mined that 42% of 12-year-olds have never had a cavity,
34% of 13-year-olds have never had a cavity, and 28% of
14-year-olds  have  never  had  a  cavity.  Suppose  a  child  is
selected at random from a group of 24 junior high school
students that includes six 12-year-olds, eight 13-year-olds,
and ten 14-year-olds. If this child does not have a cavity,
what is the probability that this child is 14 years old?
Source: National Institute of Dental Research.

41. VOTING PATTERNS In  a  recent  senatorial  election,  50%  of
the  voters  in  a  certain  district  were  registered  as  Demo-
crats, 35% were registered as Republicans, and 15% were
registered  as  Independents.  The  incumbent  Democratic
senator  was  reelected  over  her  Republican  and  Indepen-
dent opponents. Exit polls indicated that she gained 75% of
the Democratic vote, 25% of the Republican vote, and 30%
of  the  Independent  vote.  Assuming  that  the  exit  poll  is
accurate, what is the probability that a vote for the incum-
bent was cast by a registered Republican?

42. AUTO-ACCIDENT RATES An  insurance  company  has  com-
piled the accompanying data relating the age of drivers and
the accident rate (the probability of being involved in an
accident  during  a  1-year  period)  for  drivers  within  that
group:

Age Group
Under 25
25–44
45–64
65 and over

Percentage of
Insured Drivers

Accident
Rate, %

16
40
30
14

5.5
2.5
2
4

What  is  the  probability  that  an  insured  driver  selected  at
random:
a. Will  be  involved  in  an  accident  during  a  particular 

1-year period?

b. Who is involved in an accident is under 25?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

43. PERSONAL HABITS There  were  80  male  guests  at  a  party.
The number of men in each of four age categories is given
in the following table. The table also gives the probability
that  a  man in the respective age category will keep his
paper money in order of denomination.

Age
21–34
35–44
45–54
55 and over

Men
25
30
15
10

Keep Paper Money in Order, %

9
61
80
80

The wallet of a male guest selected at random was retrieved,
and  the  paper  money  in  it  was  found  to  be  kept  in  order 
of  denomination.  What  is  the  probability  that  the  wallet
belonged to a male guest between the ages of 35 and 44?

44. VOTER TURNOUT BY INCOME Voter turnout drops steadily as
income level declines. The following table gives the per-
centage of eligible voters in a certain city, categorized by
income,  who  responded  with  “did  not  vote”  in  the  2000
presidential  election.  The  table  also  gives  the  number  of
eligible voters in the city, categorized by income.

Income
(percentile)
0–16
17–33
34–67
68–95
96–100

Percent Who
“Did Not Vote”

Eligible Voters

52
31
30
14
12

4,000
11,000
17,500
12,500
5,000

If an eligible voter from this city who had voted in the elec-
tion is selected at random, what is the probability that this
person had an income in the 17–33 percentile?
Source: The National Election Studies.

45. THE SOCIAL LADDER The following table summarizes the re-

sults of a poll conducted with 1154 adults.

Respondents
Within That

Respondents 

Who Call Themselves

Income 
Range, % Rich, % Class, % Poor, %

Middle

Annual 
Household
Income, $
Less than 15,000
15,000–29,999
30,000–49,999
50,000–74,999
75,000 and higher

8.3 BAYES’ THEOREM

503

ual’s income is either less than or equal to $29,999 or
greater than or equal to $50,000?

Sources: New York Times/CBS News; Wall Street Journal Almanac.

46. OBESITY IN CHILDREN Researchers weighed 1976 3-year-olds
from low-income families in 20 U.S. cities. Each child is
classified by race (white, black, or Hispanic) and by weight
(normal weight, overweight, or obese). The results are tab-
ulated as follows:

Weight, %

Race
White
Black
Hispanic

Children Normal Weight Overweight Obese

406
1081
489

68
68
56

18
15
20

14
17
24

If a participant in the research is selected at random and is
found to be obese, what is the probability that the 3-year-
old is white? Hispanic?
Source: American Journal of Public Health.

47. COLLEGE MAJORS The Office of Admissions and Records of
a large western university released the accompanying infor-
mation concerning the contemplated majors of its freshman
class:

Freshmen
Choosing

Females
Choosing

Males

Choosing

This Major, % This Major, % This Major, %

Major
Business
Humanities
Education
Social science
Natural sciences
Other

24
8
8
7
9
44

38
60
66
58
52
48

62
40
34
42
48
52

What is the probability that: 
a. A student selected at random from the freshman class is

a female?

b. A business student selected at random from the fresh-

man class is a male?

c. A female student selected at random from the freshman

class is majoring in business?

11.2
18.6
24.5
21.9
23.8

0
3
0
2
5

24
60
86
90
91

76
37
14
8
4

48. VOTER TURNOUT BY PROFESSION The  following  table  gives
the percentage of eligible voters grouped according to pro-
fession who responded with “voted” in the 2000 presiden-
tial election. The table also gives the percentage of people
in a survey categorized by their profession.

a. What is the probability that a respondent chosen at ran-

dom calls himself or herself middle class?

b. If a randomly chosen respondent calls himself or herself
middle  class,  what  is  the  probability  that  the  annual
household income of that individual is between $30,000
and $49,999, inclusive?

c. If a randomly chosen respondent calls himself or herself
middle  class,  what  is  the  probability  that  the  individ-

Profession
Professionals
White collar
Blue collar
Unskilled
Farmers
Housewives

Percentage 
Who Voted

Percentage in
Each Profession

84
73
66
57
68
66

12
24
32
10
8
14

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

504

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

If an eligible voter who participated in the survey and voted
in the election is selected at random, what is the probability
that this person is a housewife?
Source: The National Election Studies.

49. SLEEPING WITH CELL PHONES In a survey of 920 people aged
from 18 through 84 years, of whom 84 belonged to the Mil-
lenial  Generation  (18–29),  224  belonged  to  Generation  X
(30–45), 200 belonged to the Baby Boom Generation, and
the rest belonged to the Silent Generation (65+), the follow-
ing  question  was  asked:  Who  has  slept  with  a  cell  phone
nearby?  Of  those  who  answered  in  the  affirmative,  83%,
68%,  50%,  and  20%  were  from  the  Millenial  Generation,
Generation  X,  the  Baby  Boom  Generation,  and  the  Silent
Generation, respectively. If a person in the survey is selected
at random and has not slept with a cell phone nearby, what
is  the  probability  that  the  person  belongs  to  the  Millenial
Generation?
Source: Pew Research Center.

50. MEDICAL DIAGNOSES A study was conducted among a certain
group  of  union  members  whose  health  insurance  policies
required second opinions prior to surgery. Of those members
whose  doctors  advised  them  to  have  surgery,  20%  were
informed by a second doctor that no surgery was needed. Of

8.3 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. Using  the  probabilities  given  in  the  tree  diagram  and

Bayes’ Theorem, we have

P1B2 # P1D | B2

 P1B | D2 ⫽

 ⫽

P1A2 # P1D | A2 ⫹ P1B2 # P1D | B2 ⫹ P1C2 # P1D | C2
2211
22
11
42 ⫽ 12
11
4211
22 ⫹ 11
4211
32 ⫹ 11
2211

19

2. Let R and D, respectively, denote the event that the Repub-
lican  and  the  Democratic  candidate  won  the  presidential
election. Then 
. Also, let C denote
the event that research for the new manned bomber contin-
ued. These data may be exhibited as in the accompanying
tree diagram:

P1D2 ⫽ 2

P1R2 ⫽ 3

and 

5

5

these, 70% took the second doctor’s opinion and did not go
through with the surgery. Of the members who were advised
to have surgery by both doctors, 95% went through with the
surgery. What is the probability that a union member who
had surgery was advised to do so by a second doctor?

51. SMOKING AND EDUCATION According to the Centers for Dis-
ease  Control  and  Prevention,  the  percentage  of  adults  25
years old and older who smoke, by educational level, is as
follows:

Educational
Level
Respondents, %

High 
school
diploma diploma graduate

GED

No

Under-
graduate Graduate
degree

level

Some
college

26

43

25

23

10.7

7

In a group of 140 people, there were 8 with no diploma, 14
with  GED  diplomas,  40  high  school  graduates,  24  with
some  college,  42  with  an  undergraduate  degree,  and  12
with a graduate degree. (Assume that these categories are
mutually  exclusive.)  If  a  person  selected  at  random  from
this group was a smoker, what is the probability that he or
she is a person with a graduate degree?
Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

3
5

2
5

R

D

4
5

1
5

3
10

7
10

C

Cc

C

Cc

Using Bayes’ Theorem, we find that the probability that the
Republican candidate had won the election is given by

 P1R 0 Cc2 ⫽

 ⫽

P1R2 # P1Cc 0 R2

P1R2 # P1Cc 0 R2 ⫹ P1D2 # P1Cc 0 D2
13
5211
52
102 ⫽ 3
13
521 7
5211
52 ⫹ 12

10

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

8.4 Distributions of Random Variables

8.4 DISTRIBUTIONS OF RANDOM VARIABLES

505

Random Variables
In many situations, it is desirable to assign numerical values to the outcomes of an
experiment. For example, if an experiment consists of rolling a die and observing the
face that lands uppermost, then it is natural to assign the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6,
respectively, to the outcomes one, two, three, four, five, and six of the experiment. If
we let X denote the outcome of the experiment, then X assumes one of these numbers.
Because the values assumed by X depend on the outcomes of a chance experiment, the
outcome X is referred to as a random variable.

Random Variable
A random variable is a rule that assigns a number to each outcome of a chance
experiment.

More precisely, a random variable is a function with domain given by the set of out-
comes of a chance experiment and range contained in the set of real numbers.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 1 A coin is tossed three times. Let the random variable X denote the
number of heads that occur in the three tosses.
a. List the outcomes of the experiment; that is, find the domain of the function X.
b. Find the value assigned to each outcome of the experiment by the random vari-

TABLE 3
Number of Heads in Three Coin 
Tosses
Outcome

Value of X

HHH
HHT
HTH
THH
HTT
THT
TTH
TTT

3
2
2
2
1
1
1
0

TABLE 4
Number of Coin Tosses Before Heads
Appear
Outcome

Value of Y

able X.

c. Find the event comprising the outcomes to which a value of 2 has been assigned
by X. This event is written (X ⫽ 2) and is the event consisting of the outcomes in
which two heads occur.

Solution

a. From the results of Example 3, Section 7.5 (page 443), we see that the set of out-

comes of the experiment is given by the sample space

S ⫽ {HHH, HHT, HTH, THH, HTT, THT, TTH, TTT}

b. The outcomes of the experiment are displayed in the first column of Table 3. The

corresponding value assigned to each such outcome by the random variable X
(the number of heads) appears in the second column.

c. With the aid of Table 3, we see that the event (X ⫽ 2) is given by the set

{HHT, HTH, THH}

EXAMPLE 2 A coin is tossed repeatedly until a head occurs. Let the random vari-
able Y denote the number of coin tosses in the experiment. What are the values of Y?

H
TH
TTH
TTTH
TTTTH

o

1
2
3
4
5
o

Solution The outcomes of the experiment make up the infinite set

S ⫽ {H, TH, TTH, TTTH, TTTTH, . . .}

These outcomes of the experiment are displayed in the first column of Table 4. The
corresponding values assumed by the random variable Y (the number of tosses)
appear in the second column.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

506

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

APPLIED EXAMPLE 3 Product Reliability A disposable flashlight is turned
on and left on until its battery runs out. Let the random variable Z denote 

the length (in hours) of the life of the battery. What values may Z assume?

Solution The value of Z may be any nonnegative real number; that is, the possi-
ble values of Z comprise the interval 0 ⱕ Z ⬍ ⬁.

One advantage of working with random variables—rather than working directly
with the outcomes of an experiment—is that random variables are functions that may
be added, subtracted, and multiplied. Because of this, results developed in the field of
algebra and other areas of mathematics may be used freely to help us solve problems
in probability and statistics.

A random variable is classified into three categories depending on the set of values
it assumes. A random variable is called finite discrete if it assumes only finitely many
values. For example, the random variable X of Example 1 is finite discrete because it
may assume values only from the finite set of numbers {0, 1, 2, 3}. Next, a random vari-
able is said to be infinite discrete if it takes on infinitely many values, which may be
arranged in a sequence. For example, the random variable Y of Example 2 is infinite dis-
crete because it assumes values from the set {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, . . .}, which has been arranged
in the form of an infinite sequence. Finally, a random variable is called continuous if
the values it may assume comprise an interval of real numbers. For example, the random
variable Z of Example 3 is continuous because the values it may assume comprise the
interval of nonnegative real numbers. For the remainder of this section, unless otherwise
noted, all random variables will be assumed to be finite discrete.

TABLE 5
Probability Distribution for the Random
Variable X
x

P(X ⫽ x)

x1
x2
x3
o
xn

p1
p2
p3
o
pn

Probability Distributions of Random Variables
In  Section  7.6,  we  learned  how  to  construct  the  probability  distribution  for  an
experiment. There, the probability distribution took the form of a table that gave
the probabilities associated with the outcomes of an experiment. Since the random
variable  associated  with  an  experiment  is  related  to  the  outcomes  of  the  experi-
ment, it is clear that we should be able to construct a probability distribution asso-
ciated with the random variable rather than one associated with the outcomes of
the experiment. Such a distribution is called the probability distribution of a ran-
dom variable and may be given in the form of a formula or displayed in a table
that gives the distinct (numerical) values of the random variable X and the proba-
bilities associated with these values. Thus, if x1, x2, . . . , xn are the values assumed
by the random variable X with associated probabilities P1X ⫽ x12 , P1X ⫽ x22 , . . . ,
P1X ⫽ xn2 , respectively, then the required probability distribution of the random
pi ⫽ P1X ⫽ xi2 , i ⫽ 1, 2, . . . , n.
The probability distribution of a random variable X satisfies 
0 ⱕ pi ⱕ 1                       i ⫽ 1, 2,  . . .  , n
p1 ⫹ p2 ⫹ . . . ⫹ pn ⫽ 1
In  the  next  several  examples,  we  illustrate  the  construction  and  application  of

variable  X may  be  expressed  in  the  form  of  the  table  shown  in  Table  5,  where 

1.
2.

probability distributions.

EXAMPLE 4
a. Find the probability distribution of the random variable associated with the

experiment of Example 1.

b. What is the probability of obtaining at least two heads in the three tosses of the coin?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8.4 DISTRIBUTIONS OF RANDOM VARIABLES

507

Solution

a. From the results of Example 1, we see that the values assumed by the random vari-
able X are 0, 1, 2, and 3, corresponding to the events of 0, 1, 2, and 3 heads occur-
ring, respectively. Referring to Table 3 once again, we see that the outcome associ-
ated with the event (X ⫽ 0) is given by the set {TTT}. Consequently, the probability
associated with the random variable X when it assumes the value 0 is given by

P1X ⫽ 02 ⫽ 1

8

Note that n(S) ⫽ 8.

Next, observe that the event (X ⫽ 1) is given by the set {HTT, THT, TTH}, so

P1X ⫽ 12 ⫽ 3

8

In a similar manner, we may compute P(X ⫽ 2) and P(X ⫽ 3), which gives the
probability distribution shown in Table 6.

b. The probability of obtaining at least two heads is given by 

 P1X ⱖ 22 ⫽ P1X ⫽ 22 ⫹ P1X ⫽ 32

 ⫽ 3
8

⫹ 1
8

⫽ 1
2

EXAMPLE 5 Let X denote the random variable that gives the sum of the faces that
fall uppermost when two fair dice are rolled. 
a. Find the probability distribution of X.
b. What is the probability that the sum of the faces that fall uppermost is less than

or equal to 5? Between 8 and 10, inclusive?

Solution

a. The values assumed by the random variable X are 2, 3, 4, . . . , 12, corresponding
to the events E2, E3, E4, . . . , E12 (see Example 4, Section 7.5). The probabilities
associated with the random variable X when X assumes the values 2, 3, 4, . . . , 12
are precisely the probabilities P(E2), P(E3), . . . , P(E12), respectively, and may be
computed in much the same way as the solution to Example 3, Section 7.6. Thus,

P1X ⫽ 22 ⫽ P1E22 ⫽ 1
P1X ⫽ 32 ⫽ P1E32 ⫽ 2

36

36

and so on. The required probability distribution of X is given in Table 7.

b. The probability that the sum of the faces that fall uppermost is less than or equal

to 5 is given by

 P1X ⱕ 52 ⫽ P1X ⫽ 22 ⫹ P1X ⫽ 32 ⫹ P1X ⫽ 42 ⫹ P1X ⫽ 52

 ⫽ 1
36

⫹ 2
36

⫹ 3
36

⫹ 4
36

⫽ 10
36

⫽ 5
18

TABLE 6
Probability Distribution
x

P(X ⫽ x)

0
1
2
3

1
8
3
8
3
8
1
8

TABLE 7
x

P(X ⫽ x)

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

1
36
2
36
3
36
4
36
5
36
6
36
5
36
4
36
3
36
2
36
1
36

The probability that the sum of the faces that fall uppermost is between 8 and 10,
inclusive, is given by

 P18 ⱕ X ⱕ 102 ⫽ P1X ⫽ 82 ⫹ P1X ⫽ 92 ⫹ P1X ⫽ 102

 ⫽ 5
36

⫹ 4
36

⫹ 3
36

⫽ 12
36

⫽ 1
3

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

508

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 6 Waiting Lines The following data give the number 
of cars observed waiting in line at the beginning of 2-minute intervals 

between 3 P.M. and 5 P.M. on a certain Friday at the drive-in teller of Westwood
Savings Bank and the corresponding frequency of occurrence. 

Cars

Frequency of Occurrence

0

2

1

9

2

16

3

12

4

8

5

6

6

4

7

2

8

1

a. Find the probability distribution of the random variable X, where X denotes the

number of cars observed waiting in line.

b. What is the probability that the number of cars observed waiting in line in any
2-minute interval between 3 P.M. and 5 P.M. on a Friday is less than or equal to
3? Between 2 and 4, inclusive? Greater than 6?

Solution

a. Dividing each number in the second row of the given table by 60 (the sum of
these numbers) gives the respective probabilities associated with the random
variable X when X assumes the values 0, 1, 2, . . . , 8. (Here, we use the rela-
tive frequency interpretation of probability.) For example,

P1X ⫽ 02 ⫽ 2
P1X ⫽ 12 ⫽ 9

60

60

⬇ .03

⫽ .15

and so on. The resulting probability distribution is shown in Table 8.

b. The probability that the number of cars observed waiting in line is less than or

equal to 3 is given by

 P1X ⱕ 32 ⫽ P1X ⫽ 02 ⫹ P1X ⫽ 12 ⫹ P1X ⫽ 22 ⫹ P1X ⫽ 32

 ⫽ .03 ⫹ .15 ⫹ .27 ⫹ .20 ⫽ .65

The probability that the number of cars observed waiting in line is between 2
and 4, inclusive, is given by

 P12 ⱕ X ⱕ 42 ⫽ P122 ⫹ P132 ⫹ P142
 ⫽ .27 ⫹ .20 ⫹ .13 ⫽ .60

The probability that the number of cars observed waiting in line is greater than
6 is given by

 P1X ⬎ 62 ⫽ P172 ⫹ P182

 ⫽ .03 ⫹ .02 ⫽ .05

Histograms
A probability distribution of a random variable may be exhibited graphically by means
of a histogram. To construct a histogram of a particular probability distribution, first
locate  the  values  of  the  random  variable  on  a  number  line.  Then,  above  each  such
number, erect a rectangle with width 1 and height equal to the probability associated
with that value of the random variable. For example, the histogram of the probability
distribution appearing in Table 6 is shown in Figure 13. The histograms of the proba-

TABLE 8
Probability Distribution
x

P(X ⫽ x)

.03
.15
.27
.20
.13
.10
.07
.03
.02

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

4/8

3/8

2/8

1/8

0

1

2

3

x

FIGURE 13
Histogram showing the probability distri-
bution for the number of heads occurring
in three coin tosses

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

8.4 DISTRIBUTIONS OF RANDOM VARIABLES

509

bility distributions of Examples 5 and 6 are constructed in a similar manner and are
displayed in Figures 14 and 15, respectively.

FIGURE 14
Histogram showing the probability distri-
bution for the sum of the uppermost
faces of two dice

6/36

5/36

4/36

3/36

2/36

1/36

0.3

0.2

0.1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10  11  12

FIGURE 15
Histogram showing the probability distri-
bution for the number of cars waiting in
line

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

x

x

Observe that in each histogram, the area of a rectangle associated with a value
of a random variable X gives precisely the probability associated with the value of
X.  This  follows  because  each  such  rectangle,  by  construction,  has  width  1  and
height  corresponding  to  the  probability  associated  with  the  value  of  the  random
variable.  Another  consequence  arising  from  the  method  of  construction  of  a  his-
togram is that the probability associated with more than one value of the random
variable X is given by the sum of the areas of the rectangles associated with those
values of X. For example, in the coin-tossing experiment of Example 1, the event

of obtaining at least two heads, which corresponds to the event 1X ⫽ 22 or 1X ⫽ 32,

is given by

P1X ⫽ 22 ⫹ P1X ⫽ 32

and may be obtained from the histogram depicted in Figure 13 by adding the areas
associated with the values 2 and 3 of the random variable X. We obtain

P1X ⫽ 22 ⫹ P1X ⫽ 32 ⫽ 112a3

8b ⫹ 112a1

8b ⫽ 1

2

This result provides us with a method of computing the probabilities of events
directly from the knowledge of a histogram of the probability distribution of the ran-
dom variable associated with the experiment.

EXAMPLE 7 Suppose the probability distribution of a random variable X is repre-
sented by the histogram shown in Figure 16. Identify the part of the histogram
whose area gives the probability P(10 ⱕ X ⱕ 20).

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

510

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

FIGURE 16

8

9

10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22

x

Solution The event (10 ⱕ X ⱕ 20) is the event consisting of outcomes related 
to the values 10, 11, 12, . . . , 20 of the random variable X. The probability of this
event P(10 ⱕ X ⱕ 20) is therefore given by the shaded area of the histogram in 
Figure 17.

FIGURE 17
P(10 ⱕ X ⱕ 20)

8

9

10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22

x

8.4 Self-Check Exercises

1. Three  balls  are  selected  at  random  without  replacement
from  an  urn  containing  four  black  balls  and  five  white
balls.  Let  the  random  variable  X denote  the  number  of
black balls drawn.
a. List the outcomes of the experiment.
b. Find the value assigned to each outcome of the experi-

ment by the random variable X.

c. Find  the  event  consisting  of  the  outcomes  to  which  a

value of 2 has been assigned by X.

2. The  following  data,  extracted  from  the  records  of  Dover
Public Library, give the number of books borrowed by the
library’s members over a 1-month period:

8.4 Concept Questions

Books
Frequency of
Occurrence

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

780

300

412

205

98

54

57

30

8

6

a. Find the probability distribution of the random variable
X,  where  X denotes  the  number  of  books  checked  out
over a 1-month period by a randomly chosen member.

b. Draw the histogram representing this probability distrib-

ution.

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 8.4 can be found on 
page 513.

1. What is a random variable? Give an example.

2. Give an example of (a) a finite discrete random variable, 
(b) an infinite discrete random variable, and (c) a continu-
ous random variable.

3. Suppose  you  are  given  the  probability  distribution  for  a
random variable X. Explain how you would construct a his-
togram for this probability distribution. What does the area
of each rectangle in the histogram represent?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

8.4 Exercises

1. Three balls are selected at random without replacement from
an urn containing four green balls and six red balls. Let the
random variable X denote the number of green balls drawn.
a. List the outcomes of the experiment.
b. Find the value assigned to each outcome of the experi-

ment by the random variable X.

c. Find  the  event  consisting  of  the  outcomes  to  which  a

value of 3 has been assigned by X.

2. A  coin  is  tossed  four  times.  Let  the  random  variable  X

denote the number of tails that occur.
a. List the outcomes of the experiment.
b. Find the value assigned to each outcome of the experi-

ment by the random variable X.

c. Find  the  event  consisting  of  the  outcomes  to  which  a

value of 2 has been assigned by X.

3. A die is rolled repeatedly until a 6 falls uppermost. Let the
random variable X denote the number of times the die is
rolled. What are the values that X may assume?

4. Cards are selected one at a time without replacement from
a well-shuffled deck of 52 cards until an ace is drawn. Let
X denote  the  random  variable  that  gives  the  number  of
cards drawn. What values may X assume?

5. Let X denote the random variable that gives the sum of the
faces  that  fall  uppermost  when  two  fair  dice  are  rolled.
Find P(X ⫽ 7).

6. Two cards are drawn from a well-shuffled deck of 52 play-
ing  cards.  Let  X denote  the  number  of  aces  drawn.  Find 
P(X ⫽ 2).

In Exercises 7–12, give the range of values that the random vari-
able X may assume and classify the random variable as finite dis-
crete, infinite discrete, or continuous.
7. X ⫽ The number of times a die is thrown until a 2 appears

8. X ⫽ The number of defective iPods in a sample of eight

iPods

9. X ⫽ The distance in miles a commuter travels to work

10. X ⫽ The number of hours a child watches television on a

given day

11. X ⫽ The  number  of  times  an  accountant  takes  the  CPA

examination before passing

12. X ⫽ The number of boys in a four-child family

In Exercises 13–16, determine whether the table gives the prob-
ability  distribution  of  the  random  variable  X.  Explain  your
answer.
13.

8.4 DISTRIBUTIONS OF RANDOM VARIABLES

511

14.

15.

16.

x
P(X ⴝ x)

x
P(X ⴝ x)

x
P(X ⴝ x)

⫺2
0.2

1
0.3

⫺1
0.3

⫺1
0.1

0
0.3

1
0.2

2
0.1

2
0.1

3
0.2

4
0.2

5
0.1

6
0.2

0
0.1

1
0.2

2
0.2

3
0.2

In Exercises 17 and 18, find conditions on the numbers a and/or
b such that the table gives the probability distribution of the ran-
dom variable X.
17.

18.

x
P(X ⴝ x)

x
P(X ⴝ x)

0
0.1

⫺1
0.3

2
0.4

0
a

4
a

6
0.1

8
0.2

1
0.2

2
0.2

4
b

5
0.1

19. The  probability  distribution  of  the  random  variable  X is

shown in the accompanying table:

x
P(X ⴝ x)

⫺10
.20

⫺5
.15

0
.05

5
.1

10
.25

15
.1

20
.15

Find:

a. P1X ⫽ ⫺102
b. P1X ⱖ 52
c. P1 ⫺5 ⱕ X ⱕ 52
d. P1X ⱕ 202
e. P1X ⬍ 52
f. P1X ⫽ 32

20. The  probability  distribution  of  the  random  variable  X is

shown in the accompanying table:

x
P(X ⴝ x)

⫺5
.17

⫺3
.13

⫺2
.33

0
.16

2
.11

3
.10

Find:

a. P1X ⱕ 02
b. P1X ⱕ ⫺32
c. P1 ⫺2 ⱕ X ⱕ 22
d. P1X ⫽ ⫺22
e. P1X ⬎ 02
f. P1X ⫽ 12

x
P(X ⴝ x)

⫺3
0.2

⫺2
0.4

⫺1
0.3

0

⫺0.2

1
0.1

2
0.1

21. Suppose that the probability distribution of a random vari-
able  X is  represented  by  the  accompanying  histogram.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

512

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

Shade the part of the histogram whose area gives the prob-

ability P117 ⱕ X ⱕ 202.

In this study, the number of customers waiting in line at the
express checkout at the beginning of each 3-min interval
between 9 A.M. and 12 noon on Saturday was observed.

12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20

x

Customers
Frequency of
Occurrence

Customers
Frequency of
Occurrence

0

1

5

8

1

4

2

2

6

10

7

6

8

3

3

7

9

4

4

14

10

1

22. EXAMS An  examination  consisting  of  ten  true-or-false
questions was taken by a class of 100 students. The proba-
bility  distribution  of  the  random  variable  X,  where  X
denotes the number of questions answered correctly by a
randomly chosen student, is represented by the accompa-
nying histogram. The rectangle with base centered on the
number  8  is  missing.  What  should  be  the  height  of  this
rectangle?

a. Find the probability distribution of the random variable
X, where X denotes the number of customers observed
waiting in line.

b. Draw the histogram representing the probability distri-

bution.

c. Find the probability that the number of customers wait-
ing  in  line  in  any  3-min  interval  between  9  A.M.  and 
12 noon is between 1 and 3, inclusive.

.25

.20

.15

.10

.05

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

x

23. Two dice are rolled. Let the random variable X denote the
number  that  falls  uppermost  on  the  first  die,  and  let  Y
denote the number that falls uppermost on the second die.
a. Find the probability distributions of X and Y.
b. Find the probability distribution of X ⫹ Y.

24. DISTRIBUTION OF FAMILIES BY SIZE The  Public  Housing
Authority  in  a  certain  community  conducted  a  survey  of
1000 families to determine the distribution of families by
size. The results follow:

Family Size
Frequency of
Occurrence

2

3

4

5

6

7

350

200

245

125

66

10

8

4

a. Find the probability distribution of the random variable
X, where X denotes the number of people in a randomly
chosen family.

b. Draw  the  histogram  corresponding  to  the  probability

distribution found in part (a).

c. Find  the  probability  that  a  family  chosen  at  random

from those surveyed has more than five members.

25. WAITING LINES The accompanying data were obtained in a
study conducted by the manager of SavMore Supermarket.

26. MONEY MARKET RATES The interest rates paid by 30 finan-
cial institutions on a certain day for money market deposit
accounts are shown in the accompanying table:

Rate, %
Institutions

Rate, %
Institutions

3
1

3.58

1

3.25

7

3.60

8

3.55

7

3.65

3

3.56

1

3.85

2

Let the random variable X denote the interest rate per year
paid  by  a  randomly  chosen  financial  institution  on  its
money market deposit accounts. 
a. Find  the  probability  distribution  associated  with  these

data.

b. Find the probability that the interest rate paid by a finan-
cial institution chosen at random is less than 3.56% per
year.

27. TELEVISION PILOTS After the private screening of a new tele-
vision pilot, audience members were asked to rate the new
show  on  a  scale  of  1  to  10  (10  being  the  highest  rating).
From a group of 140 people, the following responses were
obtained:

Rating
Frequency of
Occurrence

1

1

2

4

3

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

23

21

28

29

16

4

Let  the  random  variable  X denote  the  rating  given  to  the
show by a randomly chosen audience member.
a. Find  the  probability  distribution  associated  with  these

data.

b. What is the probability that the new television pilot got

a rating that is higher than 5?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

28. U.S.  POPULATION BY AGE The  following  table  gives  the

b. What  percentage  of  the  U.S.  population  is  between  5

8.4 DISTRIBUTIONS OF RANDOM VARIABLES

513

2002 age distribution of the U.S. population:

Group
Age
(in years)
Number (in
thousands)

1

2

3

4

5

6

Under 5

5–19

20–24

25–44 45–64 65 and over

19,527 59,716 18,611 83,009 66,088

33,590

Let the random variable X denote a randomly chosen age
group within the population.
a. Find  the  probability  distribution  associated  with  these

data.

8.4 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

and 24 years old, inclusive?

Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

In Exercises 29 and 30, determine whether the statement is true
or  false.  If  it  is  true,  explain  why  it  is  true.  If  it  is  false,  give  an
example to show why it is false.
29. Suppose  X is  a  finite  discrete  random  variable  assuming 
the values x1, x2, . . . , xn and associated probabilities p1, 
p2, . . . , pn. Then p1 ⫹ p2 ⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⫹ pn ⫽ 1.

30. The area of a histogram associated with a probability dis-

tribution is a number between 0 and 1.

1. a. Using the accompanying tree diagram, we see that the

outcomes of the experiment are

S ⫽ {BBB, BBW, BWB, BWW,

WBB, WBW, WWB, WWW}

2. a. We divide each number in the bottom row of the given
table by 1942 (the sum of these numbers) to obtain the
probabilities  associated  with  the  random  variable  X
when X takes on the values 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8.
For example,

Outcomes

B

B B B

W
B

W

B

W
B

B B W
B W B

B W W

W B B

W B W
W W B

B

W

B

W

B

W

P1X ⫽ 02 ⫽ 780
P1X ⫽ 12 ⫽ 300

1942

1942

⬇ .402

⬇ .154

The  required  probability  distribution  and  histogram 
follow:

x
P(X ⴝ x)

x
P(X ⴝ x)

0

.402

5

.028

1

.154

6

.029

2

.212

7

.015

3

.106

8

.003

4

.050

W

W W W

b.

b. Using the results of part (a), we obtain the values assigned

to the outcomes of the experiment as follows:

Outcome
Value

Outcome
Value

BBB

3

WBB

2

BBW

2

BWB

2

BWW

1

WBW

WWB

WWW

1

1

0

c. The required event is {BBW, BWB, WBB}.

.4

.3

.2

.1

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

x

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Graphing a Histogram

Graphing Utility
A graphing utility can be used to plot the histogram for a given set of data, as illus-
trated by the following example.

(continued)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

514

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

APPLIED EXAMPLE 1 A survey of 90,000 households conducted in a cer-
tain year revealed the following percentage of women who wear a shoe size 

within the given ranges.

Shoe Size

⬍5

Women, % 1

5–5 1
2

5

6–6 1
2

15

7–7 1
2

27

8–8 1
2

9–9 1
2

10–10 1
2

⬎

10 1
2

29

14

7

2

Source: Footwear Market Insights survey.

Let X denote the random variable taking on the values 1 through 8, where 1 corre-
sponds to a shoe size less than 5, 2 corresponds to a shoe size of 
, and so on.
a. Plot a histogram for the given data.
b. What  percentage  of  women  in  the  survey  wear  a  shoe  size  within  the  ranges

5–5 1
2

8–8 1
2

?

7–7 1
2

or 

Solution
a. Enter the values of X as x1 ⫽ 1, x2 ⫽ 2, . . . , x8 ⫽ 8 and the corresponding
values of Y as y1 ⫽ 1, y2 ⫽ 5, . . . , y8 ⫽ 2. Then using the DRAW function
from the Statistics menu, we draw the histogram shown in Figure T1.

35

0

9

b. The probability that a woman participating in the survey wears a shoe size

FIGURE T1
The histogram for the given data, using
the viewing window [0, 9] ⫻ [0, 35]

within the ranges 

or 

8–8 1
2

is given by

7–7 1
2
P1 X ⫽ 42 ⫹ P1 X ⫽ 52 ⫽ .27 ⫹ .29 ⫽ .56

This tells us that 56% of the women wear a shoe size within the ranges 
or 

.

8–8 1
2

7–7 1
2

Excel
Excel can be used to plot the histogram for a given set of data, as illustrated by the fol-
lowing example.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 2 A survey of 90,000 households conducted in a cer-
tain year revealed the following percentage of women who wear a shoe size 

within the given ranges.

Shoe Size

⬍5

Women, % 1

5–5 1
2

5

6–6 1
2

15

7–7 1
2

27

8–8 1
2

9–9 1
2

10–10 1
2

⬎

10 1
2

29

14

7

2

Source: Footwear Market Insights survey.

Let X denote the random variable taking on the values 1 through 8, where 1 corre-
sponds to a shoe size less than 5, 2 corresponds to a shoe size of 
, and so on. 
a. Plot a histogram for the given data.
b. What percentage of women in the survey wear a shoe size within the ranges

5–51
2

7–7 

1
2

or 

1
8–8 
2

?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

8.4 DISTRIBUTIONS OF RANDOM VARIABLES

515

Solution

a. Enter the given data in columns A and B onto a spreadsheet, as shown in 

Above Chart

. Enter Histogram as the title. Select 

Chart Title

兺

from the Editing

Enter

Figure T2. Highlight the data in column B, and select 
group under the Home tab. The sum of the numbers in this column (100) will
appear in cell B10. In cell C2, type =B2/100, and then press 
. To
extend the formula to cell C9, select C2 and move the pointer to the small
black box at the lower right corner of that cell. Drag the black ⫹ that appears
(at the lower right corner of cell C2) through cell C9, and then release it. The
probability distribution shown in cells C2 to C9 will then appear on your
spreadsheet. Then highlight the data in the Probability column, and select
Column
type (Clustered Column). Under the Layout tab, click on 
Labels group, and select 
Primary Horizontal Axis Title
select 
select 
Rotated Title
select 
dialog box that appears, and then click 
legend entry.

from the Charts group under the Insert tab. Click on the first chart 
in the 

and enter Probability. Right-click a bar on the chart and 
. Adjust the slider under Gap Width to 0% in the 

Title Below Axis
Primary Vertical Axis Title

, and then enter X as the horizontal axis title. Next, 

under Axis Titles from the Labels group, 

Close

. Finally, delete the Series 1

under Axis Titles followed by 

Format Data Series

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

A
X

B

C

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Frequency
1
5
15
27
29
14
7
2
100

Probability
0.01
0.05
0.15
0.27
0.29
0.14
0.07
0.02

The histogram shown in Figure T3 will appear.

Histogram

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

1

2

3

4
X

5

6

7

8

FIGURE T2
Completed spreadsheet for Example 2

FIGURE T3
The histogram for the random 
variable X

Note: Boldfaced words/characters enclosed in a box (for example, 
required. Words/characters printed blue (for example, Chart sub-type:) indicate words/characters that appear on the screen.
Words/characters printed in a monospace font (for example, =(—2/3)*A2+2) indicates words/characters that need to be
typed and entered).

) indicate an action (click, select, or press) is

Enter

(continued)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

516

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

b. The  probability  that  a  woman  participating  in  the  survey  wears  a  shoe  size

within the ranges 

7–7 

1
2

or 

8–8 

1
2

is given by

P1X ⫽ 42 ⫹ P1X ⫽ 52 ⫽ .27 ⫹ .29 ⫽ .56

This tells us that 56% of the women wear a shoe size within the ranges 
8–8 

.

1
2

7–7 

1
2

or

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

1. Graph the histogram associated with the data given in Ta-
ble  3,  page  505.  Compare  your  graph  with  that  given  in
Figure 13, page 508.

3. Graph  the  histogram  associated  with  the  data  given  in

Exercise 25, page 512.

4. Graph  the  histogram  associated  with  the  data  given  in

2. Graph  the  histogram  associated  with  the  data  given  in

Exercise 27, page 512.

Exercise 24, page 512.

8.5

Expected Value

Mean
The average value of a set of numbers is a familiar notion to most people. For exam-
ple, to compute the average of the four numbers

12, 16, 23, 37

we simply add these numbers and divide the resulting sum by 4, giving the required
average as

12 ⫹ 16 ⫹ 23 ⫹ 37

⫽ 88
4

⫽ 22

In general, we have the following definition:

4

Average, or Mean
The average, or mean, of the n numbers

is 

x

(read “x bar”), where

x1, x2, . . . , xn

x1 ⫹ x2 ⫹ p ⫹ xn

n

x ⫽

(10)

TABLE 9

Cars

Frequency of
Occurrence

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

2
9
16
12
8
6
4
2
1

APPLIED EXAMPLE 1 Waiting Times Refer to Example 6, Section 8.4. Find
the average number of cars waiting in line at the bank’s drive-in teller at 

the beginning of each 2-minute interval during the period in question.

Solution The number of cars, together with its corresponding frequency of
occurrence, are reproduced in Table 9. Observe that the number 0 (of cars) occurs
twice, the number 1 occurs 9 times, and so on. There are altogether

2 ⫹ 9 ⫹ 16 ⫹ 12 ⫹ 8 ⫹ 6 ⫹ 4 ⫹ 2 ⫹ 1 ⫽ 60

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8.5 EXPECTED VALUE

517

numbers to be averaged. Therefore, the required average is given by

10 # 22 ⫹ 11 # 92 ⫹ 12 # 162 ⫹ 13 # 122 ⫹ 14 # 82 ⫹ 15 # 62 ⫹ 16 # 42 ⫹ 17 # 22 ⫹ 18 # 12

60

⬇ 3.1

or approximately 3.1 cars.

Expected Value
Let’s reconsider the expression on the left-hand side of Equation (10), which gives the
average of the frequency distribution shown in Table 9. Dividing each term by the
denominator, we may rewrite the expression in the form

0 # a 2
60b ⫹ 1 # a 9
 ⫹ 6 # a 4

60b ⫹ 7 # a 2

60b ⫹ 2 # a16

60b ⫹ 3 # a12
60b ⫹ 8 # a 1
60b

60b ⫹ 4 # a 8

60b ⫹ 5 # a 6
60b

Observe that each term in the sum is a product of two factors; the first factor is the value
assumed by the random variable X, where X denotes the number of cars waiting in line,
and the second factor is just the probability associated with that value of the random
variable. This observation suggests the following general method for calculating the
expected value (that is, the average or mean) of a random variable X that assumes a
finite number of values from the knowledge of its probability distribution.

Expected Value of a Random Variable X
Let X denote a random variable that assumes the values x1, x2, . . . , xn with asso-
ciated probabilities p1, p2, . . . , pn, respectively. Then the expected value of X,
denoted by E(X), is given by

E1 X2 ⫽ x1p1 ⫹ x2p2 ⫹ . . . ⫹ xnpn

(11)

TABLE 10
Probability Distribution
x

P(X ⫽ x)

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

.03
.15
.27
.20
.13
.10
.07
.03
.02

Note The numbers x1, x2, . . . , xn may be positive, zero, or negative. For example,
such a number might be positive if it represents a profit and negative if it represents a
loss.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 2 Waiting Times Re-solve Example 1 by using the
probability distribution associated with the experiment, which is repro-

duced in Table 10.

Solution Let X denote the number of cars waiting in line. Then the average
number of cars waiting in line is given by the expected value of X—that is, by

E1X2 ⫽ 1021.032 ⫹ 1121.152 ⫹ 1221.272 ⫹ 1321.202 ⫹ 1421.132

  ⫹ 1521.102 ⫹ 1621.072 ⫹ 1721.032 ⫹ 1821.022
 ⫽ 3.1 cars

which agrees with the earlier result.

The expected value of a random variable X is a measure of the central tendency
of the probability distribution associated with X. In repeated trials of an experiment
with random variable X, the average of the observed values of X gets closer and closer
to the expected value of X as the number of trials gets larger and larger. Geometrically,

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

518

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

the expected value of a random variable X has the following simple interpretation: If
a laminate is made of the histogram of a probability distribution associated with a ran-
dom variable X, then the expected value of X corresponds to the point on the base of
the laminate at which the laminate will balance perfectly when the point is directly
over a fulcrum (Figure 18).

E(X )

FIGURE 18
Expected value of a random variable X

x

TABLE 11
Probability Distribution

x

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

1
36
2
36
3
36
4
36
5
36
6
36
5
36
4
36
3
36
2
36
1
36

FIGURE 19
Histogram showing the probability distri-
bution for the sum of the uppermost
faces of two dice

EXAMPLE 3 Let X denote the random variable that gives the sum of the faces that
fall uppermost when two fair dice are rolled. Find the expected value, E(X), of X.

P(X ⫽ x)

Solution The probability distribution of X, reproduced in Table 11, was found in
Example 5, Section 8.4. Using this result, we find

E1X2 ⫽ 2a 1
  ⫹ 8a 5

36b ⫹ 3a 2
36b ⫹ 9a 4

36b ⫹ 4a 3
36b ⫹ 10a 3

36b ⫹ 5a 4

36b ⫹ 6a 5

36b ⫹ 7a 6
36b
36b ⫹ 12a 1
36b

36b ⫹ 11a 2

 ⫽ 7

Note that, because of the symmetry of the histogram of the probability distribution
with respect to the vertical line x ⫽ 7, the result could have been obtained by merely
inspecting Figure 19.

6/36

5/36

4/36

3/36

2/36

1/36

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10  11  12

x

The next example shows how we can use the concept of expected value to help us

make the best investment decision.

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 4 Expected Profit A private equity group intends to
purchase one of two motels currently being offered for sale in a certain 

city. The terms of sale of the two motels are similar, although the Regina Inn has
52 rooms and is in a slightly better location than the Merlin Motor Lodge, which

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

8.5 EXPECTED VALUE

519

has 60 rooms. Records obtained for each motel reveal that the occupancy rates,
with corresponding probabilities, during the May–September tourist season are as
shown in the following tables.

Regina Inn
Occupancy Rate

Probability

Merlin Motor Lodge
Occupancy Rate

Probability

.80

.19

.75

.35

.85

.22

.80

.21

.90

.31

.85

.18

.95

.23

.90

.15

1.00

.05

.95

.09

1.00

.02

The average profit per day for each occupied room at the Regina Inn is $40,
whereas the average profit per day for each occupied room at the Merlin Motor
Lodge is $36.
a. Find the average number of rooms occupied per day at each motel.
b. If the investors’ objective is to purchase the motel that generates the higher

daily profit, which motel should they purchase? (Compare the expected daily
profit of the two motels.)

Solution

a. Let X denote the occupancy rate at the Regina Inn. Then the average daily occu-

pancy rate at the Regina Inn is given by the expected value of X—that is, by

E1X2 ⫽ 1.8021.192 ⫹ 1.8521.222 ⫹ 1.9021.312

  ⫹ 1.9521.232 ⫹ 11.0021.052
 ⫽ .8865

The average number of rooms occupied per day at the Regina Inn is

1.886521522 ⬇ 46.1

or approximately 46.1 rooms. Similarly, letting Y denote the occupancy rate at
the Merlin Motor Lodge, we have

E1Y2 ⫽ 1.7521.352 ⫹ 1.8021.212 ⫹ 1.8521.182 ⫹ 1.9021.152

  ⫹ 1.9521.092 ⫹ 11.0021.022
 ⫽ .8240

The average number of rooms occupied per day at the Merlin Motor Lodge is

1.824021602 ⬇ 49.4

146.121402 ⫽ 1844
149.421362 ⬇ 1778

or approximately 49.4 rooms.

b. The expected daily profit at the Regina Inn is given by

or $1844. The expected daily profit at the Merlin Motor Lodge is given by

or approximately $1778. From these results, we conclude that the private
equity group should purchase the Regina Inn, which is expected to yield a
higher daily profit.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

520

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

APPLIED EXAMPLE 5 Raffles The Island Club is holding a fund-raising raf-
fle. Ten thousand tickets have been sold for $2 each. There will be a first 
prize of $3000, 3 second prizes of $1000 each, 5 third prizes of $500 each, and
20 consolation prizes of $100 each. Letting X denote the net winnings (that is,
winnings less the cost of the ticket) associated with a ticket, find E(X). Interpret
your results.

Solution The values assumed by X are (0 ⫺ 2), (100 ⫺ 2), (500 ⫺ 2), (1000 ⫺ 2),
and (3000 ⫺ 2)—that is, ⫺2, 98, 498, 998, and 2998—which correspond, respec-
tively, to the value of a losing ticket, a consolation prize, a third prize, and so on.
The probability distribution of X may be calculated in the usual manner and
appears in Table 12. Using the table, we find

E1X2 ⫽ 1⫺221.99712 ⫹ 981.00202 ⫹ 4981.00052

  ⫹ 9981.00032 ⫹ 29981.00012
 ⫽ ⫺0.95

This expected value gives the long-run average loss (negative gain) of a holder of
one ticket; that is, if one participated in such a raffle by purchasing one ticket each
time, in the long run, one may expect to lose, on the average, 95 cents per raffle.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 6 Roulette In the game of roulette as played in Las
Vegas casinos, the wheel is divided into 38 compartments numbered 1 
through 36, 0, and 00. One-half of the numbers 1 through 36 are red, the other
half are black, and 0 and 00 are green (Figure 20). Of the many types of bets
that may be placed, one type involves betting on the outcome of the color of the
winning number. For example, one may place a certain sum of money on red. If
the winning number is red, one wins an amount equal to the bet placed and the
amount of the bet is returned; otherwise, one loses the amount of the bet. Find
the expected value of the winnings on a $1 bet placed on red.

TABLE 12
Probability Distribution for a Raffle

x

⫺2
98
498
998
2998

P(X ⫽ x)

.9971
.0020
.0005
.0003
.0001

FIGURE 20
Roulette wheel

Solution Let X be a random variable whose values are 1 and ⫺1, which corre-
spond to a win and a loss, respectively. The probabilities associated with the val-
ues 1 and ⫺1 are 
, respectively. Therefore, the expected value is given by

and 

18
38

20
38

E1X 2 ⫽ 1a18
 ⬇ ⫺0.053

38b ⫹ 1⫺12a20

38b ⫽ ⫺ 2

38

Thus, if one places a $1 bet on red over and over again, one may expect to lose,
on the average, approximately 5 cents per bet in the long run.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

8.5 EXPECTED VALUE

521

Examples 5 and 6 illustrate games that are not “fair.” Of course, most participants
in such games are aware of this fact and participate in them for other reasons. In a fair
game, neither party has an advantage, a condition that translates into the condition that
E(X) ⫽ 0, where X takes on the values of a player’s winnings.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 7 Fair Games Mike and Bill play a card game with a
standard deck of 52 cards. Mike selects a card from a well-shuffled deck and 
receives A dollars from Bill if the card selected is a diamond; otherwise, Mike pays
Bill a dollar. Determine the value of A if the game is to be fair.

Solution Let X denote a random variable whose values are associated with
Mike’s winnings. Then X takes on the value A with probability P(X ⫽ A) ⫽ 1
4
(since there are 13 diamonds in the deck) if Mike wins and takes on the value ⫺1
with probability P(X ⫽ ⫺1) ⫽ if Mike loses. Since the game is to be a fair one,
the expected value E(X) of Mike’s winnings must be equal to zero; that is,

3
4

E1X2 ⫽ Aa1

4b ⫹ 1⫺12a3

4b ⫽ 0

Solving this equation for A gives A ⫽ 3. Thus, the card game will be fair if Bill
makes a $3 payoff when a diamond is drawn.

Odds
In  everyday  parlance,  the  probability  of  the  occurrence  of  an  event  is  often  stated 
in  terms  of  the  odds  in  favor  of (or  odds  against)  the  occurrence  of  the  event.  For
example, one often hears statements such as “The odds that the Dodgers will win the
World Series this season are 7 to 5” and “The odds that it will not rain tomorrow are
3 to 2.” We will return to these examples later. But first, let us look at a definition that
ties together these two concepts.

Odds In Favor Of and Odds Against
If P(E) is the probability of an event E occurring, then
1. The odds in favor of E occurring are

2. The odds against E occurring are

P1E2
1 ⫺ P1E2 ⫽
1 ⫺ P1E2
P1E2 ⫽

P1E2
P1Ec2     3P1E2 ⫽ 14
P1Ec2
P1E2     3P1E2 ⫽ 04

(12a)

(12b)

Notes

1. The odds in favor of the occurrence of an event are given by the ratio of the prob-
ability of the event occurring to the probability of the event not occurring. The odds
against the occurrence of an event are given by the reciprocal of the odds in favor
of the occurrence of the event.

2. Whenever possible, odds are expressed as ratios of whole numbers. If the odds in
favor of E are  , we say that the odds in favor of E are a to b. If the odds against E
occurring are  , we say that the odds against E are b to a.

a
b

b
a

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

522

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

APPLIED EXAMPLE 8 Roulette Find the odds in favor of winning a 
bet on red in American roulette. What are the odds against winning 

a bet on red?

Solution The probability of winning a bet here—the probability that the ball
lands in a red compartment—is given by P ⫽ . Therefore, using Equation (12a),
we see that the odds in favor of winning a bet on red are

18
38

P1E2
1 ⫺ P1E2 ⫽

E, event of winning a bet on red

18
38

1 ⫺ 18
38

18
38

 ⫽

38 ⫺ 18

38

 ⫽ 18
38
 ⫽ 18
20

# 38
20
⫽ 9
10

or 9 to 10. Next, using Equation (12b), we see that the odds against winning a bet
on red are 

, or 10 to 9.

10
9

Now suppose that the odds in favor of the occurrence of an event are a to b. Then

Equation (12a) gives

⫽

a
 
b

P1E2
1 ⫺ P1E2
a31 ⫺ P1E24 ⫽ bP1E2
a ⫺ aP1E2 ⫽ bP1E2

a ⫽ 1a ⫹ b2P1E2

P1E2 ⫽ a

a ⫹ b

Cross-multiply.

which leads us to the following result:

Probability of an Event (Given the Odds)
If the odds in favor of an event E occurring are a to b, then the probability of E
occurring is

P1E2 ⫽ a

a ⫹ b

(13)

Equation (13) is often used to determine subjective probabilities, as the next example
shows.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 9 Consider each of the following statements.
a. “The odds that the Dodgers will win the World Series this season are 7 to 5.”
b. “The odds that it will not rain tomorrow are 3 to 2.”

Express each of these odds as a probability of the event occurring.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8.5 EXPECTED VALUE

523

PORTFOLIO

Robert H. Mason

TITLE Vice President, Wealth Management Advisor
INSTITUTION The Mason Group

The Mason Group—a team of

Financial Advisors at a major wire
house firm—acts as an interface
between clients and investment

markets. To meet the needs of our private clients, it is
important for us to maintain constant contact with them,
adjusting their investments when the markets and alloca-
tions change and when the clients’ goals change.

We often help our clients determine whether their vari-
ous expected sources of income in retirement will provide
them with their desired retirement lifestyle. To begin, we
determine the after-tax funds needed in retirement in
today’s dollars in consultation with the client. Using simple
arithmetic, we then look at the duration and amount of their
various income flows and their current portfolio allocations
(stocks, bonds, cash, etc.). Once we have made this assess-
ment, we take into consideration future possible allocations
to arrive at a range of probabilities for portfolio valuation for
all years up to and including retirement.

For example, we might tell a client that, on the basis of
their given investment plan, there is an 80–95% probability
that the expected value of his or her portfolio will increase
from $1 million to about $1.5 million by the time the client
turns 90; a 50–80% chance that it will increase from $1 mil-
lion to around $2 million; and a 30–50% chance that it will
increase to approximately $2.8 million.

To arrive at these probabilities, we use a deterministic

model that assumes that a constant annual rate of return is
applied to the portfolio every year of the analysis. We also
use probabilistic modeling, taking into account various fac-
tors such as economic conditions, the allocation of assets,
and market volatility. By using
these techniques we are able to
arrive at a confidence level, with-
out making any guarantees, that
our clients will be able to attain
the lifestyle in retirement they
desire.

Scooter Grubb; (inset) © istockphoto.com/Eugene Choi

Solution
a. Using Equation (13) with a ⫽ 7 and b ⫽ 5 gives the required probability as

7

7 ⫹ 5

⫽ 7
12

⬇ .5833

b. Here, the event is that it will not rain tomorrow. Using Equation (13) with a ⫽ 3

and b ⫽ 2, we conclude that the probability that it will not rain tomorrow is

3

3 ⫹ 2

⫽ 3
5

⫽ .6

Explore & Discuss
In the movie Casino, the executive of the Tangiers Casino, Sam Rothstein (Robert DeNiro),
fired the manager of the slot machines in the casino after three gamblers hit three “million
dollar” jackpots in a span of 20 minutes. Rothstein claimed that it was a scam and that
somebody had gotten into those machines to set the wheels. He was especially annoyed at
the slot machine manager’s assertion that there was no way to determine this. According to
Rothstein, the odds of hitting a jackpot in a four-wheel machine is 1 in  million, and the
probability of hitting three jackpots in a row is “in the billions.” “It cannot happen! It 
will not happen!” To see why Rothstein was so indignant, find the odds of hitting the jack-
pots in three of the machines in quick succession, and comment on the likelihood of this
happening.

11
2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

524

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

Median and Mode
In addition to the mean, there are two other measures of central tendency of a group
of numerical data: the median and the mode of a group of numbers.

Median
The median of a group of numbers arranged in increasing or decreasing order is
(a) the middle number if there is an odd number of entries or (b) the mean of the
two middle numbers if there is an even number of entries.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 10 Commuting Times

a. The times, in minutes, Susan took to go to work on nine consecutive

working days were

46

42

49

40

52

48

45

43

50

What is the median of her morning commute times?

b. The times, in minutes, Susan took to return home from work on eight consec-

utive working days were

37

36

39

37

34

38

41

40

What is the median of her evening commute times?

Solution

a. Arranging the numbers in increasing order, we have

40

42

43

45

46

48

49

50

52

Here, we have an odd number of entries with the middle number equal to 46,
and this gives the required median.

b. Arranging the numbers in increasing order, we have

34

36

37

37

38

39

40

41

Here, the number of entries is even, and the required median is 

37 ⫹ 38

2

⫽ 37.5

Mode
The mode of a group of numbers is the number in the group that occurs most
frequently.

Note
A group of numerical data may have no mode, a unique mode, or more than one mode.

EXAMPLE 11 Find the mode, if there is one, of the given group of numbers.
a. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6
b. 2, 3, 3, 4, 6, 8
c. 2, 3, 3, 3, 4, 4, 4, 8

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8.5 EXPECTED VALUE

525

Solution

a. The set has no mode because there isn’t a number that occurs more frequently

than the others.

b. The mode is 3 because it occurs more frequently than the other numbers.
c. The modes are 3 and 4 because each number occurs three times.

Of the three measures of central tendency of a group of numerical data, the mean

is by far the most suitable in work that requires mathematical computations.

8.5 Self-Check Exercises

1. Find the expected value of a random variable X having the

following probability distribution:

Units
Probability

20
.05

25
.10

30
.30

35
.25

40
.15

45
.10

50
.05

x
P(X ⴝ x)

⫺4
.10

⫺3
.20

⫺1
.25

0
.10

1
.25

2
.10

How  many  townhouses  can  the  developer  expect  to  sell
within the first month they are put on the market?

2. The  developer  of  Shoreline  Condominiums  has  provided
the following estimate of the probability that 20, 25, 30, 35,
40, 45, or 50 of the townhouses will be sold within the first
month they are offered for sale.

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 8.5 can be found on 
page 529.

8.5 Concept Questions

1. What is the expected value of a random variable? Give an

3. a. If the probability of an event E occurring is P(E), what

example.

2. What is a fair game? Is the game of roulette as played in

American casinos a fair game? Why or why not?

are the odds in favor of E occurring?

b. If  the  odds  in  favor  of  an  event  occurring  are  a to  b,

what is the probability of E occurring?

8.5 Exercises

1. During the first year at a university that uses a four-point
grading  system,  a  freshman  took  ten  three-credit  courses
and received two As, three Bs, four Cs, and one D.
a. Compute this student’s grade-point average.
b. Let the random variable X denote the number of points
corresponding to a given letter grade. Find the probabil-
ity distribution of the random variable X and compute
E(X), the expected value of X.

2. Records kept by the chief dietitian at the university cafete-
ria over a 30-week period show the following weekly con-
sumption of milk (in gallons):

Milk
Weeks

Milk
Weeks

200
3

225
3

205
4

230
2

210
6

235
2

215
5

240
1

220
4

a. Find the average number of gallons of milk consumed

per week in the cafeteria.

b. Let the random variable X denote the number of gallons
of milk consumed in a week at the cafeteria. Find the
probability  distribution  of  the  random  variable  X and
compute E(X), the expected value of X.

3. Find the expected value of a random variable X having the

following probability distribution:

x
P(X ⴝ x)

⫺5
.12

⫺1
.16

0
.26

1
.22

5
.14

8
.10

4. Find the expected value of a random variable X having the

following probability distribution:

x

P(X ⴝ x)

0

1
8

1

1
4

2

3
16

3

1
4

4

1
16

5

1
8

5. EXPECTED EARNINGS The daily earnings X of an employee who
works on a commission basis are given by the following prob-
ability distribution. Find the employee’s expected earnings.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

526

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

x (in $)
P(X ⴝ x)

x (in $)
P(X ⴝ x)

0
.07

100
.28

25
.12

125
.18

50
.17

150
.04

6. In  a  four-child  family,  what  is  the  expected  number  of
boys? (Assume that the probability of a boy being born is
the same as the probability of a girl being born.)

7. EXPECTED SALES On the basis of past experience, the manager
of the VideoRama Store has compiled the following table,
which gives the probabilities that a customer who enters the
VideoRama Store will buy 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4 DVDs. How many
DVDs can a customer entering this store be expected to buy?

75
.14

12. EXPECTED SALES The management of the Cambridge Com-
pany has projected the sales of its products (in millions of
dollars) for the upcoming year, with the associated proba-
bilities shown in the following table:

Sales
Probability

20
.05

22
.10

24
.35

26
.30

28
.15

30
.05

What does the management expect the sales to be next year?

13. INTEREST-RATE PREDICTION A  panel  of  50  economists  was
asked  to  predict  the  average  prime  interest  rate  for  the
upcoming year. The results of the survey follow:

Interest Rate, % 3.9
Economists
3

4.0
8

4.1
12

4.2
14

4.3
8

4.4
5

DVDs
Probability

0
.42

1
.36

2
.14

3
.05

4
.03

On the basis of this survey, what does the panel expect the
average prime interest rate to be next year?

8. If a sample of three batteries is selected from a lot of ten,
of which two are defective, what is the expected number of
defective batteries?

14. UNEMPLOYMENT RATES A panel of 64 economists was asked
to predict the average unemployment rate for the upcoming
year. The results of the survey follow:

9. AUTO ACCIDENTS The numbers of accidents that occur at a
certain  intersection  known  as  Five  Corners  on  a  Friday
afternoon  between  the  hours  of  3  P.M.  and  6  P.M.,  along
with the corresponding probabilities, are shown in the fol-
lowing table. Find the expected number of accidents dur-
ing the period in question.

Accidents
Probability

0

.935

1

.030

2

.020

3

.010

4

.005

10. EXPECTED DEMAND The owner of a newsstand in a college
community  estimates  the  weekly  demand  for  a  certain
magazine as follows:

Quantity
Demanded
Probability

10
.05

11
.15

12
.25

13
.30

14
.20

15
.05

Find the number of issues of the magazine that the news-
stand owner can expect to sell per week.

11. EXPECTED PRODUCT RELIABILITY A  bank  has  two  automatic
teller  machines  at  its  main  office  and  two  at  each  of  its
three branches. The numbers of machines that break down
on a given day, along with the corresponding probabilities,
are shown in the following table:

Machines That
Break Down
Probability

Machines That
Break Down
Probability

4
.04

0
.43

5
.03

1
.19

6
.03

2
.12

7
.02

3
.09

8
.05

Find  the  expected  number  of  machines  that  will  break
down on a given day.

Unemployment
Rate, %
Economists

7.5
2

7.6
4

7.7
8

7.8
20

7.9
14

8.0
12

8.1
4

On the basis of this survey, what does the panel expect the
average unemployment rate to be next year?

15. LOTTERIES In  a  lottery,  5000  tickets  are  sold  for  $1  each.
One first prize of $2000, 1 second prize of $500, 3 third
prizes of $100, and 10 consolation prizes of $25 are to be
awarded. What are the expected net earnings of a person
who buys one ticket?

16. LIFE INSURANCE PREMIUMS A  man  wishes  to  purchase  a 
5-year term-life insurance policy that will pay the benefi-
ciary $20,000 in the event that the man’s death occurs dur-
ing the next 5 years. Using life insurance tables, he deter-
mines that the probability that he will live another 5 years
is .96. What is the minimum amount that he can expect to
pay for his premium?
Hint: The  minimum  premium  occurs  when  the  insurance  com-
pany’s expected profit is zero.

17. LIFE INSURANCE PREMIUMS A woman purchased a $20,000,
1-year term-life insurance policy for $260. Assuming that
the probability that she will live another year is .992, find
the company’s expected gain.

18. LIFE INSURANCE POLICIES As  a  fringe  benefit,  Dennis  Taylor
receives a $50,000 life insurance policy from his employer.
The probability that Dennis will live another year is .9935. 
If  he  purchases  the  same  coverage  for  himself,  what  is 
the minimum amount that he can expect to pay for the policy?

19. EXPECTED PROFIT Max  built  a  spec  house  at  a  cost  of
$450,000.  He  estimates  that  he  can  sell  the  house  for
$580,000,  $570,000,  or  $560,000,  with  probabilities  .24,
.40, and .36, respectively. What is Max’s expected profit?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

20. INVESTMENT ANALYSIS The  proprietor  of  Midland  Con-
struction  Company  has  to  decide  between  two  projects.
He  estimates  that  the  first  project  will  yield  a  profit  of
$180,000 with a probability of .7 or a profit of $150,000
with  a  probability  of  .3;  the  second  project  will  yield  a
profit of $220,000 with a probability of .6 or a profit of
$80,000  with  a  probability  of  .4.  Which  project  should
the  proprietor  choose  if  he  wants  to  maximize  his
expected profit?

21. CABLE TELEVISION The  management  of  MultiVision,  a
cable TV company, intends to submit a bid for the cable
television rights in one of two cities, A or B. If the com-
pany obtains the rights to City A, the probability of which
is .2, the estimated profit over the next 10 years is $10 mil-
lion; if the company obtains the rights to City B, the prob-
ability of which is .3, the estimated profit over the next 10
years is $7 million. The cost of submitting a bid for rights
in City A is $250,000 and that in City B is $200,000. By
comparing  the  expected  profits  for  each  venture,  deter-
mine  whether  the  company  should  bid  for  the  rights  in
City A or City B.

22. EXPECTED AUTO SALES Roger Hunt intends to purchase one
of two car dealerships currently for sale in a certain city.
Records obtained from each of the two dealers reveal that
their weekly volume of sales, with corresponding probabil-
ities, are as follows:

Dahl Motors

Cars Sold/Week
Probability

Cars Sold/Week
Probability

5
.05

9
.18

Farthington Auto Sales

Cars Sold/Week
Probability

5
.08

6
.21

6
.09

10
.14

7
.31

7
.14

11
.11

8
.24

9
.10

8
.24

12
.05

10
.06

The  average  profit/car  at  Dahl  Motors  is  $543,  and  the
average profit/car at Farthington Auto Sales is $654.
a. Find the average number of cars sold each week at each

dealership.

b. If  Roger’s  objective  is  to  purchase  the  dealership  that
generates  the  higher  weekly  profit,  which  dealership
should  he  purchase?  (Compare  the  expected  weekly
profit for each dealership.)

23. EXPECTED HOME SALES Sally Leonard, a real estate broker,
is  relocating  in  a  large  metropolitan  area  where  she  has
received  job  offers  from  Realty  Company  A and  Realty
Company B. The number of houses she expects to sell in a
year at each firm and the associated probabilities are shown
in the following tables:

Company A

Houses Sold
Probability

12
.02

13
.03

14
.05

15
.07

16
.07

8.5 EXPECTED VALUE

527

Houses Sold
Probability

Houses Sold
Probability

Company B

Houses Sold
Probability

Houses Sold
Probability

Houses Sold
Probability

17
.16

21
.09

18
.17

22
.06

19
.13

23
.03

6
.01

7
.04

8
.07

9
.06

11
.12

15
.04

12
.19

16
.03

13
.17

17
.02

20
.11

24
.01

10
.11

14
.13

18
.01

The average price of a house in the locale of Company A is
$308,000,  whereas  the  average  price  of  a  house  in  the
locale of Company B is $474,000. If Sally will receive a
3%  commission  on  sales  at  either  company,  which  job
offer  should  she  accept  to  maximize  her  expected  yearly
commission?

24. INVESTMENT ANALYSIS Bob, the proprietor of Midway Lum-
ber,  bases  his  projections  for  the  annual  revenues  of  the
company  on  the  performance  of  the  housing  market.  He
rates the performance of the market as very strong, strong,
normal, weak, or very weak. For the next year, Bob esti-
mates that the probabilities for these outcomes are .18, .27,
.42, .10, and .03, respectively. He also thinks that the rev-
enues  corresponding  to  these  outcomes  are  $20,  $18.8,
$16.2, $14, and $12 million, respectively. What is Bob’s
expected revenue for next year?

25. REVENUE PROJECTION Maria sees the growth of her business
for the upcoming year as being tied to the gross domestic
product  (GDP).  She  believes  that  her  business  will  grow
(or contract) at the rate of 5%, 4.5%, 3%, 0%, or ⫺0.5%
per  year  if  the  GDP  grows  (or  contracts)  at  the  rate  of
between 2 and 2.5%, between 1.5 and 2%, between 1 and
1.5%, between 0 and 1%, and between ⫺1 and 0%, respec-
tively. Maria has decided to assign a probability of .12, .24,
.40, .20, and .04, respectively, to these outcomes. At what
rate does Maria expect her business to grow next year?

26. WEATHER PREDICTIONS Suppose  the  probability  that  it  will

rain tomorrow is .3.
a. What are the odds that it will rain tomorrow?
b. What are the odds that it will not rain tomorrow?

27. ROULETTE In American roulette, as described in Example 6,
a player may bet on a split (two adjacent numbers). In this
case, if the player bets $1 and either number comes up, the
player wins $17 and gets his $1 back. If neither comes up,
he loses his $1 bet. Find the expected value of the winnings
on a $1 bet placed on a split.

28. ROULETTE If a player placed a $1 bet on red and a $1 bet on
black in a single play in American roulette, what would be
the expected value of his winnings?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

528

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

29. ROULETTE In  European  roulette,  the  wheel  is  divided  into
37 compartments numbered 1 through 36 and 0. (In Amer-
ican  roulette  there  are  38  compartments  numbered  1
through 36, 0, and 00.) Find the expected value of the win-
nings on a $1 bet placed on red in European roulette.

30. The probability of an event E occurring is .8. What are the
odds in favor of E occurring? What are the odds against E
occurring?

31. The probability of an event E not occurring is .6. What are
the odds in favor of E occurring? What are the odds against
E occurring?

32. The odds in favor of an event E occurring are 9 to 7. What

is the probability of E occurring?

33. The odds against an event E occurring are 2 to 3. What is

the probability of E not occurring?

34. ODDS OF MAKING A SALE Carmen, a computer sales repre-
sentative,  believes  that  the  odds  are  8  to  5  that  she  will
clinch  the  sale  of  a  minicomputer  to  a  certain  company.
What is the (subjective) probability that Carmen will make
the sale?

35. SPORTS Steffi  believes  that  the  odds  in  favor  of  her  win-
ning  her  tennis  match  tomorrow  are  7  to  5.  What  is  the
(subjective) probability that she will win her match tomor-
row?

36. SPORTS If a sports forecaster states that the odds of a cer-
tain boxer winning a match are 4 to 3, what is the (subjec-
tive) probability that the boxer will win the match?

37. ODDS Bob,  the  proprietor  of  Midland  Lumber,  believes
that the odds in favor of a business deal going through are
9  to  5.  What  is  the  (subjective)  probability  that  this  deal
will not materialize?

38. ROULETTE

a. Show that, for any number c,

E1cX2 ⫽ cE1X2

b. Use this result to find the expected loss if a gambler bets

$300 on red in a single play in American roulette.

Hint: Use the results of Example 6.

39. If X and Y are random variables and c is any constant, show

that
a.
b.
c.
d.

E1c2 ⫽ c
E1cX2 ⫽ cE1X2
E1X ⫹ Y2 ⫽ E1X2 ⫹ E1Y2
E1X ⫺ Y2 ⫽ E1X2 ⫺ E1Y2

40. WAGE RATES The frequency distribution of the hourly wage
rates  (in  dollars)  among  blue-collar  workers  in  a  certain
factory is given in the following table. Find the mean (or
average) wage rate, the mode, and the median wage rate of
these workers.

Wage Rate
Frequency

12.70

12.80

12.90

60

90

75

13.00
120

13.10

13.20

60

45

41. EXAM SCORES In an examination given to a class of 20 stu-

dents, the following test scores were obtained:

40
80

45
85

50
85

50
85

55
85

60
90

60
90

75
95

75
95

80
100

a. Find the mean (or average) score, the mode, and the me-

dian score.

b. Which of these three measures of central tendency do
you think is the least representative of the set of scores?

42. SAN FRANCISCO WEATHER The normal daily minimum tem-
peratures in degrees Fahrenheit for the months of January
through December in San Francisco follow:

46.2
53.1

48.4
54.2

48.6
55.8

49.2
54.8

50.7
51.5

52.5
47.2

Find the average and the median daily minimum tempera-
ture in San Francisco for these months.
Source: San Francisco Convention and Visitors Bureau.

43. WAITING TIMES Refer to Example 6, Section 8.4. Find the
median of the number of cars waiting in line at the bank’s
drive-in teller at the beginning of each 2-min interval dur-
ing  the  period  in  question.  Compare  your  answer  to  the
mean obtained in Example 1, Section 8.5.

44. BOSTON WEATHER The relative humidity, in percent, in the
morning for the months of January through December in
Boston follows:

68
74

67
76

69
79

69
77

71
74

73
70

Find the average and the median of these humidity read-
ings.
Source: National Weather Service Forecast Office.

45. WEIGHT OF POTATO CHIPS The  weights,  in  ounces,  of  ten

packages of potato chips are as follows:

16.1

16

15.8

16

15.9

16.1

15.9

16

16

16.2

Find the average and the median of these weights.

In Exercises 46 and 47, determine whether the statement is true
or  false.  If  it  is  true,  explain  why  it  is  true.  If  it  is  false,  give  an
example to show why it is false.
46. If the odds in favor of an event E occurring are a to b, then

the probability of Ec occurring is b>(a ⫹ b).

47. A game between two people is fair if the expected value to

both people is zero.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8.5 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises
 E1X2 ⫽ 1⫺421.102 ⫹ 1⫺321.202 ⫹ 1⫺121.252

1.

  ⫹ 1021.102 ⫹ 1121.252 ⫹ 1221.102
 ⫽ ⫺0.8

2. Let X denote the number of townhouses that will be sold
within 1 month of being put on the market. Then the num-
ber  of  townhouses  the  developer  expects  to  sell  within 

8.6 Variance and Standard Deviation

8.6 VARIANCE AND STANDARD DEVIATION

529

1 month is given by the expected value of X—that is, by

E1X2 ⫽ 201.052 ⫹ 251.102 ⫹ 301.302 ⫹ 351.252

  ⫹ 401.152 ⫹ 451.102 ⫹ 501.052
 ⫽ 34.25

or 34 townhouses.

Variance
The mean, or expected value, of a random variable enables us to express an important
property of the probability distribution associated with the random variable in terms of a
single number. But the knowledge of the location, or central tendency, of a probability
distribution alone is usually not enough to give a reasonably accurate picture of the prob-
ability distribution. Consider, for example, the two probability distributions whose his-
tograms appear in Figure 21. Both distributions have the same expected value, or mean,
of ␮ ⫽ 4 (the Greek letter ␮ is read “mu”). Note that the probability distribution with the
histogram shown in Figure 21a is closely concentrated about its mean ␮, whereas the one
with the histogram shown in Figure 21b is widely dispersed or spread about its mean.

␮

 = 4

FIGURE 21
The histograms of two probability
distributions

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

0
(a)

x

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

0
(b)

x

␮

 = 4

As another example, suppose that Olivia has ten packages of Brand A potato chips
and ten packages of Brand B potato chips. After carefully measuring the weights of
each package, she obtains the following results:

Weight in Ounces
Brand A

16.1

Brand B

16.3

16

15.7

15.8

15.8

16

16.2

15.9

15.9

16.1

16.1

15.9

15.7

16

16.2

16

16

16.2

16.1

In  Example  3,  we  verify  that  the  mean  weights  for  each  of  the  two  brands  is 
16 ounces. However, a cursory examination of the data now shows that the weights of
the Brand B packages exhibit much greater dispersion about the mean than do those
of Brand A.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

530

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

One measure of the degree of dispersion, or spread, of a probability distribution
about its mean is given by the variance of the random variable associated with the prob-
ability distribution. A probability distribution with a small spread about its mean will
have a small variance, whereas one with a larger spread will have a larger variance.
Thus, the variance of the random variable associated with the probability distribution
whose histogram appears in Figure 21a is smaller than the variance of the random vari-
able associated with the probability distribution whose histogram is shown in Figure
21b (see Example 1). Also, as we will see in Example 3, the variance of the random
variable associated with the weights of the Brand A potato chips is smaller than that of
the random variable associated with the weights of the Brand B potato chips.

We now define the variance of a random variable.

Variance of a Random Variable X
Suppose a random variable has the probability distribution

x

P(X ⴝ x)

x1

p1

x2

p2

x3

p3

. . .

. . .

xn

pn

and expected value

Then the variance of the random variable X is

E1 X2 ⫽ ␮

Var1 X2 ⫽ p11 x1 ⫺ ␮2 2 ⫹ p21 x2 ⫺ ␮2 2 ⫹ . . . ⫹ pn1 xn ⫺ ␮2 2

(14)

Let’s look a little closer at Equation (14). First, note that the numbers

x1 ⫺ ␮, x2 ⫺ ␮, . . . , xn ⫺ ␮

(15)

measure the deviations of x1, x2, . . . , xn from ␮, respectively. Thus, the numbers

1 x1 ⫺ ␮2 2, 1 x2 ⫺ ␮2 2, . . . , 1 xn ⫺ ␮2 2

(16)
measure the squares of the deviations of x1, x2, . . . , xn from ␮, respectively. Next, by
multiplying each of the numbers in (16) by the probability associated with each value
of the random variable X, the numbers are weighted accordingly so that their sum is a
measure of the variance of X about its mean. An attempt to define the variance of a
random variable about its mean in a similar manner using the deviations in (15), rather
than their squares, would not be fruitful, since some of the deviations may be positive
whereas others may be negative and hence (because of cancellations) the sum will not
give a satisfactory measure of the variance of the random variable.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 1 Find the variance of the random variable X and of the random variable
Y whose probability distributions are shown in the following table. These are the
probability distributions associated with the histograms shown in Figure 21a–b.

x

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

P(X ⴝ x)

.05
.075
.2
.375
.15
.1
.05

y

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

P(Y ⴝ y)

.2
.15
.1
.15
.05
.1
.25

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8.6 VARIANCE AND STANDARD DEVIATION

531

Solution The mean of the random variable X is given by

mX ⫽ 1121.052 ⫹ 1221.0752 ⫹ 1321.22 ⫹ 1421.3752 ⫹ 1521.152

  ⫹ 1621.12 ⫹ 1721.052
 ⫽ 4

Therefore, using Equation (14) and the data from the probability distribution of X,
we find that the variance of X is given by

Var1X2 ⫽ 1.05211 ⫺ 42 2 ⫹ 1.075212 ⫺ 42 2 ⫹ 1.2213 ⫺ 42 2

  ⫹ 1.375214 ⫺ 42 2 ⫹ 1.15215 ⫺ 42 2
  ⫹ 1.1216 ⫺ 42 2 ⫹ 1.05217 ⫺ 42 2
 ⫽ 1.95

Next, we find that the mean of the random variable Y is given by

mY ⫽ 1121.22 ⫹ 1221.152 ⫹ 1321.12 ⫹ 1421.152 ⫹ 1521.052

  ⫹ 1621.12 ⫹ 1721.252
 ⫽ 4

so the variance of Y is given by

Var1Y2 ⫽ 1.2211 ⫺ 42 2 ⫹ 1.15212 ⫺ 42 2 ⫹ 1.1213 ⫺ 42 2

  ⫹ 1.15214 ⫺ 42 2 ⫹ 1.05215 ⫺ 42 2
  ⫹ 1.1216 ⫺ 42 2 ⫹ 1.25217 ⫺ 42 2
 ⫽ 5.2

Note that Var(X) is smaller than Var(Y ), which confirms our earlier observations
about the spread (or dispersion) of the probability distribution of X and Y, respec-
tively.

Standard Deviation
Because Equation (14), which gives the variance of the random variable X, involves
the squares of the deviations, the unit of measurement of Var(X) is the square of the
unit of measurement of the values of X. For example, if the values assumed by the ran-
dom variable X are measured in units of a gram, then Var(X) will be measured in units
involving the square of a gram. To remedy this situation, one normally works with the
square root of Var(X) rather than Var(X) itself. The former is called the standard devi-
ation of X.

Standard Deviation of a Random Variable X
The  standard  deviation of  a  random  variable  X denoted  ␴ (pronounced
“sigma”), is defined by

s ⫽ 1Var1X2
 ⫽ 2p11x1 ⫺ m2 2 ⫹ p21x2 ⫺ m2 2 ⫹ p ⫹ pn1xn ⫺ m2 2

(17)

where x1, x2, . . . , xn denote the values assumed by the random variable X and 
p1 ⫽ P1 X ⫽ x12 , p2 ⫽ P1 X ⫽ x22 , . . . , pn ⫽ P1 X ⫽ xn2 .

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

532

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

EXAMPLE 2 Find the standard deviations of the random variables X and Y of Exam-
ple 1.

Solution From the results of Example 1, we have Var(X) ⫽ 1.95 and Var(Y ) ⫽ 5.2.
Taking their respective square roots, we have

 sX ⫽ 11.95
 ⬇ 1.40
 sY ⫽ 15.2
 ⬇ 2.28

APPLIED EXAMPLE 3 Packaging Let X and Y denote the random vari-
ables whose values are the weights of the Brand A and Brand B potato 

chips, respectively (see page 529). Compute the means and standard deviations of
X and Y and interpret your results.

Solution The probability distributions of X and Y may be computed from the
given data as follows:

Brand A

Brand B

x

15.8
15.9
16.0
16.1
16.2

Relative Frequency

of Occurrence

P(X ⫽ x)

y

Relative Frequency

of Occurrence

P(Y ⫽ y)

1
2
4
2
1

.1
.2
.4
.2
.1

15.7
15.8
15.9
16.0
16.1
16.2
16.3

2
1
1
1
2
2
1

.2
.1
.1
.1
.2
.2
.1

The means of X and Y are given by

␮X ⫽ 1 .12115.82 ⫹ 1 .22115.92 ⫹ 1 .42116.02 ⫹ 1 .22116.12

⫹ 1 .12116.22
⫽ 16

␮Y ⫽ 1 .22115.72 ⫹ 1 .12115.82 ⫹ 1 .12115.92 ⫹ 1 .12116.02

⫹ 1 .22116.12 ⫹ 1 .22116.22 ⫹ 1 .12116.32
⫽ 16

Therefore,

Var1 X2 ⫽ 1 .12115.8  ⫺ 162 2 ⫹ 1 .22115.9  ⫺ 162 2 ⫹ 1 .42116  ⫺ 162 2

⫹ 1 .22116.1  ⫺ 162 2 ⫹ 1 .12116.2  ⫺ 162 2
⫽ 0.012

Var1 Y2 ⫽ 1 .22115.7  ⫺ 162 2 ⫹ 1 .12115.8  ⫺ 162 2 ⫹ 1 .12115.9  ⫺ 162 2
⫹ 1 .12116  ⫺ 162 2 ⫹ 1 .22116.1  ⫺ 162 2 ⫹ 1 .22116.2  ⫺ 162 2
⫹ 1 .12116.3  ⫺ 162 2
⫽ 0.042

Explore & Discuss
A useful alternative formula for
the variance is

␴ 2 ⫽ E1X 22 ⫺ ␮2
where E1X 22 is the expected

value of X 2.

1. Establish  the  validity  of  the

formula.

2. Use the formula to verify the
calculations  of  the  means  in
Example 3.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8.6 VARIANCE AND STANDARD DEVIATION

533

so the standard deviations are

 sX ⫽ 1Var 1X2
 ⫽ 10.012
 ⬇ 0.11
 sY ⫽ 1Var 1Y2
 ⫽ 10.042
 ⬇ 0.20

The mean of X and that of Y are both equal to 16. Therefore, the average weight
of a package of potato chips of either brand is 16 ounces. However, the standard
deviation of Y is greater than that of X. This tells us that the weights of the pack-
ages of Brand B potato chips are more widely dispersed about the common mean
of 16 than are those of Brand A.

Explore & Discuss
Suppose the mean weight of m packages of Brand A potato chips is ␮1 and the standard
deviation from the mean of their weight distribution is ␴1. Also suppose the mean weight of
n packages of Brand B potato chips is ␮2 and the standard deviation from the mean of their
weight distribution is ␴2.

1. Show that the mean of the combined weights of packages of Brand A and Brand B is

m ⫽

mm1 ⫹ nm2

m ⫹ n

2. If ␮1 ⫽ ␮2, show that the standard deviation from the mean of the combined-weight dis-

tribution is

s ⫽ ams2

1 ⫹ ns2
2
m ⫹ n

b1/2

3. Refer to Example 3, page 532. Using the results of parts 1 and 2, find the mean and the

standard deviation of the combined-weight distribution.

Chebychev’s Inequality
The  standard  deviation  of  a  random  variable  X may  be  used  in  statistical  estima-
tions. For example, the following result, derived by the Russian mathematician P. L.
Chebychev  (1821–1894),  gives  a  bound  on  the  proportion  of  the  values  of  X lying
within k standard deviations of the expected value of X.

Chebychev’s Inequality
Let  X be  a  random  variable  with  expected  value  ␮ and  standard  deviation  ␴.
Then  the  probability  that  a  randomly  chosen  outcome  of  the  experiment  lies
between ␮ ⫺ k␴ and ␮ ⫹ k␴ is at least 1 ⫺ (1>k2) where k is the number of stan-

dard deviations from the mean; that is,

P 1m ⫺ ks ⱕ X ⱕ m ⫹ ks2 ⱖ 1 ⫺ 1

2
k 

(18)

To shed some light on this result, let’s take k ⫽ 2 in Inequality (18) and compute

P 1m ⫺ 2s ⱕ X ⱕ m ⫹ 2s2 ⱖ 1 ⫺ 1

22

⫽ 1 ⫺ 1
4

⫽ .75

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

534

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

␮

  +  
␴
␮

  − 2␴    −  
␴
␮
␮
FIGURE 22
At least 75% of the outcomes fall within
this interval.

  + 2␴
␮

This tells us that at least 75% of the outcomes of the experiment lie within 2 standard
deviations of the mean (Figure 22). Taking k ⫽ 3 in Inequality (18), we have

P 1m ⫺ 3s ⱕ X ⱕ m ⫹ 3s2 ⱖ 1 ⫺ 1

32

⫽ 1 ⫺ 1
9

⫽ 8
9

⬇ .89

This tells us that at least 89% of the outcomes of the experiment lie within 3 standard
deviations of the mean (Figure 23).

FIGURE 23
At least 89% of the outcomes fall within
this interval.

 − 3␴
␮

 − 2␴
␮

 −
␮

␴

␮ ␮

+

␴

␮

+ 2␴

␮

+ 3␴

EXAMPLE 4 A probability distribution has a mean of 10 and a standard deviation of
1.5. Use Chebychev’s inequality to find a bound on the probability that an outcome
of the experiment lies between 7 and 13.

Solution Here, ␮ ⫽ 10 and ␴ ⫽ 1.5. To determine the value of k, note that 
␮ ⫺ k␴ ⫽ 7 and ␮ ⫹ k␴ ⫽ 13. Substituting the appropriate values for ␮ and ␴, we
find k ⫽ 2. Using Chebychev’s Inequality (18), we see that a bound on the probabil-
ity that an outcome of the experiment lies between 7 and 13 is given by

 P 17 ⱕ X ⱕ 132 ⱖ 1 ⫺ a 1
22b

 ⫽ 3
4

—that is, at least 75%.

Note The results of Example 4 tell us that at least 75% of the outcomes of the exper-
iment lie between 10 ⫺ 2␴ and 10 ⫹ 2␴—that is, between 7 and 13.

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 5 Industrial Accidents Great Northwest Lumber Com-
pany employs 400 workers in its mills. It has been estimated that X, the 

random variable measuring the number of mill workers who have industrial acci-
dents during a 1-year period, is distributed with a mean of 40 and a standard devi-
ation of 6. Using Chebychev’s Inequality (18), find a bound on the probability
that the number of workers who will have an industrial accident over a 1-year
period is between 30 and 50, inclusive.

Solution Here, ␮ ⫽ 40 and ␴ ⫽ 6. We wish to estimate P(30 ⱕ X ⱕ 50). To use
Chebychev’s Inequality (18), we first determine the value of k from the equation

␮ ⫺ k␴ ⫽ 30 or ␮ ⫹ k␴ ⫽ 50
Since ␮ ⫽ 40 and ␴ ⫽ 6 in this case, we see that k satisfies
40 ⫹ 6k ⫽ 50

40 ⫺ 6k ⫽ 30

and

from which we deduce that 
. Thus, a bound on the probability that the num-
ber of mill workers who will have an industrial accident during a 1-year period is
between 30 and 50 is given by

k ⫽ 5
3

 P 130 ⱕ X ⱕ 502 ⱖ 1 ⫺ 1
15
32 2

 ⫽ 16
25

—that is, at least 64%.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

8.6 VARIANCE AND STANDARD DEVIATION

535

55

50

52

48

50

52

46

48

50

51

Calculate the mean and standard deviation of the random
variable X associated with these data.

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 8.6 can be found on 
page 539.

8.6 Self-Check Exercises

1. Compute the mean, variance, and standard deviation of the
random variable X with probability distribution as follows:

x
P(X ⴝ x)

⫺4
.1

⫺3
.1

⫺1
.2

0
.3

2
.1

5
.2

2. James  recorded  the  following  travel  times  (the  length  of
time in minutes it took him to drive to work) on ten con-
secutive days:

8.6 Concept Questions

1. a. What is the variance of a random variable X?

b. What is the standard deviation of a random variable X?

2. What does Chebychev’s inequality measure?

8.6 Exercises

In  Exercises  1–6,  the  probability  distribution  of  a  random  vari-
able X is given. Compute the mean, variance, and standard devi-
ation of X.

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

x
P(X ⴝ x)

x
P(X ⴝ x)

x
P(X ⴝ x)

x
P(X ⴝ x)

x
P(X ⴝ x)

x
P(X ⴝ x)

1
.4

⫺4
.1

⫺2
1/16

10

1/8

430

.1

2
.3

⫺2
.2

0
.3

⫺1
4/16

0

6/16

3
.2

2
.1

1

4/16

11

2/8

12

1/8

13

2/8

14

1/8

480

.2

520

.4

565

.2

4
.1

4
.3

2

1/16

15

1/8

580

.1

⫺198

⫺195

⫺193

⫺188

.15

.30

.10

.25

⫺185

.20

8. The following histograms represent the probability distri-
butions  of  the  random  variables  X and  Y.  Determine  by
inspection  which  probability  distribution  has  the  larger
variance.

(a)

.3

(b)

.3

.2

.1

.2

.1

1

2

3

4

x

1

2

3

4

y

In Exercises 9 and 10, find the variance of the probability distri-
bution for the histogram shown.
9.

.3
.2
.1

7. The  following  histograms  represent  the  probability  distri-
butions of the random variables X and Y. Determine by inspec-
tion which probability distribution has the larger variance.

10.

(a)

.25

(b)

.35

.15

1

2

3

4

x

1

2

3

4

y

1

2

3

4

5

x

.25
.20
.15
.10
.05

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

x

11. An experiment consists of rolling an eight-sided die (num-
bered 1 through 8) and observing the number that appears
uppermost. Find the mean and variance of this experiment.
12. DRIVING AGE REQUIREMENTS The minimum age requirement
for a regular driver’s license differs from state to state. The

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

536

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

frequency  distribution  for  this  age  requirement  in  the
50 states is given in the following table:

Minimum
Age
Frequency of
Occurrence

15

1

16

15

17

4

18

28

19

1

21

1

a. Describe  a  random  variable  X that  is  associated  with

these data.

b. Find  the  probability  distribution  for  the  random  vari-

able X.

c. Compute  the  mean,  variance,  and  standard  deviation 

of X.

13. BIRTHRATES The birthrates in the United States for the years
1997–2006 are given in the following table. (The birthrate
is the number of live births/1000 population.)

2000
14.5

Year
Birthrate

Year
Birthrate

Year
Birthrate

1997
14.5

2001
14.1

2004
14.0

1998
14.6

2002
13.9

2005
14.0

1999
14.7

2003
14.1

2006
14.2

a. Describe  a  random  variable  X that  is  associated  with

these data.

b. Find  the  probability  distribution  for  the  random  vari-

able X.

c. Compute  the  mean,  variance,  and  standard  deviation 

of X.

Source: National Center for Health Statistics.

14. INVESTMENT ANALYSIS Paul  Hunt  is  considering  two  busi-
ness ventures. The anticipated returns (in thousands of dol-
lars) of each venture are described by the following proba-
bility distributions:

Venture A

Earnings

Probability

.3
.4
.3

⫺20
40
50

Venture B

Earnings

Probability

⫺15
30
40

.2
.5
.3

a. Compute the mean and variance for each venture.
b. Which investment would provide Paul with the higher

expected return (the greater mean)?

c. In which investment would the element of risk be less
(that  is,  which  probability  distribution  has  the  smaller
variance)?

15. INVESTMENT ANALYSIS Rosa Walters is considering invest-
ing $10,000 in two mutual funds. The anticipated returns
from  price  appreciation  and  dividends  (in  hundreds  of
dollars) are described by the following probability distri-
butions:

Mutual Fund A

Returns

Probability

⫺4
8
10

.2
.5
.3

Mutual Fund B

Returns

Probability

⫺2
6
8

.2
.4
.4

a. Compute  the  mean  and  variance  associated  with  the

returns for each mutual fund.

b. Which investment would provide Rosa with the higher

expected return (the greater mean)?

c. In which investment would the element of risk be less
(that  is,  which  probability  distribution  has  the  smaller
variance)?

16. The distribution of the number of chocolate chips (x) in
a cookie is shown in the following table. Find the mean
and  the  variance  of  the  number  of  chocolate  chips  in  a
cookie.

x
P(X ⴝ x)

x
P(X ⴝ x)

x
P(X ⴝ x)

0
.01

3
.11

6
.22

1
.03

4
.13

7
.16

2
.05

5
.24

8
.05

17. Equation (5) can also be expressed in the form

Var1X2 ⫽ 1 p1x 

1 ⫹ p2x 
2

2 ⫹ p ⫹ pnx 

2

2

n2 ⫺ m2

Find  the  variance  of  the  distribution  of  Exercise  1  using
this equation.

18. Find the variance of the distribution of Exercise 16 using

the equation

Var1X2 ⫽ 1 p1x 

1 ⫹ p2x 
2

2 ⫹ p ⫹ pnx 

2

2

n2 ⫺ m2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

19. HOUSING PRICES The  market  research  department  of  the
National Real Estate Company conducted a survey among
500 prospective buyers in a suburb of a large metropolitan
area to determine the maximum price a prospective buyer
would  be  willing  to  pay  for  a  house.  From  the  data  col-
lected, the distribution that follows was obtained. Compute
the  mean,  variance,  and  standard  deviation  of  the  maxi-
mum  price  x (in  thousands  of  dollars)  that  these  buyers
were willing to pay for a house.

Maximum Price
Considered, x

P(X ⴝ x)

380

390

400

410

420

450

480

500

550

10
500

20
500

75
500

85
500

70
500

90
500

90
500

55
500

5
500

20. AVERAGE RENT A study of the records of 85,000 apartment
units  in  the  greater  Boston  area  revealed  the  following
data:

Year
Average Rent, $

2002
1352

2003
1336

2004
1317

2005
1308

2006
1355

Find the average of the average rent for the 5 years in ques-
tion. What is the standard deviation for these data?
Source: Northeast Apartment Advisors, Inc.

21. OCCUPANCY RATE A  study  of  the  records  of  85,000  apart-
ment units in the greater Boston area revealed the follow-
ing data:

Year
Occupancy
Rate, %

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

95.6

94.7

95.2

95.1

96.1

Find  the  average  occupancy  rate  for  the  5-year  period.
What is the standard deviation for these data?
Source: Northeast Apartment Advisors, Inc.

22. EXAM SCORES The  following  table  gives  the  scores  of  30

students in a mathematics examination:

Scores
Students

90–99

80–89

70–79

60–69

50–59

4

8

12

4

2

Find the mean and the standard deviation of the distribution
of the given data.
Hint: Assume that all scores lying within a group interval take the
middle value of that group.

8.6 VARIANCE AND STANDARD DEVIATION

537

23. MARITAL STATUS OF MEN The  number  of  married  men  (in
thousands)  between  the  ages  of  20  and  44  in  the  United
States in 1998 is given in the following table:

Age
Men

20–24
1332

25–29
4219

30–34
6345

35–39
7598

40–44
7633

Find the mean and the standard deviation of the given data.
Hint: See the hint for Exercise 22.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

24. STUCK IN TRAFFIC The following table gives the extra travel
time each year, in hours, for peak-period travelers in urban
areas with more than 3 million people:

Urban Area
Los Angeles–Long Beach–Santa Ana, CA
San Francisco–Oakland, CA
Atlanta, GA
Washington (D.C.–VA–MD)
Dallas–Fort Worth–Arlington, TX
Houston, TX

Annual Hours of
Delay per Traveler 

(in 2007)

70
55
57
62
53
56

Find the mean of the extra travel time each year, in hours,
for  peak-period  travelers  in  urban  areas  with  more  than 
3 million people. What is the standard deviation for these
data?
Source: Texas Transportation Institute.

25. COST OF TAKING TIME OFF A  survey  was  conducted  of
graduates of Harvard College 15 years after graduation.
In the survey, the pay of graduates in different fields who
had previously taken off 18 months, often to care for chil-
dren, was compared with pay for graduates who had not
taken  time  off.  The  average  financial  penalty  for  those
who  had  taken  time  off  is  summarized  in  the  following
table:

Field
Penalty (%)

M.B.A.
⫺41

Ph.D

J.D.
⫺29 ⫺29 ⫺25 ⫺16

B.A. 
only M.D. Masters only

Other, 

⫺13

Find  the  mean  of  the  financial  penalty  for  the  graduates
who had taken time off. What is the standard deviation for
these data?
Source: Claudia Golden and Lawrence Katz, Harvard College.

26. CONVICTION RATES The  following  table  gives  the  percent-
age of homicide cases in Suffolk County, Massachusetts,
ending  in  pleas  or  verdicts  of  guilty  from  2004  through
2009:

Year
Conviction Rate (%)

2004
81

2005
91

2006
82

2007
75

2008
82

2009
95

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

538

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

Find the mean of the percentage of homicide cases in Suf-
folk County ending in pleas or verdicts of guilty from 2004
through 2009. What is the standard deviation for these data?
Source: Suffolk County, Massachusetts, District Attorney’s office.

27. HEALTH ISSUES IN MASSACHUSETTS CITIES A random survey of
health issues, conducted by the Department of Public Health
of  the  Commonwealth  of  Massachusetts,  examined  the
results from the state’s seven largest cities. These cities were
selected on the basis of their diverse racial and ethnic popu-
lations. The percentage of adults reporting fair or poor health
for each city in the survey is given in the following table:

City
Percentage of Adults 
Reporting Fair or 
Poor Health

City
Percentage of Adults 
Reporting Fair or 
Poor Health

Boston Worcester

Springfield

Lowell

16.3

15.4

22.2

17.2

Fall River

Lawrence

New Bedford

23.2

30.4

26.4

Find the average percentage of adults reporting fair or poor
health for the seven cities. What is the standard deviation
for these data?
Source: Massachusetts Department of Public Health.

28. NEW YORK STATE COURTS’  TOTAL CASELOAD The  following
table gives the total caseload (in millions) in the New York
State courts from 2004 through 2009.

Year
Cases

2004
4.2

2005
4.3

2006
4.6

2007
4.5

2008
4.7

2009
4.7

Find the mean of the total caseload in the New York State
courts from 2004 through 2009. What is the standard devi-
ation for these data?
Source: New York State Office of Court Administration.

29. DIABETES IN MASSACHUSETTS CITIES A  random  survey  of
health  issues,  conducted  by  the  Department  of  Public
Health of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, examined
the results from the state’s seven largest cities. These cities
were selected on the basis of their diverse racial and ethnic
populations. The percentage of adults with diabetes in each
city in the survey is given in the following table:

City
Percentage of Adults
with Diabetes

City
Percentage of Adults 
with Diabetes

Boston Worcester

Springfield

Lowell

7.2

8.2

12.1

8.7

Fall River

Lawrence

New Bedford

11.1

10.9

9.3

Find the average percentage of adults with diabetes in these
seven cities. What is the standard deviation for these data?
Source: Massachusetts Department of Public Health.

30. LIGHTNING INJURIES The number of injuries due to lightning
in the United States from 1999 through 2008 is given in the
following table:

Year
Number

1999 2000

2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008

243

371

372

256

238

279

309

245

139

207

What  is  the  average  number  of  injuries  per  year  due  to
lightning  in  the  United  States  from  1999  through  2008?
What is the standard deviation for these data?
Source: National Oceanic and Atmosphere Administration.

31. GOVERNMENT DEBT The following table gives the projected
debt as a percentage of the gross domestic product (GDP)
of  nine  selected  countries  for  2011.  The  study  was  con-
ducted  by  the  Organization  for  Economic  Co-operation
and Development (OECD) in early 2010.

Country
Percentage

Spain

67

U.S.
72

Germany

Portugal

83

88

Country
Percentage

U.K.
89

France

91

Japan
113

Italy
121

Greece

127

Find the mean of the projected debt as a percentage of GDP
of the nine countries under consideration. What is the stan-
dard deviation for these data?
Source: OECD.

32. GAS BILL The  monthly  gas  bill  (in  dollars)  for  a  typical
family  of  Massachusetts  from  May  2009  through  April
2010 is summarized in the following table:

Month
Amount

MAY
89.57

JUN
58.99

JUL
37.15

AUG
37.15

SEP
47.64

OCT
72.97

Month
Amount

NOV
145.02

DEC
195.46

JAN
240.97

FEB MAR
242.20

APR
215.14 173.31

Find the mean of the amount of the monthly gas bill for a
typical family for the 12-month period under consideration.
What is the standard deviation for these data?
Source: Bay State Gas.

33. HOURS WORKED IN SOME COUNTRIES The number of average
hours worked per year per worker in the United States and
five European countries in 2002 is given in the following
table:

Country
Average 
Hours
Worked

U.S.

Spain

Great
Britain

West

France

Germany

Norway

1815

1807

1707

1545

1428

1342

Find the average of the average hours worked per worker
in 2002 for workers in the six countries. What is the stan-
dard deviation for these data?
Source: Office of Economic Cooperation and Development.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

34. ACCESS TO CAPITAL One  of  the  key  determinants  of  eco-
nomic growth is access to capital. Using 54 variables to cre-
ate  an  index  of  1–7,  with  7  being  best  possible  access  to
capital, Milken Institute ranked the following as the top ten
nations (although technically Hong Kong is not a nation) by
the ability of their entrepreneurs to gain access to capital:

Hong

Country Kong Netherlands
Index

5.70

5.59

U.K.
5.57

Singapore Switzerland

5.56

5.55

Country U.S.
Index
5.55

Australia

Finland Germany

Denmark

5.31

5.24

5.23

5.22

Find the mean of the indices of the top ten nations. What is
the standard deviation for these data?
Source: Milken Institute.

35. ACCESS TO CAPITAL Refer to Exercise 34. Milken Institute also
ranked the following as the ten worst-performing nations by
the ability of their entrepreneurs to gain access to capital:

Country
Index

Peru
3.76

Mexico

Bulgaria

3.70

3.66

Brazil
3.50

Indonesia

3.46

Country Colombia
Index

3.46

Turkey Argentina Venezuela

3.43

3.20

2.88

Russia
2.19

Find the mean of the indices of the ten worst-performing
nations. What is the standard deviation for these data?
Source: Milken Institute.

36. ELECTION TURNOUT The  percent  of  the  voting-age  popula-
tion  who  cast  ballots  in  presidential  elections  from  1940
through 2008 are given in the following table:

Election
Year
1940
Turnout, % 59

Election
Year
1976
Turnout % 54

1944

1948

1952

1956

1960

1964

1968

1972

56

51

62

59

59

62

61

55

1980

1984

1988

1992

1996

2000

2004

2008

53

53

50

55

49

51

55

57

Find the mean and the standard deviation of the given data.
Source: Federal Election Commission.

37. A probability distribution has a mean of 42 and a standard
deviation of 2. Use Chebychev’s inequality to find a bound
on the probability that an outcome of the experiment lies
between
a. 38 and 46

b. 32 and 52

8.6 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

8.6 VARIANCE AND STANDARD DEVIATION

539

38. A probability distribution has a mean of 20 and a standard
deviation of 3. Use Chebychev’s inequality to find a bound
on the probability that an outcome of the experiment lies
between
a. 15 and 25

b. 10 and 30

39. A probability distribution has a mean of 50 and a standard
deviation  of  1.4.  Use  Chebychev’s  inequality  to  find  the
value  of  c that  guarantees  the  probability  is  at  least  96% 
that an outcome of the experiment lies between 50 ⫺ c and
50 ⫹ c.

40. Suppose X is a random variable with mean ␮ and standard
deviation ␴. If a large number of trials is observed, at least
what percentage of these values is expected to lie between 
␮ ⫺ 2␴ and ␮ ⫹ 2␴?

41. PRODUCT RELIABILITY The deluxe model hair dryer produced
by  Roland  Electric  has  a  mean  expected  lifetime  of  24
months  with  a  standard  deviation  of  3  months.  Find  a
bound on the probability that one of these hair dryers will
last between 20 and 28 months.

42. PRODUCT RELIABILITY A  Christmas 

tree 

light  has  an

expected life of 200 hr with a standard deviation of 2 hr.
a. Find a bound on the probability that one of these Christ-

mas tree lights will last between 190 hr and 210 hr.

b. Suppose  a  large  city  uses  150,000  of  these  Christmas
tree lights as part of its Christmas decorations. Estimate
the number of lights that are likely to require replace-
ment between 180 hr and 220 hr of use.

43. STARTING SALARIES The  mean  annual  starting  salary  of  a
new graduate in a certain profession is $52,000 with a stan-
dard  deviation  of  $500.  Find  a  bound  on  the  probability
that the starting salary of a new graduate in this profession
will be between $50,000 and $54,000.

44. QUALITY CONTROL Sugar packaged by a certain machine has
a mean weight of 5 lb and a standard deviation of 0.02 lb.
For what values of c can the manufacturer of the machinery
claim that the sugar packaged by this machine has a weight
between 5 ⫺ c and 5 ⫹ c lb with probability at least 96%?

In Exercises 45 and 46, determine whether the statement is true
or  false.  If  it  is  true,  explain  why  it  is  true.  If  it  is  false,  give  an
example to show why it is false.
45. Both the variance and the standard deviation of a random

variable measure the spread of a probability distribution.

46. Chebychev’s inequality is useless when k ⱕ 1.

1. The mean of the random variable X is

The variance of X is

␮ ⫽ 1⫺421.12 ⫹ 1⫺321.12 ⫹ 1⫺121.22

⫹ 1021.32 ⫹ 1221.12 ⫹ 1521.22
⫽ 0.3

Var1X2 ⫽ 1.121⫺4  ⫺ 0.32 2 ⫹ 1.121⫺3  ⫺ 0.32 2
⫹ 1.221⫺1  ⫺ 0.32 2 ⫹ 1.3210  ⫺ 0.32 2
⫹ 1.1212  ⫺ 0.32 2 ⫹ 1.2215  ⫺ 0.32 2
⫽ 8.01

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

540

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

The standard deviation of X is

s ⫽ 1Var 1X2 ⫽ 18.01 ⬇ 2.83

2. We first compute the probability distribution of X from the

given data as follows:

The mean of X is

␮ ⫽ 1.121462 ⫹ 1.221482 ⫹ 1.321502
⫹ 1.121512 ⫹ 1.221522 ⫹ 1.121552
⫽ 50.2

x
46
48
50
51
52
55

Relative Frequency

of Occurrence

P(X ⴝ x)

1
2
3
1
2
1

.1
.2
.3
.1
.2
.1

The variance of X is

Var1X2 ⫽ 1.12146  ⫺ 50.22 2 ⫹ 1.22148  ⫺ 50.22 2
⫹ 1.32150  ⫺ 50.22 2 ⫹ 1.12151  ⫺ 50.22 2
⫹ 1.22152  ⫺ 50.22 2 ⫹ 1.12155  ⫺ 50.22 2
⫽ 5.76

from which we deduce the standard deviation

 s ⫽ 15.76

 ⫽ 2.4

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Finding the Mean and Standard Deviation
The calculation of the mean and standard deviation of a random variable is facilitated
by the use of a graphing utility.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 1 Age Distribution of Company Directors A survey
conducted in a certain year of the Fortune 1000 companies revealed the 

following age distribution of the company directors:

Age

20–24

25–29

30–34

35–39

40–44

45–49

50–54

Directors

1

6

28

104

277

607

1142

Age

55–59

60–64

65–69

70–74

75–79

80–84

85–89

Directors

1413

1424

494

159

62

31

5

Source: Directorship.

Let X denote the random variable taking on the values 1 through 14, where 1 cor-
responds to the age bracket 20–24, 2 corresponds to the age bracket 25–29, and
so on. 
a. Plot a histogram for the given data.
b. Find the mean and the standard deviation of these data. Interpret your results.

Solution
a. Enter the values of X as x1 ⫽ 1, x2 ⫽ 2, . . . , x14 ⫽ 14 and the corresponding

values of Y as y1 ⫽ 1, y2 ⫽ 6, . . . , y14 ⫽ 5. Then using the DRAW function
from the Statistics menu of a graphing utility, we obtain the histogram shown
in Figure T1.

FIGURE T1
The histogram for the given data, using
the viewing window [0, 16] ⫻ [0, 1500]

1500

0

16

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

8.6 VARIANCE AND STANDARD DEVIATION

541

b. Using the appropriate function from the Statistics menu, we find that

and ␴x ⬇ 1.6378; that is, the mean of X is ␮ ⬇ 7.9, and the stan-
x ⬇ 7.9193
dard deviation is ␴ ⬇ 1.6. Interpreting our results, we see that the average age
of the directors is in the 55- to 60-year-old bracket.

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

1. a. Graph  the  histogram  associated  with  the  random  vari-

a. Describe  a  random  variable  X that  is  associated  with

able X in Example 1, page 530.

b. Find the mean and the standard deviation for these data.
2. a. Graph  the  histogram  associated  with  the  random  vari-

able Y in Example 1, page 530.

b. Find the mean and the standard deviation for these data.
3. a. Graph the histogram associated with the data given in

Exercise 12, page 535.

b. Find the mean and the standard deviation for these data.
4. a. Graph the histogram associated with the data given in

Exercise 16, page 536.

b. Find the mean and the standard deviation for these data.
5. A sugar refiner uses a machine to pack sugar in 5-lb cartons.
To  check  the  machine’s  accuracy,  cartons  are  selected  at
random and weighed. The results follow:

4.98
4.96
4.97
4.98
4.96
5.03

5.02
4.98
5.04
5.04
4.97
5.01

4.96
5.01
5.04
5.01
5.02
5.00

4.97
5.02
5.01
5.03
5.04
5.01

5.03
5.06
4.99
5.05
4.97
4.98

a. Describe  a  random  variable  X that  is  associated  with

these data.

b. Find  the  probability  distribution  for  the  random  vari-

able X.

c. Compute the mean and standard deviation of X.

6. The  scores  of  25  students  in  a  mathematics  examination

are as follows:

90
87
69
98

85
85
66
71

74
70
58
75

92
72
70
68

68
68
74

94
73
88

66
72
90

these data.

b. Find  the  probability  distribution  for  the  random  vari-

able X.

c. Compute the mean and standard deviation of X.

7. HEIGHTS OF WOMEN The following data, obtained from the
records of the Westwood Health Club, give the heights (to
the nearest inch) of 200 female members of the club:

Height
Frequency

62
2

1
2

62 
3

63
4

1
2

63 
8

64
11

1
64 
2
20

65
32

1
65 
2
30

66
18

Height
Frequency

1
66 
2
18

67
16

1
2

67 
8

68
10

1
2

68 
5

69
5

1
2

69 
4

70
3

1
2

70 
2

71
1

a. Plot a histogram for the given data.
b. Find the mean and the standard deviation of these data.

8. AGE DISTRIBUTION IN A TOWN The following table gives the
distribution of the ages (in years) of the residents (in hun-
dreds) of the town of Monroe who are under the age of 40:

Age
Residents

0–3
30

4–7
42

8–11
50

Age
Residents

20–23

41

24–27

50

28–31

45

12–15

60

32–35

42

16–19

50

36–39

34

Let  X denote  the  random  variable  taking  on  the  values  1
through 10, where 1 corresponds to the range 0–3, . . . , and
10 corresponds to the range 36–39.
a. Plot a histogram for the given data.
b. Find the mean and the standard deviation of X.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

542

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

CHAPTER 8

Summary of Principal Formulas and Terms

FORMULAS

1. Conditional probability

2. Product Rule
3. Test for independence

4. Bayes’ Theorem

5. Mean of n numbers

6. Expected value

7. Odds in favor of E occurring

8. Odds against E occurring

9. Probability of an event occurring 

given the odds

10. Variance of a random variable

11. Standard deviation of a random variable

12. Chebychev’s inequality

TERMS

conditional probability (481)
finite stochastic process (485)
independent events (488)
Bayes’ Theorem (496)
random variable (505)
finite discrete random variable (506)

P1A 艚 B2
P1A2

, P(A) ⬆ 0

P1B 0 A2 ⫽
P1A 艚 B2 ⫽ P1A2 # P1B 0 A2
P1A 艚 B2 ⫽ P1A2 # P1B2
P1Ai 艚 E2 ⫽
P1A12 # P1E 冨 A12 ⫹ P1A22 # P1E 冨 A22 ⫹ . . . ⫹ P1An2 # P1E 冨 An2

P1Ai2 # P1E 冨 Ai2

x1 ⫹ x2 ⫹ p ⫹ xn

n

x ⫽
E1X2 ⫽ x1p1 ⫹ x2p2 ⫹ . . . ⫹ xnpn
P 1E2
P 1Ec2
P 1Ec2
P 1E2

a

a ⫹ b
Var1X2 ⫽ p11x1 ⫺ ␮2 2 ⫹ p21x2 ⫺ ␮2 2 ⫹ . . . ⫹ pn1xn ⫺ ␮2 2
s ⫽ 1Var 1X2
P 1m ⫺ ks ⱕ X ⱕ m ⫹ ks2

ⱖ 1 ⫺ 1
k2

infinite discrete random variable (506)
continuous random variable (506)
probability distribution of a random 

variable (506)
histogram (508)
average (mean) (516)

expected value (517)
median (524)
mode (524)
variance (530)
standard deviation (531)

CHAPTER 8

Concept Review Questions

Fill in the blanks.
1. The probability of the event B given that the event A has
already  occurred  is  called  the  ______  probability  of  B
given A.

2. If the outcome of one event does not depend on the other,

then the two events are said to be ______.

3. The probability of an event after the outcomes of an exper-
iment  have  been  observed  is  called  a/an  ______  ______
______.

4. A rule that assigns a number to each outcome of a chance

experiment is called a/an ______ variable.

5. If  a  random  variable  assumes  only  finitely  many  values,
then  it  is  called  ______  discrete;  if  it  takes  on  infinitely
many values that can be arranged in a sequence, then it is
called ______ discrete; if it takes on all real numbers in an
interval, then it is said to be ______.

6. The expected value of a random variable X is given by the
______ of the products of the values assumed by the ran-

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

dom variable and its associated probabilities. For example,
if X assumes the values ⫺2, 3, and 4 with associated prob-
abilities  ,  , and  , then its expected value is ______.

1
2

1
4

1
4

7. a. If the probability of an event E occurring is P(E), then

the odds in favor of E occurring are ______.

CHAPTER 8

Review Exercises

The accompanying tree diagram represents an experiment con-
sisting of two trials. In Exercises 1–5, use the diagram to find the
given probability.

.3

.5

.2

A

B

C

. 6

.4

. 5

.5

. 3

.7

E

Ec

E

Ec

E

Ec

1.

2. P1B 傽 E2
4. P1E2

P 1A 艚 E2
3. P1C 傽 E2
P1A 0 E2
P1F2 ⫽ .55, and P1E 傼 F2 ⫽ .70. Find 

5.

6. Let E and F be two events, and suppose that P1E2 ⫽ .35, 
7. Suppose that P1E2 ⫽ .60, P1F2 ⫽ .32, and P1E 傽 F2 ⫽ .22.
8. Suppose that E and F are independent events. If P1E2 ⫽ .32

Are E and F independent?

P1E 0 F2

and P1E 傽 F2 ⫽ .16, what is P1F2?

.

9. An experiment consists of tossing a fair coin three times
and observing the outcomes. Let A be the event that at least
one head is thrown, and let B be the event that at most two
tails are thrown.

a. Find P1A2.

b. Find P1B2.

c. Are A and B independent events?

10. QUALITY CONTROL In a group of 20 ballpoint pens on a shelf
in the stationery department of Metro Department Store, 2
are known to be defective. If a customer selects 3 of these
pens, what is the probability that:
a. At least 1 is defective?
b. No more than 1 is defective?

11. Five people are selected at random. What is the probability
that none of the people in this group were born on the same
day of the week?

12. A pair of fair dice is rolled. What is the probability that the
sum of the numbers falling uppermost is 8 if it is known
that the two numbers are different?

REVIEW EXERCISES

543

b. If the odds in favor of an event E occurring are a to b,

then the probability of E occurring is ______.

8. If a random variable X takes on the values x1, x2, . . . , xn
with probabilities p1, p2, . . . , pn and has a mean of ␮, then
the variance of X is ______ and the standard deviation of 
X is ______.

13. A fair die is rolled three times. What is the probability that
it shows an even number in the first toss, an odd number in
the second toss, and a 1 on the third toss? Assume that the
outcomes of the tosses are independent.

14. A fair die is rolled, a fair coin is tossed, and a card is drawn
from a standard deck of 52 playing cards. Assuming these
events  are  independent,  what  is  the  probability  that  the
number falling uppermost on the die is a 6, the coin shows
a tail, and the card drawn is a face card?

Three  cards  are  drawn  at  random  without  replacement  from  a
standard  deck  of  52  playing  cards.  In  Exercises  15–19,  find  the
probability of each of the given events.
15. All three cards are aces.
16. All three cards are face cards.
17. The second and third cards are red.
18. The second card is black, given that the first card was red.
19. The second card is a club, given that the first card was black.
20. CUSTOMER SURVEYS The  sales  department  of  Thompson
Drug Company released the accompanying data concern-
ing the sales of a certain pain reliever manufactured by the
company.

Pain Reliever
Group I (capsule form)
Group II (tablet form)

Drug Sold, %

57
43

Group Sold in
Extra-Strength

Dosage, %

38
31

If  a  customer  purchased  the  extra-strength  dosage  of  this
drug, what is the probability that it was in capsule form?

21. OPINION POLLS A survey involving 600 Democrats, 400 Re-
publicans, and 200 Independents asked the question: Do you
favor  or  oppose  eliminating  taxes  on  dividends  paid  to
shareholders? The following results were obtained:

Answer
Favor
Opposed

Democrats, % Republicans, % Independents, %

29
71

66
34

48
52

If  a  randomly  chosen  respondent  in  the  survey  answered
“favor,” what is the probability that he or she is an Inde-
pendent?
Source: TechnoMetrica Market Intelligence.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

544

CHAPTER 8 ADDITIONAL TOPICS IN PROBABILITY

22. OPINION POLLS A poll was conducted among 500 registered
voters  in  a  certain  area  regarding  their  position  on  a
national lottery to raise revenue for the government. The
results of the poll are shown in the accompanying table.

Voters

Favoring

Favoring

Polled, % Lottery, % Lottery, % Opinion, %

Not

Expressing

No

51
49

62
68

32
28

6
4

Sex
Male
Female

What is the probability that a registered voter who:
a. Favored a national lottery was a woman?
b. Expressed  no  opinion  regarding  the  lottery  was  a  wo-

man?

23. Three  balls  are  selected  at  random  without  replacement
from an urn containing three white balls and four blue balls.
Let the random variable X denote the number of blue balls
drawn.
a. List the outcomes of this experiment.
b. Find the value assigned to each outcome of this experi-

ment by the random variable X.

c. Find the probability distribution of the random variable

associated with this experiment.

d. Draw the histogram representing this distribution.

24. LIFE INSURANCE POLICIES A man purchased a $25,000, 1-year
term-life  insurance  policy  for  $375.  Assuming  that  the
probability that he will live for another year is .989, find
the company’s expected gain.

25. The  probability  distribution  of  a  random  variable  X is

shown in the following table:

x
0
1
2
3
4
5

P(X ⴝ x)

.1
.1
.2
.3
.2
.1

a. Compute P(1 ⱕ X ⱕ 4).
b. Compute the mean and standard deviation of X.

26. TRAFFIC A traffic survey of the speeds of vehicles traveling
along  a  stretch  of  Hampton  Road  between  4  P.M.  and 
6 P.M. yielded the following results:

Speed, mph
Probability

30–34

35–39

40–44

45–49

50–54

.07

.28

.42

.18

.05

Find the average speed of the vehicles.
Hint: Assume that all speeds lying within a group interval take the
midvalue of that group.

27. EXPECTED PROFIT A  buyer  for  Discount  Fashions,  an  outlet
for women’s apparel, is considering buying a batch of cloth-
ing for $64,000. She estimates that the company will be able
to sell it for $80,000, $75,000, or $70,000 with probabilities
of .30, .60, and .10, respectively. On the basis of these esti-
mates, what will be the company’s expected gross profit?

28. HEIGHTS OF WOMEN The heights of 4000 women who par-
ticipated in a recent survey were found to have a mean of
64.5 in. and a standard deviation of 2.5 in. Use Chebychev’s
inequality  to  estimate  the  probability  that  the  height  of  a
woman  who  participated  in  the  survey  will  fall  within 
2 standard deviations of the mean—that is, that her height
will be between 59.5 and 69.5 in.

29. VOLKSWAGEN’S REVENUE The  revenue  of  Volkswagen  (in
billions of Euros) for the five quarters beginning with the
first quarter of 2009 are summarized in the following table:

Quarter
Revenue

2009
Q1
24.0

Q2
27.2

Q3
26.0

Q4
28.0

2010
Q1
28.6

Find the average quarterly revenue of Volkswagen for the
five quarters in question. What is the standard deviation?
Source: Company reports.

30. MARITAL STATUS OF WOMEN The number of single women
(in thousands) between the ages of 20 and 44 in the United
States in 1998 is given in the following table:

Age
Women

20–24
6178

25–29
3689

30–34
2219

35–39
1626

40–44
1095

Find the mean and the standard deviation of the given data.
Hint: Assume that all values lying within a group interval take the
middle value of that group.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

BEFORE MOVING ON . . .

545

4. The  probability  distribution  of  the  random  variable  X is 

shown in the following table. Find (a) P1X ⱕ 02 and (b) 
P1 ⫺4 ⱕ X ⱕ 12.

x

P1X ⴝ x2

⫺4
.06

⫺3
.14

⫺1
.32

0
.28

1
.12

3
.08

5. Find the mean, variance, and standard deviation of a ran-
dom variable X having the following probability distribu-
tion:

x

P1X ⴝ x2

⫺3
.08

⫺1
.24

0
.32

1
.16

3
.12

5
.08

Before Moving On . . .

CHAPTER 8
1. Suppose A and B are independent events with P1A2 ⫽ .3

and P1B2 ⫽ .6. Find P1A 傼 B2.
ment. Use the diagram to find P1A 兩 D2.

2. The following tree diagram represents a two-stage experi-

. 4

.6

A

B

. 2

.8

. 3

.7

D

Dc

D

Dc

3. The values taken on by a random variable X and the fre-
quency  of  their  occurrence  are  shown  in  the  following
table. Find the probability distribution of X.

x
Frequency of
Occurrence

⫺3

⫺2

4

8

0

20

1

24

2

16

3

8

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

THE DERIVATIVE

9

Losevsky Pavel/Shutterstock.com

IN THIS CHAPTER, we begin the study of differential calculus.

Historically, differential calculus was developed in response to

the problem of finding the tangent line to an arbitrary curve. But it

quickly became apparent that solving this problem provided

mathematicians with a method of solving many practical problems

involving the rate of change of one quantity with respect to

another. The basic tool used in differential calculus is the derivative

of a function. The concept of the derivative is based, in turn, on a

more fundamental notion—that of the limit of a function.

What happens to the sales of a DVD

recording of a certain hit movie over 

a 10-year period after it is first 

released into the market? In Example 6,

page 619, you will see how to find the

rate of change of sales for the DVD over

the first 10 years after its release.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

547

548

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

9.1

Limits

Introduction to Calculus
Historically, the development of calculus by Isaac Newton (1642–1727) and Gottfried
Wilhelm Leibniz (1646–1716) resulted from the investigation of the following problems:
1. Finding the tangent line to a curve at a given point on the curve (Figure 1a)
2. Finding the area of a planar region bounded by an arbitrary curve (Figure 1b)

y 

y 

P 

T 

x 

R 

x 

FIGURE 1

(a) What is the slope of the 
tangent line T at point P?

(b) What is the area of the region R?

The tangent-line problem might appear to be unrelated to any practical applica-
tions  of  mathematics,  but  as  you  will  see  later,  the  problem  of  finding  the  rate  of
change of  one  quantity  with  respect  to  another  is  mathematically  equivalent  to  the
geometric problem of finding the slope of the tangent line to a curve at a given point
on the curve. It is precisely the discovery of the relationship between these two prob-
lems that spurred the development of calculus in the seventeenth century and made it
such  an  indispensable  tool  for  solving  practical  problems.  The  following  are  a  few
examples of such problems:

■ Finding the velocity of an object
■ Finding the rate of change of a bacteria population with respect to time
■ Finding the rate of change of a company’s profit with respect to time
■ Finding the rate of change of a travel agency’s revenue with respect to the agency’s

expenditure for advertising

The study of the tangent-line problem led to the creation of differential calculus,
which relies on the concept of the derivative of a function. The study of the area prob-
lem led to the creation of integral calculus, which relies on the concept of the anti-
derivative, or integral, of a function. (The derivative of a function and the integral of
a function are intimately related, as you will see in Section 11.4.) Both the derivative
of a function and the integral of a function are defined in terms of a more fundamen-
tal concept: the limit, our next topic.

A Real-Life Example
From data obtained in a test run conducted on a prototype of a maglev (magnetic
levitation train), which moves along a straight monorail track, engineers have deter-
mined that the position of the maglev (in feet) from the origin at time t (in seconds)
is given by

(1)

s ⫽ f1t2 ⫽ 4t2

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 302

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

9.1 LIMITS

549

where f is called the position function of the maglev. The position of the maglev at
time t ⫽ 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . , 10, measured from its initial position, is
f132 ⫽ 36, . . . 

f1102 ⫽ 400

f122 ⫽ 16

f102 ⫽ 0

f112 ⫽ 4

feet (Figure 2).

t  = 0 

t  = 1 

t  = 2 

t  = 3 

t  =  10 

FIGURE 2
A maglev moving along an elevated 
monorail track

0 

4 

16 

36 

400 

s   (feet) 

Suppose we want to find the velocity of the maglev at t ⫽ 2. This is just the veloc-
ity of the maglev as shown on its speedometer at that precise instant of time. Offhand,
calculating this quantity using only Equation (1) appears to be an impossible task; but
consider what quantities we can compute using this relationship. Obviously, we can
compute the position of the maglev at any time t as we did earlier for some selected
values  of  t.  Using  these  values,  we  can  then  compute  the  average  velocity of  the
maglev over an interval of time. For example, the average velocity of the train over
the time interval [2, 4] is given by

Distance covered
 

Time elapsed

⫽

f 142 ⫺ f 122
4 ⫺ 2
41422 ⫺ 41222

 ⫽
2
 ⫽ 64 ⫺ 16

2

⫽ 24

or 24 feet/second.

Although this is not quite the velocity of the maglev at t ⫽ 2, it does provide us

with an approximation of its velocity at that time.

Can  we  do  better?  Intuitively,  the  smaller  the  time  interval  we  pick  (with 
t ⫽ 2 as the left endpoint), the better the average velocity over that time interval will
approximate the actual velocity of the maglev at t ⫽ 2.*

Now, let’s describe this process in general terms. Let t ⬎ 2. Then, the average

velocity of the maglev over the time interval [2, t] is given by

f 1t2 ⫺ f 122
t ⫺ 2

4t 

⫽

2 ⫺ 41222
t ⫺ 2

2 ⫺ 42
41t 
t ⫺ 2

⫽

(2)

By choosing the values of t closer and closer to 2, we obtain a sequence of numbers
that give the average velocities of the maglev over smaller and smaller time intervals.
As we observed earlier, this sequence of numbers should approach the instantaneous
velocity of the train at t ⫽ 2.

Let’s try some sample calculations. Using Equation (2) and taking the sequence 

t ⫽ 2.5, 2.1, 2.01, 2.001, and 2.0001, which approaches 2, we find the following:

*Actually, any interval containing t ⫽ 2 will do.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

550

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

The average velocity over [2, 2.5] is 

The average velocity over [2, 2.1] is 

412.52 ⫺ 42
2.5 ⫺ 2
412.12 ⫺ 42
2.1 ⫺ 2

⫽ 18,

or 18 feet/second.

⫽ 16.4,

or 16.4 feet/second.

and so forth. These results are summarized in Table 1.

TABLE 1

t

Average Velocity
over [2, t]

t approaches 2 from the right.

2.5

18

2.1

16.4

2.01

16.04

2.001

16.004

2.0001

16.0004

Average velocity approaches 16 from the right.

From Table 1, we see that the average velocity of the maglev seems to approach the
number 16 as it is computed over smaller and smaller time intervals. These computa-
tions suggest that the instantaneous velocity of the train at t ⫽ 2 is 16 feet/second.

Note Notice  that  we  cannot  obtain  the  instantaneous  velocity  for  the  maglev  at 
t ⫽ 2  by  substituting  t ⫽ 2  into  Equation  (2)  because  this  value  of  t is  not  in  the
domain of the average velocity function.

Intuitive Definition of a Limit
Consider the function t defined by

t 1t2 ⫽

2 ⫺ 42
41t 
t ⫺ 2

which gives the average velocity of the maglev [see Equation (2)]. Suppose we are
required to determine the value that t(t) approaches as t approaches the (fixed) num-
ber 2. If we take the sequence of values of t approaching 2 from the right-hand side,
as we did earlier, we see that t(t) approaches the number 16. Similarly, if we take a
sequence of values of t approaching 2 from the left, such as t ⫽ 1.5, 1.9, 1.99, 1.999,
and 1.9999, we obtain the results shown in Table 2.

TABLE 2

t
t(t)

t approaches 2 from the left.

1.5

14

1.9

15.6

1.99

15.96

1.999

15.996

1.9999

15.9996

Average velocity approaches 16 from the left.

Observe that t(t) approaches the number 16 as t approaches 2—this time from
the  left-hand  side.  In  other  words,  as  t approaches  2  from  either side  of  2,  t(t)
approaches 16. In this situation, we say that the limit of t(t) as t approaches 2 is 16,
written

 t1t2 ⫽ lim

tS2

lim
tS2

2 ⫺ 42
41t 
t ⫺ 2

 

⫽ 16

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The graph of the function t, shown in Figure 3, confirms this observation.

9.1 LIMITS

551

y =  g ( t )  =  

4 ( t 2 –  4) 

t –  2 

y 

20 
18 
16 
14 
12 

8 

4 

FIGURE 3
As t approaches t ⫽ 2 from either 
direction, g(t) approaches y ⫽ 16.

1.5 

1.9  2.1 

2.5 

1 

2 

3 

t 

Observe that the point t ⫽ 2 is not in the domain of the function t [for this reason, the
point  (2,  16)  is  missing  from  the  graph  of  t].  This,  however,  is  inconsequential
because the value, if any, of t(t) at t ⫽ 2 plays no role in computing the limit.

This example leads to the following informal definition.

Limit of a Function
The function f has the limit L as x approaches a, written

  f  1x2 ⫽ L

lim
xSa

if the value of f(x) can be made as close to the number L as we please by taking
x sufficiently close to (but not equal to) a.

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
1. Use a graphing utility to plot the graph of

t 1x2 ⫽

2 ⫺ 42
41x 
x ⫺ 2

in the viewing window [0, 3] ⫻ [0, 20].

approaches 2, first from the right and then from the left.

2. Use  ZOOM and  TRACE to describe what happens to the values of t(x) as x
3. What happens to the y-value when you try to evaluate t(x) at x ⫽ 2? Explain.
4. Reconcile your results with those of the preceding example.

Evaluating the Limit of a Function
Let’s now consider some examples involving the computation of limits.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXAMPLE 1 Let f1x2 ⫽ x 3 and evaluate 

  f  1x2

.

lim
xS2

y  =  x 3 

Solution The graph of f is shown in Figure 4. You can see that f (x) can be
made as close to the number 8 as we please by taking x sufficiently close to 2.
Therefore,

– 1  

1

2

 

x 

EXAMPLE 2 Let

x3 ⫽ 8

lim
xS2 

t 1x2 ⫽ e x ⫹ 2

1

if x ⫽ 1
if x ⫽ 1

552

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

y 

8 

6 

4 

2 

FIGURE 4
f(x) is close to 8 whenever x is close 
to 2.

y =  g ( x ) 

y 

5 

3 

1 

– 1  

1            3 

x 

FIGURE 5
lim
xS1

g(x) ⫽ 3

 t 1x2

.

lim
xS1

Evaluate 
Solution The domain of t is the set of all real numbers. From the graph of t
shown in Figure 5, we see that t(x) can be made as close to 3 as we please by taking
x sufficiently close to 1. Therefore,

 t 1x2 ⫽ 3

lim
xS1

Observe that t(1) ⫽ 1, which is not equal to the limit of the function t as x
approaches 1. [Once again, the value of t(x) at x ⫽ 1 has no bearing on the exis-
tence or value of the limit of t as x approaches 1.]

EXAMPLE 3 Evaluate the limit of the following functions as x approaches the indi-
cated point.

a.

1

f 1x2 ⫽ e ⫺1
Solution The graphs of the functions f and t are shown in Figure 6.

t 1x2 ⫽ 1

x2;  x ⫽ 0

if x ⬍ 0
if x ⱖ 0

;  x ⫽ 0

b.

y

y = f (x)

1

– 3

– 1

x

3

y 

5 

g ( x )  =  1 
x  2  

– 2    – 1  

1

2

 

x 

FIGURE 6

(a)

lim
xS0

f(x) does not exist.

(b)

lim
 
xS0

g(x) does not exist.

a. Referring to Figure 6a, we see that no matter how close x is to zero, f(x) takes on
the values 1 or ⫺1, depending on whether x is positive or negative. Thus, there is
no single real number L that f(x) approaches as x approaches zero. We conclude
that the limit of f(x) does not exist as x approaches zero.
b. Referring to Figure 6b, we see that as x approaches zero (from either side), t(x)
increases without bound and thus does not approach any specific real number.
We conclude, accordingly, that the limit of t(x) does not exist as x approaches
zero.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Explore & Discuss
Consider the graph of the function h shown in the following figure.

9.1 LIMITS

553

y
1

–1

x

It has the property that as x approaches zero from either the right or the left, the curve oscil-
lates more and more frequently between the lines y ⫽ ⫺1 and y ⫽ 1.

1. Explain why              does not exist.
2. Compare this function with those in Example 3. More specifically, discuss the different

lim
xS0

 h1x2

ways the functions fail to have a limit at x ⫽ 0.

Until now, we have relied on knowing the actual values of a function or the graph
of  a  function  near  x ⫽ a to  help  us  evaluate  the  limit  of  the  function  f(x)  as  x
approaches a. The following properties of limits, which we list without proof, enable
us to evaluate limits of functions algebraically.

THEOREM 1
Properties of Limits
Suppose

Then

 f 1x2 ⫽ L

lim
xSa

and

 t 1x2 ⫽ M

lim
xSa

lim
xSa 
lim

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

lim

xSa3  f 1x24 r ⫽ 3 lim
cf 1x2 ⫽ c lim

xSa

xSa

 f 1x24 r ⫽ Lr
 f 1x2 ⫽ cL

xSa

lim

xSa3  f 1x2 ⫾ t 1x24 ⫽ lim
xSa3   f  1x2t 1x24 ⫽ 3 lim
 f 1x2
 t 1x2 ⫽ L

f 1x2
t 1x2 ⫽

lim
xSa
 lim
xSa

lim
 
xSa

xSa

M

r, a positive constant

c, a real number

 t 1x2 ⫽ L ⫾ M 

 f  1x2 ⫾ lim
 f  1x243 lim

xSa

xSa

 t 1x24 ⫽ LM

Provided that M ⫽ 0

EXAMPLE 4 Use Theorem 1 to evaluate the following limits.

lim

xS115x4 ⫺ 22

a.

d.

 x3

lim
xS2

lim
xS3

 2x32x2 ⫹ 7

Solution

a.

 lim
xS2

 x 3 ⫽ 3 lim
 x4 3
 ⫽ 23 ⫽ 8

xS2

c.

b.

e.

 5x3/2

lim
xS4

2x2 ⫹ 1
x ⫹ 1

lim
 
xS2

Property 1

  x ⫽ 2

lim
xS2

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

554

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

b.

c.

d.

 lim
xS4

 x 

 5x 3/2 ⫽ 53 lim

3/24
 ⫽ 5142 3/2 ⫽ 40

xS4

Property 2

Property 1

lim

xS115x4 ⫺ 22 ⫽ lim

 5x4 ⫺ lim
xS1

 2

Property 3

xS1
, observe that the constant function t(x) ⫽ 2 has value 2 for
 2

To evaluate
all values of x. Therefore, t(x) must approach the limit 2 as x approaches 1 (or any
other point for that matter!). Therefore,

lim
xS1

 2x 3 2x 2 ⫹ 7 ⫽ 2 lim

 lim
xS3

lim

xS115x4 ⫺ 22 ⫽ 5112 4 ⫺ 2 ⫽ 3
 x 3 2x 2 ⫹ 7

Property 2

Property 4

Properties 1 and 3

 2x 2 ⫹ 7

xS3
 ⫽ 2 lim
xS3

 x 3 lim
xS3

lim

 ⫽ 2132 3 232 ⫹ 7
 ⫽ 21272116 ⫽ 216
xS212x 
2 ⫹ 12
xS21x ⫹ 12
2122 2 ⫹ 1
⫽ 9
2 ⫹ 1
3

⫽ 3

lim

Property 5

e.

2 ⫹ 1
2x 
x ⫹ 1

 lim
 
xS2

⫽

 ⫽

Indeterminate Forms
Let’s emphasize once again that Property 5 of limits is valid only when the limit of
the function that appears in the denominator is not equal to zero at the number in
question.

If the numerator has a limit different from zero and the denominator has a limit
equal to zero, then the limit of the quotient does not exist at the number in ques-

tion.  This  is  the  case  with  the  function  t(x)  ⫽ 1>x 2 in  Example  3b.  Here,  as  x

approaches zero, the numerator approaches 1 but the denominator approaches zero,
so the quotient becomes arbitrarily large. Thus, as was observed earlier, the limit
does not exist.

Next, consider

2 ⫺ 42
41x 
x ⫺ 2

lim
 
xS2

which we evaluated earlier by looking at the values of the function for x near x ⫽ 2.
If we attempt to evaluate this expression by applying Property 5 of limits, we see that
both the numerator and denominator of the function

41x 
2 ⫺ 42
x ⫺ 2

approach zero as x approaches 2; that is, we obtain an expression of the form 0>0. In
this event, we say that the limit of the quotient f(x)>t(x) as x approaches 2 has the
indeterminate form 0>0.
ingless expression 0>0 does not provide us with a solution to our problem. One strat-

We need to evaluate limits of this type when we discuss the derivative of a func-
tion, a fundamental concept in the study of calculus. As the name suggests, the mean-

egy that can be used to solve this type of problem follows.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.1 LIMITS

555

Strategy for Evaluating Indeterminate Forms
1. Replace the given function with an appropriate one that takes on the same

values as the original function everywhere except at x ⫽ a.

2. Evaluate the limit of this function as x approaches a.

Examples 5 and 6 illustrate this strategy.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 5 Evaluate

2 ⫺ 42
41x 
x ⫺ 2

lim
 
xS2

Solution Since both the numerator and the denominator of this expression

approach zero as x approaches 2, we have the indeterminate form 0>0. We rewrite

2 ⫺ 42
41x 
x ⫺ 2

41x ⫺ 221x ⫹ 22

⫽

1x ⫺ 22

which, upon cancellation of the common factors, is equivalent to 4(x ⫹ 2), provided
that x ⫽ 2. Next, we replace 4(x 2 ⫺ 4)>(x ⫺ 2) with 4(x ⫹ 2) and find that

 
lim
xS2
The graphs of the functions

f 1x2 ⫽

2 ⫺ 42
41x 
x ⫺ 2

⫽ lim
xS2

 41x ⫹ 22 ⫽ 16

2 ⫺ 42
41x 
x ⫺ 2

  and  t1x2 ⫽ 41x ⫹ 22

are shown in Figure 7. Observe that the graphs are identical except when x ⫽ 2. The
function t is defined for all values of x and, in particular, its value at x ⫽ 2 is t(2) ⫽
4(2 ⫹ 2) ⫽ 16. Thus, the point (2, 16) is on the graph of t. However, the function f is
not defined at x ⫽ 2. Since f(x) ⫽ t(x) for all values of x except x ⫽ 2, it follows that
the graph of f must look exactly like the graph of t, with the exception that the point
(2, 16) is missing from the graph of f. This illustrates graphically why we can evalu-
ate the limit of f by evaluating the limit of the “equivalent” function t.

y

24

20

16

12

8

4

–2

–3

–2

–1

FIGURE 7
The graphs of f(x) and g(x) are identical
except at the point (2, 16).

(a) 

f 1x2 ⫽

41x 

2 ⫺ 42

x ⫺ 2

y 

24 

20 

16 

12 

8 

4 

1

2

3

4

x

–3 

–2  –1 

1 

2 

3 

4 

–2 

x 

(b) g(x) ⫽ 4(x ⫹ 2)

Note Notice that the limit in Example 5 is the same limit that we evaluated earlier
when we discussed the instantaneous velocity of a maglev at a specified time.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

556

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
1. Use a graphing utility to plot the graph of

f 1x2 ⫽

2 ⫺ 42
41x 
x ⫺ 2

in the viewing window [0, 3] ⫻ [0, 20]. Then use
ZOOM and TRACE to find

2 ⫺ 42
41x 
x ⫺ 2

lim
 
xS2

2. Use a graphing utility to plot the graph of t(x) ⫽
4(x ⫹ 2) in the viewing window [0, 3] ⫻ [0, 20].
4(x ⫹ 2). 
Then use ZOOM and TRACE to find 

lim
xS2

What happens to the y-value when you try to eval-
uate f (x) at x ⫽ 2? Explain.
3. Can you distinguish between the graphs of f and t?
4. Reconcile your results with those of Example 5.

EXAMPLE 6 Evaluate

11 ⫹ h ⫺ 1

h

 
lim
hS0

Solution Letting h approach zero, we obtain the indeterminate form 0>0. Next,

we rationalize the numerator of the quotient by multiplying both the numerator
and the denominator by the expression 

, obtaining

The algebra icon is used to
indicate that the algebraic

(x2)
computation or problem-solving skill
used in the example is reviewed on
the referenced page. For instance, in
Example 11, if you refer to page 42,
you will find a review of the
process of rationalizing an algebraic
fraction. This is followed by a
worked example.

11 ⫹ h ⫺ 1

 

h

h111 ⫹ h ⫹ 12

111 ⫹ h ⫹ 12
⫽ 111 ⫹ h ⫺ 12111 ⫹ h ⫹ 12
h111 ⫹ h ⫹ 12
 ⫽ 1 ⫹ h ⫺ 1
h111 ⫹ h ⫹ 12
111 ⫹ h ⫹ 1

 ⫽

 ⫽

h

(x2)

See page 42.

11a ⫺ 1b211a ⫹ 1b2 ⫽ a ⫺ b

Therefore,

11 ⫹ h ⫺ 1

h

 lim
 
hS0

⫽ lim
hS0

 

111 ⫹ h ⫹ 1

⫽

111 ⫹ 1

⫽ 1
2

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
1. Use a graphing utility to plot the graph of 

11 ⫹ x ⫺ 1

t1x2 ⫽

x

11 ⫹ x ⫺ 1

in the viewing window 

[⫺1, 2] ⫻ [0, 1]. Then use ZOOM and TRACE to find 

by observing the values of t1x2

 
lim
xS0
as x approaches zero from the left and from the
right. 

x

2. Use a graphing utility to plot the graph of 

111 ⫹ x ⫹ 1

f 1x2 ⫽
[⫺1, 2] ⫻ [0, 1]. Then use ZOOM and TRACE to find 

in the viewing window 

111 ⫹ x ⫹ 1

 
lim
xS0
when x takes on the value zero? Explain.

. What happens to the y-value 

3. Can you distinguish between the graphs of f and t?
4. Reconcile your results with those of Example 6.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.1 LIMITS

557

Limits at Infinity
Up to now, we have studied the limit of a function as x approaches a (finite) number
a. There are occasions, however, when we want to know whether f(x) approaches a
unique number as x increases without bound. Consider, for example, the function P,
giving the number of fruit flies (Drosophila) in a container under controlled labora-
tory conditions, as a function of a time t. The graph of P is shown in Figure 8. You
can see from the graph of P that as t increases without bound (gets larger and larger),
P(t)  approaches  the  number  400.  This  number,  called  the  carrying  capacity of  the
environment, is determined by the amount of living space and food available, as well
as other environmental factors.

y

s
e
i
l
f
 
t
i
u
r
f
 
f
o

 
r
e
b
m
u
N

400

300

200

100

y = 400

FIGURE 8
The graph of P(t) gives the population of
fruit flies in a laboratory experiment.

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Days

t

As another example, suppose we are given the function

2

f 1x2 ⫽ 2x 

1 ⫹ x 

2

and we want to determine what happens to f(x) as x gets larger and larger. Picking the
sequence of numbers 1, 2, 5, 10, 100, and 1000 and computing the corresponding val-
ues of f(x), we obtain the following table of values:

x

f(x)

1

1

2

1.6

5

1.92

10

1.98

100

1.9998

1000

1.999998

From the table, we see that as x gets larger and larger, f(x) gets closer and closer to 2.
The graph of the function f shown in Figure 9 confirms this observation. We call the
line y ⫽ 2 a horizontal asymptote.* In this situation, we say that the limit of the func-
tion f(x) as x increases without bound is 2, written

2

2x 

1 ⫹ x 

2

 

lim
xS⬁

⫽ 2

In the general case, the following definition for a limit of a function at infinity

is applicable.

y 

2 

1 

y  =  2  

y  =    

2  x  2  
1 +  x  2  

– 3    

– 1  

1

3

x 

FIGURE 9
The graph of f has a horizontal asymptote
at y ⫽ 2.

*We will discuss asymptotes in greater detail in Section 10.3.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

558

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

Limit of a Function at Infinity
The function f has the limit L as x increases without bound (or, as x approaches
infinity), written 

 f 1x2 ⫽ L

lim
xS⬁

if f(x) can be made arbitrarily close to L by taking x large enough.

Similarly, the function f has the limit M as x decreases without bound (or as

x approaches negative infinity), written 

 f 1x2 ⫽ M

lim
xS⫺⬁

if f(x) can be made arbitrarily close to M by taking x to be negative and suffi-
ciently large in absolute value.

EXAMPLE 7 Let f and t be the functions

f  1x2 ⫽ e ⫺1

1

if x ⬍ 0
if x ⱖ 0

  and  t 1x2 ⫽ 1

x2

 f  1x2 and lim

xS⫺⬁

 f  1x2

lim
xS⬁

Evaluate:
a.
Solution The graphs of f(x) and t(x) are shown in Figure 10. Referring to the
graphs of the respective functions, we see that

 t 1x2 and lim

 t 1x2

xS⫺⬁

b.

lim
xS⬁

a.

 f  1x2 ⫽ 1 and lim

xS⫺⬁

 f 1x2 ⫽ ⫺1

lim
xS⬁

b.

 

lim
xS⬁

1
x2

⫽ 0 and lim
xS⫺⬁

 

1
x2

⫽ 0

y 

y  =  f  ( x ) 

1 

– 3  

– 1  

x 

3 

y 

5 

1 
g ( x ) =   
x  2  

– 2    – 1  

1

2

 

x 

FIGURE 10

(a)

 f 1x2 ⫽ 1

lim
xS⬁

and lim
xS⫺⬁

 f 1x2 ⫽ ⫺1

(b)

 g 1x2 ⫽ 0

lim
xS⬁

and lim
xS⫺⬁

 g 1x2 ⫽ 0

All the properties of limits listed in Theorem 1 are valid when a is replaced by ⬁

or ⫺⬁. In addition, we have the following property for the limit at infinity.

THEOREM 2
For all n ⬎ 0,

1
n
x 

 

lim
xS⬁

⫽ 0  and  lim
xS⫺⬁

 

1
n
x 

⫽ 0

provided that

1
xn

is defined.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

9.1 LIMITS

559

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
1. Use a graphing utility to plot the graphs of

y1 ⫽ 1
x0.5

    y2 ⫽ 1
x

    y3 ⫽ 1
x1.5

in the viewing window [0, 200] ⫻ [0, 0.5]. What can you say about 
lim
xS⬁
if n ⫽ 0.5, n ⫽ 1, and n ⫽ 1.5? Are these results predicted by Theorem 2?

1
x n

2. Use a graphing utility to plot the graphs of

y1 ⫽ 1
x

  and  y2 ⫽ 1
x5/3

in  the  viewing  window  [⫺50,  0]  ⫻ [⫺0.5,  0].  What  can  you  say  about 

1
x n

if n ⫽ 1 and n ⫽ ? Are these results predicted by Theorem 2?

lim
xS⫺⬁
Hint: To graph y2, write it in the form y2 ⫽ 1>(xˆ(1>3))ˆ5.

5
3

We often use the following technique to evaluate the limit at infinity of a rational
function: Divide the numerator and denominator of the expression by x n, where n is
the highest power present in the denominator of the expression.

EXAMPLE 8 Evaluate

x 

2 ⫺ x ⫹ 3
2x 

3 ⫹ 1

 

lim
xS⬁

Solution Since the limits of both the numerator and the denominator do not exist
as x approaches infinity, the property pertaining to the limit of a quotient (Property
5) is not applicable. Let’s divide the numerator and denominator of the rational
expression by x 3, obtaining

x 

2 ⫺ x ⫹ 3
2x 

3 ⫹ 1

 

 lim
xS⬁

⫽ lim
xS⬁

 

1
x

⫹ 3
x 3

⫺ 1
x 2
2 ⫹ 1
x 3
⫽ 0
2

 ⫽ 0 ⫺ 0 ⫹ 0

2 ⫹ 0

Use Theorem 2.

 ⫽ 0

f 1x2 ⫽ 3x2 ⫹ 8x ⫺ 4

2x2 ⫹ 4x ⫺ 5

EXAMPLE 9 Let

Compute 

  f  1x2

lim
xS⬁

if it exists.

Solution Again, we see that Property 5 is not applicable. Dividing the numerator
and the denominator by x 2, we obtain the following:

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

560

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

3x2 ⫹ 8x ⫺ 4
2x2 ⫹ 4x ⫺ 5

 

 lim
xS⬁

⫽ lim
xS⬁

 

3 ⫹ 8
x
2 ⫹ 4
x

⫺ 4
x2
⫺ 5
x2
1
 
x
1
x

 

 ⫽

lim
xS⬁

lim
xS⬁

 3 ⫹ 8  lim
xS⬁ 

 2 ⫹ 4  lim
xS⬁ 

⫺ 4  lim
 
xS⬁ 

⫺ 5  lim
 
xS⬁ 

1
x2
1
x2

Use Theorem 2.

 ⫽ 3 ⫹ 0 ⫺ 0
2 ⫹ 0 ⫺ 0

 ⫽ 3
2

EXAMPLE 10 Let 

f 1x2   ⫽ 2x3 ⫺ 3x2 ⫹ 1

x2 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 4

and evaluate:

b.

lim
xS⫺⬁

 f 1x2

a.

 f 1x2

lim
xS⬁

Solution

a. Dividing the numerator and the denominator of the rational expression by x 2, we

obtain

2x 
x 

3 ⫺ 3x 
2 ⫹ 1
2 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 4

 

lim
xS⬁

⫽ lim
xS⬁

 

2x ⫺ 3 ⫹ 1
2
x 
⫹ 4
x 

1 ⫹ 2
x

2

Since the numerator becomes arbitrarily large, whereas the denominator
approaches 1 as x approaches infinity, we see that the quotient f(x) gets larger
and larger as x approaches infinity. In other words, the limit does not exist. In
this case, we indicate this by writing

2x 
x 

3 ⫺ 3x 
2 ⫹ 1
2 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 4

 

lim
xS⬁

⫽ ⬁

b. Once again, dividing both the numerator and the denominator by x 2, we obtain

lim
xS⫺⬁

 

2x 
x 

3 ⫺ 3x 
2 ⫹ 1
2 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 4

⫽ lim
xS⫺⬁

 

2

2x ⫺ 3 ⫹ 1
x 
⫹ 4
x 

1 ⫹ 2
x

2

In this case, the numerator becomes arbitrarily large in magnitude but negative in
sign, whereas the denominator approaches 1 as x approaches negative infinity.
Therefore, the quotient f(x) decreases without bound, and the limit does not exist.
In this case, we indicate this by writing
3 ⫺ 3x 
2 ⫹ 1
2 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 4

lim
xS⫺⬁

2x 
x 

⫽ ⫺⬁

 

Example  11  gives  an  application  of  the  concept  of  the  limit  of  a  function  at

infinity.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 11 Average Cost Functions Custom Office makes
a line of executive desks. It is estimated that the total cost of making x

Senior Executive Model desks is C(x) ⫽ 100x ⫹ 200,000 dollars per year, so the
average cost of making x desks is given by

9.1 LIMITS

561

C1x2
100x ⫹ 200,000

x

 C1x2 ⫽
 ⫽

200,000

⫽ 100 ⫹

x
, and interpret your results.

x

 C1x2

y ($) 

dollars per desk. Evaluate 

lim
xS⬁

Solution

2000 

1000 

100 

C ( x )  =  100  +  

2 00,000 

x 

y  = 100 

1000  

2000 

x 

FIGURE 11
As the level of production increases, the
average cost approaches $100 per desk.

 lim
xS⬁

 C1x2 ⫽ lim
 ⫽ lim
xS⬁ 

xS⬁a 100 ⫹
100 ⫹ lim
xS⬁

 

200,000

b

x
200,000

x

⫽ 100

A sketch of the graph of the function C苶(x) appears in Figure 11. The result we
obtained is fully expected if we consider its economic implications. Note that as
the level of production increases, the fixed cost per desk produced, represented by

the term (200,000>x), drops steadily. The average cost should approach a constant

unit cost of production—$100 in this case.

Explore & Discuss
Consider the graph of the function f depicted in the following figure:

y

1

–1

x

It has the property that the curve oscillates between y ⫽ ⫺1 and y ⫽ 1 indefinitely in either
direction.

1. Explain why           

 f 1x2

lim
xS⫺⬁

and              do not exist.

 f 1x2

lim
xS⬁

2. Compare this function with those of Example 10. More specifically, discuss the different

ways each function fails to have a limit at infinity or negative infinity.

9.1 Self-Check Exercises

1. Find the indicated limit if it exists.

2x2 ⫹ 7 ⫹ 23x ⫺ 5

a.

lim
 
xS3

b.

lim
xS⫺1 

x ⫹ 2
x2 ⫺ x ⫺ 2
2x2 ⫺ x ⫺ 3

Records in pressing x CDs is given by the average cost
function

C1x2 ⫽ 1.8 ⫹ 3000

x

Evaluate 

 C1x2

lim
xS⬁

, and interpret your result.

2. The average cost per disc (in dollars) incurred by Herald

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 9.1 can be found on page 565.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

562

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

9.1 Concept Questions

1. Explain what is meant by the statement 

  f 1x2 ⫽ 3

.

lim
xS2

2. a. If 

  f 1x2 ⫽ 5,

what can you say about f132 ? Explain.

lim
xS3

b. If f122 ⫽ 6, what can you say about 

  f 1x2?

lim
xS2

Explain.

3. Evaluate the following, and state the property of limits that

you use at each step.

1x12x2 ⫹ 12

a.

lim
xS4

9.1 Exercises

b. lim 

x4 ⫹ 1

xS1¢2x2 ⫹ x ⫹ 5

≤3/2

f(x) at the indicated value of a, if it exists.

In Exercises 1–8, use the graph of the given function f to determine
lim
xS a
1.

2.

y

y

y = f (x)

y = f (x)

3
2
1

3
2
1

–3 –2 –1

1 2 3

x

a = – 2

–3 –2

–1

1 2 3

a = 1

3.

y

4.

4
3
2
1

y = f (x)

–3 –2 –1

1 2 3
a = 3

5.

y = f (x)

y

2

3

1

–3 –2 –1

1 2 3

a = – 2

7.

y = f (x)

y

3
2
1

–4 –3 –2 –1

1 2

6.

8.

x

x

x

y

y = f (x)

3
2
1

 –2  –1

1 2 3
a = 1

y = f (x)

y

2

4
3

1

–4 –3 –2 –1

1 2
a = – 2

y

3
2

y = f (x)

–3 –2 –1

1 2 3

a = – 2

a = 0

x

x

x

x

4. What is an indeterminate form? Illustrate with an example.

5. Explain in your own words the meaning of 

and 

xS⫺⬁ f 1x2 ⫽ M

lim

.

  f 1x2 ⫽ L

lim
xS⬁

In Exercises 9–16, complete the table by computing f(x) at the
given values of x. Use these results to estimate the indicated limit
(if it exists).
9.

f 1x2 ⫽ x2 ⫹ 1; lim

  f 1x2

xS2

x
f(x)

1.9

1.99

1.999

2.001

2.01

2.1

10.

f 1x2 ⫽ 2x2 ⫺ 1; lim

 f 1x2

xS1
0.99

x
f(x)

0.9

0.999

1.001

1.01

1.1

11.

f 1x2 ⫽

x
f(x)

; lim
xS0

 f 1x2

| x |
x
⫺0.1 ⫺0.01 ⫺0.001

12.

f 1x2 ⫽

| x ⫺ 1|
x ⫺ 1

 f 1x2

; lim
xS1

0.001

0.01

0.1

x
f(x)

13.

f 1x2 ⫽

x
f(x)

0.9

0.99

0.999

1.001

1.01

1.1

1

1x ⫺ 12 2; lim

xS1

 f 1x2

0.9

0.99

0.999

1.001

1.01

1.1

14.

f 1x2 ⫽ 1

x ⫺ 2

 f 1x2

; lim
xS2

x
f(x)

1.9

1.99

1.999

2.001

2.01

2.1

15.

f 1x2 ⫽ x2 ⫹ x ⫺ 2

x ⫺ 1

 f 1x2

; lim
xS1

x
f(x)

0.9

0.99

0.999

1.001

1.01

1.1

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

16.

f 1x2 ⫽ x ⫺ 1

x ⫺ 1

 f 1x2

; lim
xS1

x
f(x)

0.9

0.99

0.999

1.001

1.01

1.1

45.

47.

 1t1x2
2f  1x2 ⫺ t 1x2
f  1x2t 1x2

lim
xSa

lim
 
xSa

46.

48.

 23 5f 1x2 ⫹ 3t 1x2
t 1x2 ⫺ f  1x2
f  1x2 ⫹ 1t 1x2

lim
xSa

 
lim
xSa

9.1 LIMITS

563

In Exercises 17–22, sketch the graph of the function f, and evalu-
ate 

f(x), if it exists, for the given value of a.

lim
xS a

In Exercises 49–62, find the indicated limit, if it exists.

49.

x2 ⫺ 1
x ⫺ 1

lim
 
xS1

51.

 
lim
xS0

x 2 ⫺ x

2x

53.

lim
 
xS⫺5

x2 ⫺ 25
x ⫹ 5

55.

lim
 
xS1

x

x ⫺ 1

57.

lim
 
xS⫺2

x2 ⫺ x ⫺ 6
x2 ⫹ x ⫺ 2

1x ⫺ 1

x ⫺ 1

59.

 
lim
xS1

Hint: Multiply by 

1x ⫹ 1
1x ⫹ 1

50.

 
lim
xS⫺2

x2 ⫺ 4
x ⫹ 2

52.

 
lim
xS0

2x2 ⫺ 3x

x

54.

 
lim
bS⫺3

b ⫹ 1
b ⫹ 3

56.

58.

x ⫹ 2
x ⫺ 2

lim
 
xS2

z3 ⫺ 8
z ⫺ 2

lim
 
zS2

60.

lim
 
xS4

x ⫺ 41x ⫺ 2

.

Hint: See Exercise 59.

61.

lim
 
xS1

2x ⫺ 2

x 3 ⫹ x 2 ⫺ 2x

62.

lim
xS⫺2

 

4 ⫺ x2
2x2 ⫹ x3

f(x) and 

In Exercises 63–68, use the graph of the function f to determine
lim
xS⬁
63.

f(x), if they exist.

lim
xS⫺⬁

64.

y

y
f (x) = 2x 2 – 10

10

x

3

f (x) = x 3 – x

5

–1

1 2 3

x

– 5

66.

y

65.

–2

67.

y

y

f (x) =  1
x 2

f (x) = 

x 2

x 2 + 1

1

x

2

–3 –2 –1

1 2 3

x

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

25.

27.

29.

30.

31.

33.

35.

37.

39.

if x ⱕ 0
if x ⬎ 0

    1a ⫽ 02

if x ⱕ 3
if x ⬎ 3

    1a ⫽ 32

if x ⬍ 1
if x ⫽ 1
if x ⬎ 1

    1a ⫽ 12

if x ⬍ 1
if x ⫽ 1
if x ⬎ 1

    1a ⫽ 12

⫺1

f 1x2 ⫽ e x ⫺ 1
f 1x2 ⫽ e x ⫺ 1

⫺2x ⫹ 8

x
0
⫺x ⫹ 2

⫺2x ⫹ 4
4
x2 ⫹ 1

f 1x2 ⫽c 
f 1x2 ⫽c 

1

f 1x2 ⫽ e | x |
f 1x2   ⫽ e | x ⫺ 1|

0

if x ⫽ 0
if x ⫽ 0

    1a ⫽ 02
    1a ⫽ 12

if x ⫽ 1
if x ⫽ 1

In Exercises 23–40, find the indicated limit.
 ⫺3
23.

24.

 4

lim
xS⫺2

 x

lim
xS3

26.

lim
xS⫺2

 ⫺3x
2 ⫺ 2t ⫹ 12
 14t 

28.

lim
tS3

lim
xS2

lim
xS1

lim
xS1
lim
xS0

lim
sS0

 11 ⫺ 3x 22
 12x3 ⫺ 3x2 ⫹ x ⫹ 22
 14x5 ⫺ 20x2 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 12
 12s 
2x ⫹ 1
x ⫹ 4

2 ⫺ 1212s ⫹ 42

lim
 
xS2

lim
xS2

lim
xS⫺3

 1x ⫹ 2
22x4 ⫹ x2
2x 2 ⫹ 8

lim
xS⫺1

2x ⫹ 5

32.

lim
xS2

34.

lim
 
xS1

 1x2 ⫹ 121x2 ⫺ 42
x3 ⫹ 1
2x3 ⫹ 2

23 5x ⫹ 2
 B 2x3 ⫹ 4
x2x2 ⫹ 7
2x ⫺ 22x ⫹ 3

x2 ⫹ 1

lim
xS⫺2

lim
xS2

lim
 
xS3

36.

38.

40.

f(x) ⴝ 3 and 

In Exercises 41–48, find the indicated limit given that 
lim
xS a
41.

g(x) ⴝ 4.

lim
xS a

42.

 3   f 1x2 ⫺ t1x24
 34f 1x2 ⫺ 3t1x24

lim
xSa

lim
xSa

43.

lim
xSa
44. lim
xSa

 2f 1x2
 3  f 1x2t 1x24

f (x) = 2 –  x

x

3

–1

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

564

68.

y

1

–2  –1

1

2

3

x

1⫺x

x

x ⫹ 1

f 1x2 ⫽c 

if x ⱕ 0

if x ⬎ 0

In Exercises 69–72, complete the table by computing f(x) at the
given values of x. Use the results to guess at the indicated limits,
if they exist.

69.

f 1x2 ⫽ 1

x2 ⫹ 1

  f 1x2 and  lim

xS⫺⬁

 f 1x2

; lim
xS⬁

1

10

100

1000

⫺1

⫺10

⫺100

⫺1000

x
f(x)

x
f(x)

70.

f 1x2 ⫽ 2x

x ⫹ 1

  f 1x2 and  lim

xS⫺⬁

 f 1x2

; lim
xS⬁

1

10

100

1000

⫺5

⫺10

⫺100

⫺1000

x
f(x)

x
f(x)

71.

f 1x2   ⫽ 3x3 ⫺ x2 ⫹ 10; lim

xS⬁

  f 1x2 and  lim

xS⫺⬁

 f 1x2

1

5

10

100

1000

⫺1

⫺5

⫺10

⫺100

⫺1000

x
f(x)

x
f(x)

72.

f 1x2 ⫽

| x |
x

  f 1x2 and  lim

xS⫺⬁

 f 1x2

; lim
xS⬁

1

10

100

⫺1

⫺10

⫺100

x
f(x)

In Exercises 73–80, find the indicated limits, if they exist.

73.

3x ⫹ 2
x ⫺ 5

 

lim
xS⬁

74.

lim
xS⫺⬁

4x2 ⫺ 1
x ⫹ 2

75.

lim
xS⫺⬁

3x3 ⫹ x2 ⫹ 1

x3 ⫹ 1

76.

 

lim
xS⬁

2x2 ⫹ 3x ⫹ 1

x4 ⫺ x2

77.

lim
xS⫺⬁

 

x4 ⫹ 1
x3 ⫺ 1

78.

 

lim
xS⬁

4x4 ⫺ 3x2 ⫹ 1

2x4 ⫹ x3 ⫹ x2 ⫹ x ⫹ 1

79.

 

lim
xS⬁

x5 ⫺ x3 ⫹ x ⫺ 1

x6 ⫹ 2x2 ⫹ 1

80.

 

lim
xS⬁

2x2 ⫺ 1

x3 ⫹ x2 ⫹ 1

81. TOXIC WASTE A  city’s  main  well  was  recently  found  to  be
contaminated with trichloroethylene, a cancer-causing chem-
ical,  as  a  result  of  an  abandoned  chemical  dump  leaching
chemicals into the water. A proposal submitted to city coun-
cil members indicates that the cost, measured in millions of
dollars, of removing x% of the toxic pollutant is given by

C1x2 ⫽ 0.5x

100 ⫺ x

    10 ⬍ x ⬍ 1002

a. Find the cost of removing 50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, 90%,

and 95% of the pollutant.

b. Evaluate

 
lim
xS100

0.5x

100 ⫺ x

and interpret your result.

82. A DOOMSDAY SITUATION The population of a certain breed

of rabbits introduced into an isolated island is given by

P1t2 ⫽ 72

9 ⫺ t

    10 ⱕ t ⬍ 92

where t is measured in months.
a. Find the number of rabbits present in the island initially

(at t ⫽ 0).

b. Show that the population of rabbits is increasing with-

out bound.

c. Sketch the graph of the function P.

(Comment: This phenomenon is referred to as a dooms-
day situation.)

83. AVERAGE COST The average cost/disc in dollars incurred by
Herald Records in pressing x DVDs is given by the aver-
age cost function

C1x2 ⫽ 2.2 ⫹ 2500

x

Evaluate 

 C1x2

lim
xS⬁

, and interpret your result.

84. CONCENTRATION OF A DRUG IN THE BLOODSTREAM The  con-
centration of a certain drug in a patient’s bloodstream t hr
after injection is given by

C1t2 ⫽ 0.2t
 C1t2

t 

2 ⫹ 1

mg/cm3. Evaluate 

, and interpret your result.

lim
tS⬁

85. BOX-OFFICE RECEIPTS The 

total  worldwide  box-office
receipts for a long-running blockbuster movie are approxi-
mated by the function

T1x2 ⫽ 120x2

x2 ⫹ 4

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

where T(x) is measured in millions of dollars and x is the
number of months since the movie’s release.
a. What  are  the  total  box-office  receipts  after  the  first

month? The second month? The third month?

b. What  will  the  movie  gross  in  the  long  run  (when  x is

very large)?

86. RELIABILITY OF COMPUTER CHIPS The percentage of a certain
brand of computer chips that will fail after t years of use is
estimated to be

P1t2 ⫽ 10011 ⫺ e⫺0.1t2

a. What percentage of this brand of computer chips are ex-

pected to be usable after 3 years?

b. Evaluate 

lim
tS⬁  

P 1t2

. Did you expect this result?

91. If 

87. SPREAD OF AN EPIDEMIC During a flu epidemic, the number
of children in the Woodbridge Community School System
who contracted influenza after t days was given by

Q 1t2 ⫽

1000

1 ⫹ 199e⫺0.8 t

How many children eventually contracted the disease?

88. PHOTOSYNTHESIS The rate of production R in photosynthe-

sis is related to the light intensity I by the function

R1I2 ⫽ aI

b ⫹ I 

2

where a and b are positive constants.
a. Taking a ⫽ b ⫽ 1, compute R(I) for I ⫽ 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 

and 5.

 R1I2

b. Evaluate 
c. Use the results of parts (a) and (b) to sketch the graph of

lim
IS⬁

.

R. Interpret your results.

89. SPEED OF A CHEMICAL REACTION Certain proteins, known as
enzymes, serve as catalysts for chemical reactions in living
things. In 1913 Leonor Michaelis and L. M. Menten dis-
covered the following formula giving the initial speed V (in
moles per liter per second) at which the reaction begins in
terms  of  the  amount  of  substrate  x (the  substance  being
acted upon, measured in moles per liters) present:

9.1 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises
29 ⫹ 7 ⫹ 23132 ⫺ 5
216 ⫹ 24

2x2 ⫹ 7 ⫹ 23x ⫺ 5

3 ⫹ 2

x ⫹ 2

 
 lim
xS3

⫽

1. a.

5

 ⫽
 ⫽ 6
5

b. Letting x approach  ⫺1 leads to the indeterminate form

0>0. Thus, we proceed as follows:

9.1 LIMITS

565

V ⫽ ax
x ⫹ b

where a and b are positive constants. Evaluate

ax

x ⫹ b

 

lim
xS⬁

and interpret your result.

In Exercises 90–95, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
90. If 

exists, then f is defined at x ⫽ a.

lim
xSa

lim
xS0

lim
xS2

xS0

  f 1x2
  f 1x2   ⫽ 4 and lim
  f 1x2   ⫽ 3 and lim 
  f 1x2   ⫽ 0 and lim

xS2

xS3 

does not exist.

does not exist.

92. If

93. If

lim
xS3

.

xS0

 t1x2 ⫽ 0, then lim
t1x2 ⫽ 0, then lim
t1x2 ⫽ 0, then lim

   f 1x2t1x2   ⫽ 0
xS2 3  f 1x24>3t1x24
xS3 3  f 1x24>3t1x24

94.

95.

x ⫹ 1

x

lim

xS2 a
xS1 a 2x

lim

x ⫺ 1

 
xS2

⫹ 3
x ⫺ 1b ⫽ lim
⫺ 2
x ⫺ 1b ⫽ lim

 
xS1

x

x ⫹ 1

2x

x ⫺ 1

⫹ lim
 
xS2

⫺ lim
 
xS1

3

x ⫺ 1

2

x ⫺ 1

96. Show  by  means  of  an  example  that 

may exist even though neither 
Does this example contradict Theorem 1?

lim
xSa

xSa 3   f 1x2 ⫹ t1x24

lim

exists.

xSa 

t1x2
  f 1x2 nor lim
xSa 3  f 1x2t1x24
t1x2

lim

may exist

exists. Does this

97. Show by means of an example that

even though neither
example contradict Theorem 1?

lim
xSa

  f 1x2 nor lim

xSa 

98. Show  by  means  of  an  example  that 

exist even though neither
this example contradict Theorem 1?

lim
xSa

  f 1x2 nor lim

xSa

lim
xSa

  f 1x2>t1x2
 t1x2

exists. Does 

may 

 
 lim
xS⫺1

x 2 ⫺ x ⫺ 2
2x 2 ⫺ x ⫺ 3

⫽ lim
xS⫺1

  1x ⫹ 121x ⫺ 22
1x ⫹ 1212x ⫺ 32
x ⫺ 2
2x ⫺ 3

Cancel the 
common factors.

 ⫽ lim
 
xS⫺1

 ⫽

⫺1 ⫺ 2
21⫺12 ⫺ 3

 ⫽ 3
5

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

566

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

2.

 lim
xS⬁

 C1x2 ⫽ lim

xS⬁ ¢1.8 ⫹ 3000
x ≤

1.8 ⫹ lim
xS⬁

x

 

3000

 ⫽ lim
xS⬁ 
 ⫽ 1.8

Our  computation  reveals  that,  as  the  production  of  CDs
increases  “without  bound,”  the  average  cost  drops  and
approaches a unit cost of $1.80/disc.

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Finding the Limit of a Function
A graphing utility can be used to help us find the limit of a function, if it exists, as
illustrated in the following examples.

4

0

_2

(a) The graph of 

f 1x2   ⫽

x3 ⫺ 1
x ⫺ 1

in the viewing window [⫺2, 2] ⫻ [0, 4]

Plot2 Plot3

Plot1
\Y1=(X^3-1)/(X-1)
\Y2=
\Y3=
\Y4=
\Y5=
\Y6=

(b) The TI-83/84 equation screen
FIGURE T1

EXAMPLE 1 Let 

f 1x2   ⫽ x3 ⫺ 1

x ⫺ 1

.

a. Plot the graph of f in the viewing window [⫺2, 2] ⫻ [0, 4].

b. Use ZOOM to find 

x3 ⫺ 1
x ⫺ 1

.

lim
 
xS1

c. Verify your result by evaluating the limit algebraically.

Solution
a. The graph of f in the viewing window [⫺2, 2] ⫻ [0, 4] is shown in Figure T1a.

2

b. Using ZOOM-IN repeatedly, we see that the y-value approaches 3 as the x-value

approaches 1. We conclude, accordingly, that

c. We compute

x3 ⫺ 1
x ⫺ 1

 

lim
xS1

⫽ 3

x3 ⫺ 1
x ⫺ 1

 lim
 
xS1

 1x ⫺ 121x2 ⫹ x ⫹ 12
⫽ lim
xS1
xS1 1x2 ⫹ x ⫹ 12 ⫽ 3
 ⫽ lim

x ⫺ 1

Note If you attempt to find the limit in Example 1 by using the evaluation function
of your graphing utility to find the value of f(x) when x ⫽ 1, you will see that the
graphing utility does not display the y-value. This happens because x ⫽ 1 is not in the
domain of f.

EXAMPLE 2 Use ZOOM to find 

xS0 11 ⫹ x2 1/x

lim

.

Solution We first plot the graph of f1x2 ⫽ 11 ⫹ x2 1/x in a suitable viewing win-
dow. Figure T2a shows a plot of f in the window [⫺1, 1] ⫻ [0, 4]. Using ZOOM-IN
repeatedly, we see that 

xS0 11 ⫹ x2 1/x ⬇ 2.71828

lim

.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

9.1 LIMITS

567

4

0

Plot1 Plot2 Plot3
\Y1=(1+X)^(1/X)
\Y2=
\Y3=
\Y4=
\Y5=
\Y6=
\Y7=

(b)

1

FIGURE T2
(a) The graph of f(x) ⫽ (1 ⫹ x)1/x in the
viewing window [⫺1, 1] ⫻ [0, 4]; (b) the
TI-83/84 equation screen

_1

(a)

The limit of f1x2 ⫽ 11 ⫹ x2 1/x as x approaches zero, denoted by the letter e,

plays a very important role in the study of mathematics and its applications (see Sec-
tion 3.3). Thus,

xS0 11 ⫹ x2 1/x ⫽ e

lim

where, as we have just seen, e ⬇ 2.71828.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 3 Oxygen Content of a Pond When organic waste is 
dumped into a pond, the oxidation process that takes place reduces the 

pond’s oxygen content. However, given time, nature will restore the oxygen con-
tent to its natural level. Suppose the oxygen content t days after the organic waste
has been dumped into the pond is given by

f 1t2   ⫽ 100 ¢t 

t 

2 ⫹ 10t ⫹ 100

2 ⫹ 20t ⫹ 100≤

percent of its normal level.
a. Plot the graph of f in the viewing window [0, 200] ⫻ [70, 100].
b. What can you say about f(t) when t is very large?
c. Verify your observation in part (b) by evaluating 

.

  f 1t2

lim
tS⬁

Solution

a. The graph of f is shown in Figure T3a.
b. From the graph of f, it appears that f(t) approaches 100 steadily as t gets larger
and larger. This observation tells us that eventually the oxygen content of the
pond will be restored to its natural level.

100

70
0
(a)

Plot1 Plot2 Plot3
\Y1=100(X^2+10X+100)/
(X^2+20X+100)
\Y2=
\Y3=
\Y4=
\Y5=

200

(b)

c. To verify the observation made in part (b), we compute

FIGURE T3
(a) The graph of f in the viewing window
[0, 200] ⫻ [70, 100]; (b) the TI-83/84 
equation screen

 f 1t2 ⫽ lim

tS⬁

 100a t 

t 

 lim
tS⬁

 ⫽ 100 lim
tS⬁

2 ⫹ 10t ⫹ 100

2 ⫹ 20t ⫹ 100b
⫹ 100
2
t 
⫹ 100
t 

t
1 ⫹ 20
t

 §1 ⫹ 10

2¥ ⫽ 100

(continued)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

568

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

In  Exercises  1–8,  find  the  indicated  limit  by  first  plotting  the
graph of the function in a suitable viewing window and then
using the ZOOM-IN feature of the calculator.

1.

lim
 
xS1

2x3 ⫺ 2x2 ⫹ 3x ⫺ 3

x ⫺ 1

2.

 
lim
xS⫺2

2x3 ⫹ 3x2 ⫺ x ⫹ 2

x ⫹ 2

3.

lim
 
xS⫺1

x3 ⫹ 1
x ⫹ 1

4.

x4 ⫺ 1
x ⫺ 1

 
lim
xS⫺1

5.

7.

x3 ⫺ x2 ⫺ x ⫹ 1

 
lim
xS1

lim
xS0

x3 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 2
 11 ⫹ 2x2 1/x

6.

lim
 
xS0

x

1x ⫹ 1 ⫺ 1

8.

lim
 
xS0

2x ⫺ 1

x

a. Plot  the  graph  of  P in  the  viewing  window  [0,  50]  ⫻

[0, 30].

b. What will be the population of Marlboro in the long run?

Hint: Find 

P1t2

.

lim
tS⬁ 

12. AMOUNT OF RAINFALL The total amount of rain (in inches)

after t hr during a rainfall is given by

T1t2 ⫽ 0.8t

t ⫹ 4.1

a. Plot  the  graph  of  T in  the  viewing  window  [0,  30]  ⫻

[0, 0.8].

b. What is the total amount of rain during this rainfall?

Hint: Find 

lim
tS⬁

 

T 1t2

.

13. AN EXTINCTION SITUATION The  number  of  saltwater  croco-

diles in a certain area of northern Australia is given by

P 1t2 ⫽ 300e⫺0.024 t

5e⫺0.024t ⫹ 1

a. How many crocodiles were in the population initially?
b. Show that 

.

P 1t2 ⫽ 0

lim
tS⬁ 

c. Plot the graph of P in the viewing window [0, 200] ⫻

[0, 70].

(Comment: This phenomenon is referred to as an extinction
situation.)

9. Show that 

2

x ⫺ 3

lim
 
xS3

does not exist.

10. Show that 

lim
 
xS2

x3 ⫺ 2x ⫹ 1

x ⫺ 2

does not exist.

11. CITY PLANNING A major developer is building a 5000-acre
complex  of  homes,  offices,  stores,  schools,  and  churches 
in  the  rural  community  of  Marlboro.  As  a  result  of  this
development, the planners have estimated that Marlboro’s
population (in thousands) t years from now will be given by

P1t2 ⫽ 25t 

2 ⫹ 125t ⫹ 200
2 ⫹ 5t ⫹ 40
t 

9.2 One-Sided Limits and Continuity

y 

1 

y  =  f ( x ) 

x 

– 1  

1

 

– 1  

FIGURE 12
The function f does not have a limit as x
approaches zero.

One-Sided Limits
Consider the function f defined by

f1x2   ⫽ e x ⫺ 1

x ⫹ 1

if x ⬍ 0
if x ⱖ 0

From the graph of f shown in Figure 12, we see that the function f does not have a limit
as x approaches zero because, no matter how close x is to zero, f(x) takes on values that
are close to 1 if x is positive and values that are close to ⫺1 if x is negative. Therefore,
f(x) cannot be close to a single number L—no matter how close x is to zero. Now, if we
restrict x to be greater than zero (to the right of zero), then we see that f(x) can be made
as close to 1 as we please by taking x sufficiently close to zero. In this situation we say
that the right-hand limit of f as x approaches zero (from the right) is 1, written

lim
xS0 ⫹ 

f1x2 ⫽ 1

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

9.2 ONE-SIDED LIMITS AND CONTINUITY

569

Similarly, we see that f(x) can be made as close to ⫺1 as we please by taking x
sufficiently close to, but to the left of, zero. In this situation we say that the left-hand
limit of f as x approaches zero (from the left) is ⫺1, written

xS0⫺  f 1x2 ⫽ ⫺1

lim

These  limits  are  called  one-sided  limits. More  generally,  we  have  the  following 
informal definitions.

One-Sided Limits
The  function  f has  the right-hand  limit  L as  x approaches  a from  the  right, 
written

xSa⫹ f 1x2 ⫽ L

lim

if the values of f(x) can be made as close to L as we please by taking x suffi-
ciently close to (but not equal to) a and to the right of a.

Similarly, the function f has the left-hand limit M as x approaches a from

the left, written

xSa⫺  f 1x2 ⫽ M

lim

if the values of f(x) can be made as close to M as we please by taking x suffi-
ciently close to (but not equal to) a and to the left of a.

The connection between one-sided limits and the two-sided limit defined earlier

is given by the following theorem.

THEOREM 3
Let f be a function that is defined for all values of x close to x ⫽ a with the possible
exception of a itself. Then

  f 1x2 ⫽ L

lim
xSa

if and only if

xSa⫹ f 1x2 ⫽ lim

xSa⫺  f 1x2 ⫽ L

lim

Thus, the two-sided limit exists if and only if the one-sided limits exist and are equal.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 1 Let

if x ⱕ 0
if x ⬎ 0

and

t1x2 ⫽ e ⫺1

1

if x ⬍ 0
if x ⱖ 0

exists by studying the one-sided limits of f as x approaches 

1x
f 1x2 ⫽ e ⫺x
  f 1x2
 t 1x2

lim
xS0

lim
xS0

does not exist.

a. Show that

x ⫽ 0.

b. Show that 

Solution
a. For x ⱕ 0,

and for x ⬎ 0, we find

f 1x2 ⫽ lim

lim
xS0⫺  

xS0⫺ 1⫺x2 ⫽ 0
1x ⫽ 0

xS0⫹ f 1x2 ⫽ lim

lim

xS0⫹

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

570

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

Thus,

(Figure 13a).

b. We have

  f 1x2 ⫽ 0

lim
xS0

t 1x2 ⫽ ⫺1  and  lim

xS0⫹ t1x2   ⫽ 1

lim
xS0⫺ 

and since these one-sided limits are not equal, we conclude that 
not exist (Figure 13b).

lim
xS0

y 

2 

1 

– 2  

– 1  

1

2

 

x 

y 

1 

– 1  

 t 1x2

does 

x 

FIGURE 13

(a) 

 f1x2

lim
xS0

exists.

(b) 

 g1x2

lim
xS0

does not exist.

Continuous Functions
Continuous functions will play an important role throughout most of our study of cal-
culus. Loosely speaking, a function is continuous at a point if the graph of the func-
tion  at  that  point  is  devoid  of  holes,  gaps,  jumps,  or  breaks.  Consider,  for  ex-
ample, the graph of the function f depicted in Figure 14.

y 

FIGURE 14
The graph of this function is not continu-
ous at x ⫽ a, x ⫽ b, x ⫽ c, and x ⫽ d.

a 

b 

c 

d 

x 

Let’s take a closer look at the behavior of  f at or near  x ⫽ a, x ⫽ b, x ⫽ c, and 
x ⫽ d. First, note that f is not defined at x ⫽ a; that is, x ⫽ a is not in the domain of f,
thereby resulting in a “hole” in the graph of f. Next, observe that the value of f at b, f(b),
is not equal to the limit of f(x) as x approaches b, resulting in a “jump” in the graph of f
at x ⫽ b. The function f does not have a limit at x ⫽ c, since the left-hand and right-hand
limits of f(x) are not equal, also resulting in a jump in the graph of f at x ⫽ c. Finally, the
limit of f does not exist at x ⫽ d, resulting in a break in the graph of f. The function f is
discontinuous at each of these numbers. It is continuous everywhere else.

Continuity of a Function at a Number
A function f is continuous at a number x ⫽ a if the following conditions are
satisfied.
1. f(a) is defined.

exists.

3.

2.

  f1x2

lim
xSa

  f1x2 ⫽ f1a2

lim
xSa

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

9.2 ONE-SIDED LIMITS AND CONTINUITY

571

Thus, a function f is continuous at x ⫽ a if the limit of f at x ⫽ a exists and has the
value f(a). Geometrically, f is continuous at x ⫽ a if the proximity of x to a implies
the proximity of f(x) to f(a).

If  f is  not  continuous  at  x ⫽ a,  then  f is  said  to  be  discontinuous at  x ⫽ a. 
Also, f is continuous on an interval if f is continuous at every number in the interval.
Figure 15 depicts the graph of a continuous function on the interval (a, b). Notice
that the graph of the function over the stated interval can be sketched without lifting
one’s pencil from the paper.

y 

y  =  f  ( x ) 

FIGURE 15
The graph of f is continuous on the 
interval (a, b).

a 

x 

b 

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 2 Find the values of x for which each function is continuous.

a. f1x2 ⫽ x ⫹ 2

b.

t 1x2   ⫽ x 

2 ⫺ 4
x ⫺ 2

c.

h1x2 ⫽ e x ⫹ 2

1

if x ⫽ 2
if x ⫽ 2

d.

F1x2   ⫽ e ⫺1

1

if x ⬍ 0
if x ⱖ 0

e.

The graph of each function is shown in Figure 16.

x
⫺1

G1x2   ⫽c 1

y

5

f(x) = x + 2

y

5

(a)

5

x

y

(b)

g(x) = 

x 2 – 4
x – 2

x

5

(c)

y 

if x ⬎ 0

if x ⱕ 0

y 

5 

y  =  h ( x ) 

x 

5 

y = F(x)

1

y  =  G ( x ) 

x

x 

–1

–1 

FIGURE 16

(d)

(e)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

572

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

Solution

a. The function f is continuous everywhere because the three conditions for continu-
b. The function t is discontinuous at x ⫽ 2 because t is not defined at that number.

ity are satisfied for all values of x.

It is continuous everywhere else.

c. The function h is discontinuous at x ⫽ 2 because the third condition for continuity

is violated; the limit of h(x) as x approaches 2 exists and has the value 4, but this
limit is not equal to h(2) ⫽ 1. It is continuous for all other values of x.

d. The function F is continuous everywhere except at x ⫽ 0, where the limit of F(x)

fails to exist as x approaches zero (see Example 3a, Section 9.1).

e. Since the limit of G(x) does not exist as x approaches zero, we conclude that G
fails to be continuous at x ⫽ 0. The function G is continuous everywhere else.

Properties of Continuous Functions
The following properties of continuous functions follow directly from the definition of
continuity and the corresponding properties of limits. They are stated without proof.

Properties of Continuous Functions
1. The constant function f(x) ⫽ c is continuous everywhere.
2. The identity function f(x) ⫽ x is continuous everywhere.
If f and t are continuous at x ⫽ a, then
3. [ f(x)]n,  where  n is  a  real  number,  is  continuous  at  x ⫽ a whenever  it  is
4. f ⫾ t is continuous at x ⫽ a.
5. ft is continuous at x ⫽ a.
6. f>t is continuous at x ⫽ a provided that t(a) ⫽ 0.

defined at that number.

Using these properties of continuous functions, we can prove the following results. (A
proof is sketched in Exercise 100, page 581.)

Continuity of Polynomial and Rational Functions
1. A polynomial function y ⫽ P(x) is continuous at every value of x.
2. A rational function R(x) ⫽ p(x)>q(x) is continuous at every value of x where

q(x) ⫽ 0.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 3 Find the values of x for which each function is continuous.
a. f1x2 ⫽ 3x 3 ⫹ 2x 2 ⫺ x ⫹ 10
h1x2 ⫽ 4x3 ⫺ 3x2 ⫹ 1

t 1x2   ⫽ 8x10 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 1

x2 ⫹ 1

b.

c.

x2 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 2

Solution

a. The function f is a polynomial function of degree 3, so f(x) is continuous for all
b. The function t is a rational function. Observe that the denominator of t—namely,

values of x.
x2 ⫹ 1—is never equal to zero. Therefore, we conclude that t is continuous for
all values of x.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.2 ONE-SIDED LIMITS AND CONTINUITY

573

c. The function h is a rational function. In this case, however, the denominator of h

is equal to zero at x ⫽ 1 and x ⫽ 2, which can be seen by factoring it. Thus,

x 2 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 2 ⫽ 1x ⫺ 221x ⫺ 12

We therefore conclude that h is continuous everywhere except at x ⫽ 1 and 
x ⫽ 2, where it is discontinuous.

Up to this point, most of the applications we have discussed involved functions
that are continuous everywhere. In Example 4, we consider an application from the
field of educational psychology that involves a discontinuous function.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 4 Learning Curves Figure 17 depicts the learning curve
associated with a certain individual. Beginning with no knowledge 

of the subject being taught, the individual makes steady progress toward under-
standing it over the time interval 0 ⱕ t ⬍ t1. In this instance, the individual’s
progress slows as we approach time t1 because he fails to grasp a particularly dif-
ficult concept. All of a sudden, a breakthrough occurs at time t1, propelling his
knowledge of the subject to a higher level. The curve is discontinuous at t1.

y (%) 

1 00 

 
t
c
e
j
b
u
s
 
f
o
 
e
g
d
e
l
 w
o
n
K

t 1 

t (time)

FIGURE 17
A learning curve that is discontinuous at t ⫽ t1

Intermediate Value Theorem
Let’s look again at our model of the motion of the maglev on a straight stretch of track.
We know that the train cannot vanish at any instant of time and it cannot skip portions
of  the  track  and  reappear  someplace  else.  To  put  it  another  way,  the  train  cannot
occupy the positions s1 and s2 without at least, at some time, occupying an intermedi-
ate position (Figure 18).

FIGURE 18
The position of the maglev

s 1 

s 

s 2 

s 1 

Not possible 

s 
Possible 

s 2 

To state this fact mathematically, recall that the position of the maglev as a function
of time is described by

f1t2 ⫽ 4t2

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

574

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

Suppose the position of the maglev is s1 at some time t1 and its position is s2 at some
time t2 (Figure 19). Then, if s3 is any number between s1 and s2 giving an intermedi-
ate position of the maglev, there must be at least one t3 between t1 and t2 giving the
time at which the train is at s3—that is, f1t32 ⫽ s3.

FIGURE 19
If s1 ⱕ s3 ⱕ s2, then there must be at least
one t3 (t1 ⱕ t3 ⱕ t2) such that f(t3) ⫽ s3.

s 

s 2 

s 3 

s 1 

y  = 4 t 2 

t 1 

t 3 

t 2 

t 

This discussion carries the gist of the Intermediate Value Theorem. The proof of

this theorem can be found in most advanced calculus texts.

THEOREM 4
The Intermediate Value Theorem
If  f is  a  continuous  function  on  a  closed  interval  [a,  b]  and  M is  any  number
between  f(a)  and  f(b),  then  there  is  at  least  one  number  c in  [a,  b]  such  that 
f(c) ⫽ M (Figure 20).

y

f(b)
M

f(a)

a

(a) f(c) ⫽ M
FIGURE 20

y = f(x)

y 

f ( b ) 

M 
f ( a ) 

y =  f ( x ) 

x

bc

a 

c 1 

c 2 

c 3 

b 

x 

(b) f(c1) ⫽ f(c2) ⫽ f(c3) ⫽ M

To illustrate the Intermediate Value Theorem, let’s look at the example involving the
motion of the maglev again (see Figure 2, page 549). Notice that the initial position of the
train is f(0) ⫽ 0 and the position at the end of its test run is f (10) ⫽ 400. Furthermore,
the function f is continuous on [0, 10]. So the Intermediate Value Theorem guarantees
that if we arbitrarily pick a number between 0 and 400—say, 100—giving the position of
the maglev, there must be a  (read “t bar”) between 0 and 10 at which time the train is at
the position s ⫽ 100. To find the value of  , we solve the equation f( ) ⫽ s, or

t

t

t
2 ⫽ 100

4t 

giving  ⫽ 5 (t must lie between 0 and 10).

t

It is important to remember when we use Theorem 4 that the function f must be
continuous. The conclusion of the Intermediate Value Theorem may not hold if
f is not continuous (see Exercise 101, page 581).

The next theorem is an immediate consequence of the Intermediate Value Theo-
rem. It not only tells us when a zero of a function f [root of the equation f(x) ⫽ 0]
exists but also provides the basis for a method of approximating it.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

9.2 ONE-SIDED LIMITS AND CONTINUITY

575

THEOREM 5
Existence of Zeros of a Continuous Function
If f is a continuous function on a closed interval [a, b], and if f(a) and f(b) have
opposite signs, then there is at least one solution of the equation f(x) ⫽ 0 in the
interval (a, b) (Figure 21).

y 

f  ( a ) 

f  ( b ) 

y 

f  ( b ) 

a 

c 

b 

x 

a 

c 1  c 2 

b 

x 

f  ( a ) 

f  ( c 1 ) =  f  ( c 2 ) = 0 

a 

b 

x 

FIGURE 21
If f(a) and f(b) have opposite signs, there must be at least one number c (a ⬍ c ⬍ b) such
that f(c) ⫽ 0.

y 

f  ( b ) 

f  ( a ) 

FIGURE 22
f(a) ⬍ 0 and f(b) ⬎ 0, but the graph of 
f does not cross the x-axis between a and
b because f is discontinuous.

Geometrically, this property states that if the graph of a continuous function goes from
above the x-axis to below the x-axis or vice versa, it must cross the x-axis. This is not
necessarily true if the function is discontinuous (Figure 22).

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 5 Let f(x) ⫽ x 3 ⫹ x ⫹ 1.
a. Show that f is continuous for all values of x.
b. Compute f(⫺1) and f(1), and use the results to deduce that there must be at least

one number x ⫽ c, where c lies in the interval (⫺1, 1) and f(c) ⫽ 0.

Solution

a. The function f is a polynomial function of degree 3 and is therefore continuous

everywhere.

b. f1⫺12 ⫽ 1⫺12 3 ⫹ 1⫺12 ⫹ 1 ⫽ ⫺1 and

f112 ⫽ 13 ⫹ 1 ⫹ 1 ⫽ 3

Since f(⫺1) and f(1) have opposite signs, Theorem 5 tells us that there must be
at least one number x ⫽ c with ⫺1 ⬍ c ⬍ 1 such that f(c) ⫽ 0.

The  next  example  shows  how  the  Intermediate  Value  Theorem  can  be  used  to

help us find a zero of a function.

EXAMPLE 6 Let f(x) ⫽ x 3 ⫹ x ⫺ 1. Since f is a polynomial function, it is continu-
ous everywhere. Observe that f(0) ⫽ ⫺1 and f(1) ⫽ 1, so Theorem 5 guarantees the
existence of at least one root of the equation f(x) ⫽ 0 in (0, 1).*

We can locate the root more precisely by using Theorem 5 once again as fol-

lows: Evaluate f(x) at the midpoint of [0, 1], obtaining

f10.52 ⫽ ⫺0.375

*It can be shown that f has precisely one zero in (0, 1) (see Exercise 111, Section 10.1).

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

576

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

TABLE 3
Step Root of f(x) ⴝ 0 lies in

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

(0, 1)
(0.5, 1)
(0.5, 0.75)
(0.625, 0.75)
(0.625, 0.6875)
(0.65625, 0.6875)
(0.671875, 0.6875)
(0.6796875, 0.6875)
(0.6796875, 0.6835937)

Because f(0.5) ⬍ 0 and f(1) ⬎ 0, Theorem 5 now tells us that the root must lie in 
(0.5, 1).

Repeat the process: Evaluate f(x) at the midpoint of [0.5, 1], which is

0.5 ⫹ 1

2

⫽ 0.75

Thus,

f10.752 ⬇ 0.1719

Because f(0.5) ⬍ 0 and f(0.75) ⬎ 0, Theorem 5 tells us that the root is in (0.5, 0.75).
This process can be continued. Table 3 summarizes the results of our computations
through nine steps.

From Table 3, we see that the root is approximately 0.68, accurate to two deci-
mal places. By continuing the process through a sufficient number of steps, we can
obtain as accurate an approximation to the root as we please.

Note The  process  of  finding  the  root  of  f(x)  ⫽ 0  used  in  Example  6  is  called  the
method of bisection. It is crude but effective.

9.2 Self-Check Exercises

f1x2 and  lim

xS⫺1⫹  f1x2
1 ⫹ 1x ⫹ 1

, where

if x ⬍ ⫺1
if x ⱖ ⫺1

a.

b.

1. Evaluate 

lim
xS⫺1⫺  

f 1x2 ⫽ e 1
f1x2

exist?

Does 

lim
xS⫺1  

f  1x2 ⫽ e ⫺x2 ⫹ 1

x ⫺ 1
⫺x ⫹ 1
2
⫺x ⫹ 3

if x ⱕ 1
if x ⬎ 1
if x ⬍ ⫺1
if ⫺1 ⬍ x ⱕ 1
if x ⬎ 1

t1x2 ⫽c 

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 9.2 can be found on 
page 581.

2. Determine  the  values  of  x for  which  the  given  function  is
discontinuous.  At  each  number  where  f is  discontinuous,
indicate  which  condition(s)  for  continuity  are  violated.
Sketch the graph of the function.

9.2 Concept Questions

xS3⫺  f 1x2 ⫽ 2

lim

and 

1. Explain what is meant by the statements 

xS3⫹  f 1x2 ⫽ 4

lim

.

2. Suppose 

xS1⫺  f 1x2 ⫽ 3

lim

and 

a. What can you say about 
b. What can you say about f(1)? Explain.

lim
xS1

Explain.

lim

xS1⫹  f 1x2 ⫽ 4
  f 1x2?

.

3. Explain what it means for a function f to be continuous (a)

at a number a and (b) on an interval I.

4. Determine whether each function f is continuous or discon-

tinuous. Explain your answer.

a. f(t) gives the altitude of an airplane at time t.
b. f(t) measures the total amount of rainfall at time t at the

Municipal Airport.

c. f(s) measures the fare as a function of the distance s for tak-
ing a cab from Kennedy Airport to downtown Manhattan.
d. f(t) gives the interest rate charged by a financial institu-

tion at time t.

5. Explain the Intermediate Value Theorem in your own

words.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.2 Exercises

9.2 ONE-SIDED LIMITS AND CONTINUITY

577

f(x),

f(x), and 

In Exercises 1–8, use the graph of the function f to find 
lim
lim
xSa ⴙ
xSa ⴚ
the limit exists.
1.

lim
xSa

2.

y

y

f(x) at the indicated value of a, if 

9.

11.

13.

lim
xS⫺3⫹

  f 1x2 ⫽ 1
  f 1x2 ⫽ 2
 f 1x2

lim
xS2⫺

lim
xS3

does not exist.

10.

12.

14.

 f 1x2 ⫽ f 102
  f 1x2 ⫽ 3
  f 1x2 ⫽ 3

lim
xS0

lim
xS2⫹

lim
xS5⫺

y = f (x)

In Exercises 15–20, refer to the graph of the function f and deter-
mine whether each statement is true or false.

y = f (x)

3

2

1

x

x

x

x

– 2  –1

3.

1

2

a = 2

y

y = f (x)

2

1

– 3   – 2   – 1

1

2

a = –1

5.

y

4

3

2

y = f (x)

– 2  –1

1

2

7.

a = 1

y

2

1

y = f (x)

– 2 

–1

1

2

–1

– 2

a = 0

5
4
3
2
1

4.

6.

8.

1 2 3 4 5 6

a = 3

– 2  –1

–1

y

y

y

3

2

1

2

1

2

1

y = f (x)

1

2

a = 1

y = f (x)

1

2

a = 0

y = f (x)

x

x

x

x

– 2 

–1

1

2

a = 0

In Exercises 9–14, refer to the graph of the function f and deter-
mine whether each statement is true or false.

y

3

2

1

–3

–2

–1

1

2

3

4

5

y = f(x)

x

y

4

3

2

1

y = f(x)

–3

–2

–1

1

2

3

4

5

6

x

does not exist. 20.

In Exercises 21–38, find the indicated one-sided limit, if it exists.
21.

22.

16.

18.

f 1x2 ⫽ 2
  f 1x2 ⫽ 3
 f 1x2 ⫽ 2

lim
xS0 

lim
xS4⫺

lim
xS4

lim

xS1⫺ 13x ⫺ 42
x ⫹ 2
x ⫹ 1

 
lim
xS1⫹

24.

26.

28.

30.

32.

1
x

 
lim
xS0⫺

x ⫹ 1

lim
 
xS2⫹

x2 ⫺ 2x ⫹ 3

 21x ⫺ 2

lim
xS2⫹
lim

xS⫺5⫹ x11 ⫹ 15 ⫹ x2

34.

 
lim
xS1⫹

36.

lim
 
xS⫺3⫹

1 ⫹ x
1 ⫺ x

1x ⫹ 3

x2 ⫹ 1

15.

17.

19.

lim
xS⫺3⫹

  f 1x2 ⫽ 2
 f 1x2 ⫽ 1
  f 1x2

lim
xS2

lim
xS4⫹

lim

xS1⫹ 12x ⫹ 52
x ⫺ 4
x ⫹ 2

lim
 
xS2⫺

25.

 
lim
xS0⫹

lim
 
xS0⫹

1
x
x ⫺ 1
x2 ⫹ 1

 1x

lim
xS0⫹
lim

xS⫺2⫹ 12x ⫹ 12 ⫹ x2

33.

 
lim
xS1⫺

lim
 
xS2⫺

1 ⫹ x
1 ⫺ x
x2 ⫺ 4
x ⫺ 2

xS0⫹  f 1x2 and  lim

lim

23.

27.

29.

31.

35.

37.

38.

, where

xS0⫺  f 1x2
f 1x2 ⫽ e 2x
xS0⫺  f 1x2
f 1x2 ⫽ e ⫺x ⫹ 1

, where

2x ⫹ 3

x2

if x ⬍ 0
if x ⱖ 0

if x ⱕ 0
if x ⬎ 0

xS0⫹  f 1x2 and  lim

lim

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In Exercises 45–56, find the values of x for which each function is
continuous.

45. f1x2 ⫽ 2x 2 ⫹ x ⫺ 1
46. f1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 2x 2 ⫹ x ⫺ 1

48.

50.

2x2 ⫹ 1

x

f 1x2 ⫽
f 1x2 ⫽ x ⫹ 1

x ⫺ 1

578

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

In  Exercises  39–44,  determine  the  values  of  x,  if  any,  at  which
each  function  is  discontinuous.  At  each  number  where  f is 
discontinuous, state the condition(s) for continuity that are vio-
lated.

39.

y

5

f 1x2 ⫽ e 2x ⫺ 4

1

if x ⱕ 0
if x ⬎ 0

x

5

y

– 5

–10

10

5

40.

– 4  – 3  – 2  –1

1 2 3 4

x

f 1x2 ⫽ e x2 ⫹ 1

0

if x ⫽ 0
if x ⫽ 0

49.

51.

52.

53.

54.

47.

f 1x2 ⫽ 2

x2 ⫹ 1

2x ⫺ 1

f 1x2 ⫽ 2
f 1x2 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 1
f 1x2 ⫽

x ⫺ 1

x2 ⫹ x ⫺ 2

x2 ⫹ 2x ⫺ 3

2x ⫺ 1

f 1x2 ⫽ e x
f 1x2 ⫽ e ⫺2x ⫹ 1

x2 ⫹ 1

if x ⱕ 1
if x ⬎ 1

if x ⬍ 0
if x ⱖ 0

41.

y

5

–10 – 5

– 5

5  10

42.

y

5

– 5

5 

43.

y

5

–10 – 5

– 5

5  10

44.

y

3

f 1x2 ⫽ e x ⫹ 5

⫺x2 ⫹ 5

if x ⱕ 0
if x ⬎ 0

55.

f 1x2 ⫽ | x ⫹ 1|

56.

f 1x2 ⫽

| x ⫺ 1|
x ⫺ 1

In Exercises 57–60, determine all values of x at which the func-
tion is discontinuous.

x

x

x

f  1x2 ⫽ | x ⫺ 1 |

x ⫹ 5
2
⫺x2 ⫹ 5

f 1x2 ⫽c 

if x ⬍ 0
if x ⫽ 0
if x ⬎ 0

x ⫹ 1
1

f 1x2 ⫽c x2 ⫺ 1

x

4

if x ⫽ ⫺1

if x ⫽ ⫺1

57.

59.

x2 ⫺ 1

f 1x2 ⫽ 2x
f 1x2 ⫽ x2 ⫺ 2x

x2 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 2

58.

60.

1

f 1x2 ⫽
1x ⫺ 121x ⫺ 22
f 1x2 ⫽ x2 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 2

x2 ⫺ 2x

61. THE POSTAGE FUNCTION The  graph  of  the  “postage  func-

tion” for 2009,

122
139
o
326

if 0 ⬍ x ⱕ 1
if 1 ⬍ x ⱕ 2

if 12 ⬍ x ⱕ 13

f 1x2 ⫽d 

where x denotes the weight of a package in ounces and f(x)
the postage in cents, is shown in the accompanying figure.
Determine the values of x for which f is discontinuous.

y (¢)

300

200

100

2

4

6

8

10

12

x (oz)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

62. INVENTORY CONTROL As part of an optimal inventory policy,
the manager of an office supply company orders 500 reams
of photocopy paper every 20 days. The accompanying graph
shows the actual inventory level of paper in an office supply
store during the first 60 business days of 2012. Determine the
values of t for which the “inventory function” is discontinu-
ous, and give an interpretation of the graph.

y

s

m
a
e
R

800

600

400

200

9.2 ONE-SIDED LIMITS AND CONTINUITY

579

65. ENERGY CONSUMPTION The  following  graph  shows 

the
amount of home heating oil remaining in a 200-gal tank over
a 120-day period (t ⫽ 0 corresponds to October 1). Explain
why the function is discontinuous at t ⫽ 40, 70, 95, and 110.

y

s
n
o
l
l
a
G

200

100

20

40
Days

60

t

10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120

Days

t

63. LEARNING CURVES The following graph describes the prog-
ress Michael made in solving a problem correctly during a
mathematics quiz. Here, y denotes the percentage of work
completed, and x is measured in minutes. Give an interpre-
tation of the graph.

66. PRIME INTEREST RATE The function P, whose graph follows,
gives the prime rate (the interest rate banks charge their best
corporate customers) for a certain country as a function of
time for the first 32 weeks in 2012. Determine the values of
t for which P is discontinuous, and interpret your results.

y (%)

100

x1
x 2
Minutes

x

x 3

64. AILING FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS Franklin  Savings  and  Loan
acquired two ailing financial institutions in 2012. One of
them  was  acquired  at  time  t ⫽ T1,  and  the  other  was
acquired at time t ⫽ T2 (t ⫽ 0 corresponds to the beginning
of 2012). The following graph shows the total amount of
money on deposit with Franklin. Explain the significance
of the discontinuities of the function at T1 and T2.

y

s
r
a
l
l
o
d

 
f
o

 
s
n
o
i
l
l
i

M

1200

1000

800

600

400

200

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12

t

T
1

Months

T
2

y (percent per year)

5

4

3

4

8

12

16

20

24

28

32

t (weeks)

67. ADMINISTRATION OF AN INTRAVENOUS SOLUTION A  dextrose
solution is being administered to a patient intravenously.
The 1-liter (L) bottle holding the solution is removed and
replaced  by  another  as  soon  as  the  contents  drop  to
approximately 5% of the initial (1-L) amount. The rate of
discharge is constant, and it takes 6 hr to discharge 95%
of the contents of a full bottle. Draw a graph showing the
amount of dextrose solution in a bottle in the IV system
over a 24-hr period, assuming that we started with a full
bottle.

68. COMMISSIONS The base monthly salary of a salesman work-
ing on commission is $22,000. For each $50,000 of sales
beyond $100,000, he is paid a $1000 commission. Sketch a
graph showing his earnings as a function of the level of his
sales x. Determine the values of x for which the function f
is discontinuous.

69. PARKING FEES The fee charged per car in a downtown park-
ing lot is $2.00 for the first half hour and $1.00 for each addi-
tional  half  hour  or  part  thereof,  subject  to  a  maximum  of
$10.00.  Derive  a  function  f relating  the  parking  fee  to  the
length of time a car is left in the lot. Sketch the graph of f and
determine the values of x for which the function f is discon-
tinuous.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

580

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

70. COMMODITY PRICES The  function  that  gives  the  cost  of  a

certain commodity is defined by

5x
4x
3.5x
3.25x

if 0 ⬍ x ⬍ 10
if 10 ⱕ x ⬍ 30
if 30 ⱕ x ⬍ 60
if  x ⱖ 60

C1x2 ⫽d

where x is the number of pounds of a certain commodity
sold and C(x) is measured in dollars. Sketch the graph of
the function C, and determine the values of x for which the
function C is discontinuous.

71. WEISS’S LAW According to Weiss’s law of excitation of tis-
sue,  the  strength  S of  an  electric  current  is  related  to  the
time t the current takes to excite tissue by the formula

S1t2 ⫽ a

t

⫹ b    1t ⬎ 02

where a and b are positive constants.
a. Evaluate 

, and interpret your result.

b. Evaluate 

, and interpret your result.

S1t2
S1t2

lim
tS0⫹ 
lim
tS⬁ 

(Note: The limit in part (b) is called the threshold strength
of the current. Why?)

72. ENERGY EXPENDED BY A FISH Suppose a fish swimming a dis-
tance of L ft at a speed of √ ft/sec relative to the water and
against  a  current  flowing  at  the  rate  of  u ft/sec  (u ⬍ √)
expends a total energy given by

E1√2 ⫽ aL√3
√ ⫺ u

where E is measured in foot-pounds (ft-lb) and a is a con-
stant.
a. Evaluate 

, and interpret your result.

lim

√Su⫹ E1√2
 E1√2

lim
√ S⬁

b. Evaluate 

73. Let

, and interpret your result.

f 1x2 ⫽ e x ⫹ 2

kx 

2

if x ⱕ 1
if x ⬎ 1

Find the value of k that will make f continuous on (⫺⬁, ⬁).

74. Let

x ⫹ 2
k

f 1x2 ⫽c x2 ⫺ 4

if x ⫽ ⫺2

if x ⫽ ⫺2

For what value of k will f be continuous on (⫺⬁, ⬁)?

75. a. Suppose f is continuous at a and t is discontinuous at a.
Is the sum f ⫹ t necessarily discontinuous at a? Explain.
b. Suppose f and t are both discontinuous at a. Is the sum 
f ⫹ t necessarily discontinuous at a? Explain.

76. a. Suppose f is continuous at a and t is discontinuous at a.
Is  the  product  ft necessarily  discontinuous  at  a?
Explain.
b. Suppose f and t are both discontinuous at a. Is the prod-
uct ft necessarily discontinuous at a? Explain.

In Exercises 77–80, (a) show that the function f is continuous for
all values of x in the interval [a, b] and (b) prove that f must have
at least one zero in the interval (a, b) by showing that f(a) and f(b)
have opposite signs.
77. f(x) ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 6x ⫹ 8; a ⫽ 1, b ⫽ 3
78. f(x) ⫽ 2x 3 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫺ 36x ⫹ 14; a ⫽ 0, b ⫽ 1
79. f(x) ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 2x 2 ⫹ 3x ⫹ 2; a ⫽ ⫺1, b ⫽ 1
80. f(x) ⫽ 2x 5/3 ⫺ 5x 4/3; a ⫽ 14, b ⫽ 16

In Exercises 81 and 82, use the Intermediate Value Theorem to
show that there exists a number c in the given interval such that
f(c) ⴝ M. Then find its value.
81. f(x) ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 6 on [0, 3]; M ⫽ 4
82. f(x) ⫽ x 2 ⫺ x ⫹ 1 on [⫺1, 4]; M ⫽ 7

83. Use  the  method  of  bisection  (see  Example  6)  to  find  the
root of the equation x5 ⫹ 2x ⫺ 7 ⫽ 0 accurate to two decimal
places.

84. Use  the  method  of  bisection  (see  Example  6)  to  find  the
root of the equation x 3 ⫺ x ⫹ 1 ⫽ 0 accurate to two deci-
mal places.

85. FALLING OBJECT Joan is looking straight out a window of an
apartment  building  at  a  height  of  32  ft  from  the  ground. 
A boy on the ground throws a tennis ball straight up by the
side of the building where the window is located. Suppose
the height of the ball (measured in feet) from the ground at
time t is h(t) ⫽ 4 ⫹ 64t ⫺ 16t 2.
a. Show that h(0) ⫽ 4 and h(2) ⫽ 68.
b. Use  the  Intermediate  Value  Theorem  to  conclude  that

the ball must cross Joan’s line of sight at least once.

c. At what time(s) does the ball cross Joan’s line of sight?

Interpret your results.

86. OXYGEN CONTENT OF A POND The  oxygen  content  t days
after organic waste has been dumped into a pond is given
by

f 1t2 ⫽ 100 ¢t 

t 

2 ⫹ 10t ⫹ 100

2 ⫹ 20t ⫹ 100≤

percent of its normal level.
a. Show that f(0) ⫽ 100 and f(10) ⫽ 75.
b. Use  the  Intermediate  Value  Theorem  to  conclude  that
the  oxygen  content  of  the  pond  must  have  been  at  a
level of 80% at some time.

c. At what time(s) is the oxygen content at the 80% level?

Hint: Use the quadratic formula.

In Exercises 87–96, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.

.

lim
xS2

88. If 

 f 1x2 ⫽ 4
, then f102 ⫽ 3.

87. If f122 ⫽ 4, then 
 f 1x2 ⫽ 3
f1x2 ⫽ 3 and f122 ⫽ 3 then 
f1x2 and 

lim
xS0
lim
xS2 ⫹
lim
xS3 ⫺

90. If 

89. If 

lim
xS3 ⫹

lim
xS2 ⫺

f1x2 ⫽ 3.

f1x2 both exist, then 

lim
xS3

f1x2 exists.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.2 ONE-SIDED LIMITS AND CONTINUITY

581

99. Let 

f 1x2 ⫽ x ⫺ 21 ⫺ x2

.

a. Show that f is continuous for all values of x in the inter-

val [⫺1, 1].

b. Show that f has at least one zero in [⫺1, 1].
c. Find the zeros of f in [⫺1, 1] by solving the equation 

f(x) ⫽ 0.

100. a. Prove that a polynomial function y ⫽ P(x) is continu-

ous at every number x. Follow these steps:
(i) Use Properties 2 and 3 of continuous functions to
establish that the function t(x) ⫽ x n, where n is a
positive integer, is continuous everywhere.

(ii) Use Properties 1 and 5 to show that f(x)  ⫽ cx n,
where c is a constant and n is a positive integer, is
continuous everywhere.

(iii) Use Property 4 to complete the proof of the result.

b. Prove that a rational function R(x) ⫽ p(x)>q(x) is con-

tinuous at every point x where q(x) ⫽ 0.
Hint: Use the result of part (a) and Property 6.

101. Show that the conclusion of the Intermediate Value The-
orem  does  not  necessarily  hold  if  f is  discontinuous  on 
[a, b].

b. The graph of t follows:

y 

4 

3 

1 

– 3    – 2    – 1  

1

2

3

4

x 

 

Since t is  not  defined  at  x ⫽ ⫺1,  it  is  discontinuous
there. It is continuous everywhere else.

91. If f152 is not defined, then 

lim
xS5 ⫺

f1x2 does not exist.

92. Suppose the function f is defined on the interval [a, b]. If
f(a)  and  f(b)  have  the  same  sign,  then  f has  no  zero  in 
[a, b].

93. If 

94. If 

lim
xSa ⫺

lim
xSa

95. If  f
lim
xS0
96. If 

lim
xSa

and 

, then 

lim
xSa⫹

lim
xSa ⫹

 f 1x2 ⫽ L,
 f 1x2 ⫺ lim

then f1a2 ⫽ L.
 f 1x2 ⫽ 0

 f 1x2 ⫽ L
 f 1x2 ⫽ L
is  continuous  for  all  x ⫽ 0  and  f102 ⫽ 0,  then 
 f 1x2 ⫽ 0
 f 1x2 ⫽ L

and t1a2 ⫽ M, then 

 f 1x2t 1x2 ⫽ LM

lim
xSa

xSa ⫺

.

.

.

97. Is the following statement true or false? Suppose f is con-
tinuous on [a, b] and f(a) ⬍ f(b). If M is a number that lies
outside the interval [ f(a), f(b)], then there does not exist a
number a ⬍ c ⬍ b such that f(c) ⫽ M. Does this contradict
the Intermediate Value Theorem?

98. Let 

f 1x2 ⫽ x2

x2 ⫹ 1

.

a. Show that f is continuous for all values of x.
b. Show that f(x) is nonnegative for all values of x.
c. Show  that  f has  a  zero  at  x ⫽ 0.  Does  this  contradict

Theorem 5?

9.2 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

lim
xS⫺1⫺

1. For x ⬍ ⫺1, f(x) ⫽ 1, and so
 f 1x2 ⫽ lim
x ⱖ ⫺1, f 1x2 ⫽ 1 ⫹ 1x ⫹ 1
xS⫺1 ⫹ 11 ⫹ 1x ⫹ 12 ⫽ 1
xS⫺1⫹  f 1x2 ⫽ lim

, and so

1 ⫽ 1

xS⫺1⫺ 

For 

lim

Since  the  left-hand  and  right-hand  limits  of  f exist  as  x
approaches ⫺1 and both are equal to 1, we conclude that

 f 1x2 ⫽ 1

lim
xS⫺1

2. a. The graph of f follows:

y 

3 

2 

1 

– 3    – 2  

1

2

3

4

x 

 

We see that f is continuous everywhere.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

582

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Finding the Points of Discontinuity of a Function
You can very often recognize the points of discontinuity of a function f by examining
its graph. For example, Figure T1a shows the graph of f(x)  ⫽ x>(x 2 ⫺ 1) obtained
using a graphing utility. It is evident that f is discontinuous at x ⫽ ⫺1 and x ⫽ 1. This
observation is also borne out by the fact that both these points are not in the domain
of f.

FIGURE T1
(a) The graph of 

f 1x2 ⫽

x

x2 ⫺ 1

in the viewing window [⫺4, 4] ⫻ [⫺10, 10];
(b) the TI-83/84 equation screen

10

_10

_4

(a)

Consider the function

4

Plot1 Plot2 Plot3
\Y1=X/(X^2-1)
\Y2=
\Y3=
\Y4=
\Y5=
\Y6=
\Y7=

(b)

FIGURE T2
(a) The graph of 

g 1x2 ⫽

2x 

3 ⫹ x 

2 ⫺ 7x ⫺ 6

x 

2 ⫺ x ⫺ 2

in the standard viewing window; 
(b) the TI-83/84 equation screen

y 

8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 

– 3 

– 2 

– 1 – 1 
– 2 

1 

2 

3 

FIGURE T3
The graph of g has holes at (⫺1, 1) and 
(2, 7).

t 1x2 ⫽ 2x3 ⫹ x2 ⫺ 7x ⫺ 6

x2 ⫺ x ⫺ 2

Using a graphing utility, we obtain the graph of t shown in Figure T2a.

10

_10

_10

(a)

10

Plot1 Plot2 Plot3
\Y1=(2X^3+X^2-7X-6) 
\/(X^2-X-2)
\Y2=
\Y3=
\Y4=
\Y5=
\Y6=

(b)

An examination of this graph does not reveal any points of discontinuity. However, if
we factor both the numerator and the denominator of the rational expression, we see
that

 t 1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 121x ⫺ 2212x ⫹ 32

1x ⫹ 121x ⫺ 22

 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3

provided that x ⫽ ⫺1 and x ⫽ 2, so its graph in fact looks like that shown in Fig-
ure T3.

This example shows the limitation of the graphing utility and reminds us of the

x 

importance of studying functions analytically!

Graphing Functions Defined Piecewise
The  following  example  illustrates  how  to  plot  the  graphs  of  functions  defined  in  a
piecewise manner on a graphing utility.

EXAMPLE 1 Plot the graph of

if x ⱕ 1

if x ⬎ 1

2
x

f 1x2 ⫽  c x ⫹ 1

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

9.2 ONE-SIDED LIMITS AND CONTINUITY

583

Solution We enter the function

y1 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 121x ⱕ 12 ⫹ 12>x21x ⬎ 12

Figure T4a shows the graph of the function in the viewing window [⫺5, 5] ⫻
[⫺2, 4].

FIGURE T4
(a) The graph of f in the viewing 
window [⫺5, 5] ⫻ [⫺2, 4]; (b) the 
TI-83/84 equation screen

4

_2

_5

(a)

Plot1 Plot2 Plot3
\Y1=(X+1)(X≤1)+(2/X)
(X>1)
\Y2=
\Y3=
\Y4=
\Y5=
\Y6=

5

(b)

APPLIED EXAMPLE 2 TV Viewing Patterns The percent of U.S. households,
P(t), watching television during weekdays between the hours of 4 P.M. and 

4 A.M. is given by

1.35t 

3 ⫹ 2.58333t 

P1t2 ⫽ e 0.01354t 

4 ⫺ 0.49375t 
2 ⫺ 33.05t ⫹ 208

if 0 ⱕ t ⱕ 8
if 8 ⬍ t ⱕ 12
where t is measured in hours, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 4 P.M. Plot the graph of
P in the viewing window [0, 12] ⫻ [0, 80].
Source: A. C. Nielsen Co.

2 ⫹ 3.8t ⫹ 31.60704

Solution We enter the function

y1 ⫽ 1.01354xˆ4 ⫺ .49375xˆ3 ⫹ 2.58333xˆ2 ⫹ 3.8x ⫹ 31.6070421x ⱖ 021x ⱕ 82

⫹ 11.35xˆ2 ⫺ 33.05x ⫹ 20821x ⬎ 821x ⱕ 122

Figure T5a shows the graph of P.

80

0

(a)

Plot1 Plot2 Plot3
\Y1=(.01354X^4-
.49375X^3+2.58333
X^2+3.8X+31.60704)
(X≥0)(X≤8)+ 
(1.35X^2-33.05X+208)
(X>8)(X≤12)
\Y2=

(b)

12

FIGURE T5
(a) The graph of P in the viewing 
window [0, 12] ⫻ [0, 80]; (b) the 
TI-83/84 equation screen

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

In Exercises 1–8, plot the graph of f and find the points of disconti-
nuity of f. Then use analytical means to verify your observation and
find all numbers where f is discontinuous.

1.

3.

5.

x 2 ⫺ x

f 1x2 ⫽ 2
f 1x2 ⫽ 6x 3 ⫹ x 2 ⫺ 2x
f 1x2 ⫽ 2x 4 ⫺ 3x 3 ⫺ 2x 2

2x 2 ⫺ 3x ⫺ 2

2x 2 ⫺ x

2.

31x1x ⫹ 12

f 1x2 ⫽
f 1x2 ⫽ 2x 3 ⫺ x 2 ⫺ 13x ⫺ 6
6. f 1x2 ⫽ 6x 4 ⫺ x 3 ⫹ 5x 2 ⫺ 1

2x 2 ⫺ 5x ⫺ 3

6x 2 ⫺ x ⫺ 1

4.

7.

8.

x 4 ⫹ 2x 3 ⫺ x ⫺ 2

f 1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫹ x 2 ⫺ 2x
Hint: x 4 ⫹ 2x 3 ⫺ x ⫺ 2 ⫽ 1x 3 ⫺ 121x ⫹ 22
f 1x2 ⫽
Hint: x 4/3 ⫺ x ⫹ x 1/3 ⫺ 1 ⫽ 1x 1/3 ⫺ 121x ⫹ 12

x 4/3 ⫺ x ⫹ x 1/3 ⫺ 1

x 3 ⫺ x

Can you explain why part of the graph is missing?

(continued)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

584

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

In Exercises 9 and 10, plot the graph of f in the indicated viewing
window.

9.

10.

24 ⫺ x 2

f 1x2 ⫽ e 2
f 1x2 ⫽ e ⫺x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 2

2x 3 ⫺ x 2 ⫺ 4

if x ⱕ 0
if x ⬎ 0; 3 ⫺2, 24 ⫻ 3 ⫺4, 44

if x ⱕ 1
if x ⬎ 1; 3 ⫺4, 44 ⫻ 3 ⫺5, 54

11. FLIGHT PATH OF A PLANE The function

0
⫺0.00411523x 3 ⫹ 0.0679012x 
           ⫺0.123457x ⫹ 0.05968
1.5

f 1x2 ⫽d 

if 0 ⱕ x ⬍ 1

2

if 1 ⱕ x ⬍ 10
if 10 ⱕ x ⱕ 100

9.3

The Derivative

where  both  x and  f(x)  are  measured  in  units  of  1000  ft,
describes the flight path of a plane taking off from the ori-
gin and climbing to an altitude of 15,000 ft. Plot the graph
of f to visualize the trajectory of the plane.

12. HOME SHOPPING INDUSTRY According  to  industry  sources,
revenue  from  the  home  shopping  industry  for  the  years
since its inception may be approximated by the function

R1t2 ⫽ e ⫺0.03t 

0.57t ⫺ 0.63

3 ⫹ 0.25t 

2 ⫺ 0.12t

if 0 ⱕ t ⱕ 3
if 3 ⬍ t ⱕ 11

where R(t) measures the revenue in billions of dollars and
t is  measured  in  years,  with  t ⫽ 0  corresponding  to  the
beginning of 1984. Plot the graph of R.
Source: Paul Kagan Associates.

An Intuitive Example
We mentioned in Section 9.1 that the problem of finding the rate of change of one
quantity with respect to another is mathematically equivalent to the problem of find-
ing the slope of the tangent line to a curve at a given point on the curve. Before going
on to establish this relationship, let’s show its plausibility by looking at it from an intu-
itive point of view.

Consider the motion of the maglev discussed in Section 9.1. Recall that the posi-

tion of the maglev at any time t is given by

s ⫽ f1t2 ⫽ 4t 2

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 302

where s is measured in feet and t in seconds. The graph of the function f is sketched
in Figure 23.

s  ( ft) 

60 

40 

20 

s  =  f  ( t ) 

1

 

2

  3

  4

 

t  (sec) 

FIGURE 23
Graph showing the position s of a maglev
at time t

Observe that the graph of f rises slowly at first but more rapidly as t increases,
reflecting the fact that the speed of the maglev is increasing with time. This obser-
vation suggests a relationship between the speed of the maglev at any time t and the
steepness of the curve at the point corresponding to this value of t. Thus, it would
appear that we can solve the problem of finding the speed of the maglev at any time
if we can find a way to measure the steepness of the curve at any point on the curve.
To discover a yardstick that will measure the steepness of a curve, consider the
graph of a function f such as the one shown in Figure 24a. Think of the curve as rep-
resenting a stretch of roller coaster track (Figure 24b). When the car is at the point

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

9.3 THE DERIVATIVE

585

P on the curve, a passenger sitting erect in the car and looking straight ahead will
have a line of sight that is parallel to the line T, the tangent to the curve at P.

As Figure 24a suggests, the steepness of the curve—that is, the rate at which y is
increasing or decreasing with respect to x—is given by the slope of the tangent line to
the graph of f at the point P(x, f(x)). But for now we will show how this relationship
can be used to estimate the rate of change of a function from its graph.

y 

P ( x ,  f  ( x )) 

T 

y =  f  ( x ) 

y 

L i n e o f s i g h t 

T 

y =  f  ( x ) 

FIGURE 24

(a) T is the tangent line to the curve at P.

(b) T is parallel to the line of sight.

x 

x 

APPLIED EXAMPLE 1 Social Security Beneficiaries The graph of the func-
tion y ⫽ N(t), shown in Figure 25, gives the number of Social Security 

beneficiaries from the beginning of 1990 (

t ⫽ 0

) through the year 2045 (t ⫽ 55).

y 

s
e
i
r
a
i
c
i
f
e
n
e
b

 

y
t
i
r
u
c
e
S

 
l
a
i
c
o
S

)
s
n
o
i
l
l
i

 

m
n
i
(

80 

70 

60 

50 

40 

FIGURE 25
The number of Social Security beneficia-
ries from 1990 through 2045. We can use
the slope of the tangent line at the indi-
cated points to estimate the rate at which
the number of Social Security beneficia-
ries will be changing.

T 2

(Slope  ≈ 1.15) 

P 2 

≈ 1 1.5 

10 

T 1

( 
Slope  ≈ 1  ) 

2  

P 1 

≈10 

20 

0  

5  

10 

15  20  25 

30  35  40  45  50  55 

Y ears 

t 

Use the graph of y ⫽ N(t) to estimate the rate at which the number of Social

Security beneficiaries was growing at the beginning of the year 2000 (t ⫽ 10).
How fast will the number be growing at the beginning of 2025 (t ⫽ 35)?
[Assume that the rate of change of the function N at any value of t is given by the
slope of the tangent line at the point P(t, N(t)).]
Source: Social Security Administration.

Solution From the figure, we see that the slope of the tangent line T1 to the
graph of y ⫽ N(t) at P1(10, 44.7) is approximately 0.5. This tells us that the quan-
tity y is increasing at the rate of ᎏ1
ᎏ unit per unit increase in t, when t ⫽ 10. In other
2
words, at the beginning of the year 2000, the number of Social Security beneficia-
ries was increasing at the rate of approximately 0.5 million, or 500,000, per year.

The slope of the tangent line T2 at P2(35, 71.9) is approximately 1.15. This tells
us that at the beginning of 2025 the number of Social Security beneficiaries will be
growing at the rate of approximately 1.15 million, or 1,150,000, per year.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

586

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

FIGURE 26
As Q approaches P along the curve C, the
secant lines approach the tangent line T.

Slope of a Tangent Line
In Example 1, we answered the questions raised by drawing the graph of the function
N and estimating the position of the tangent lines. Ideally, however, we would like to
solve a problem analytically whenever possible. To do this, we need a precise defini-
tion of the slope of a tangent line to a curve.

To define the tangent line to a curve C at a point P on the curve, fix P and let Q
be any point on C distinct from P (Figure 26). The straight line passing through P and
Q is called a secant line.

y 

C 

Q 

Secant lines 

P ( x,  f  ( x )) 

T 

x 

Now, as the point Q is allowed to move toward P along the curve, the secant line
through P and Q rotates about the fixed point P and approaches a fixed line through
P. This fixed line, which is the limiting position of the secant lines through P and Q
as Q approaches P, is the tangent line to the graph of f at the point P.

We  can  describe  the  process  more  precisely  as  follows.  Suppose  the  curve  C
is  the  graph  of  a  function  f defined  by  y ⫽ f(x).  Then  the  point  P is  described  by 
P(x, f(x)) and the point Q by Q(x ⫹ h, f(x ⫹ h)), where h is some appropriate nonzero
number (Figure 27a). Observe that we can make Q approach P along the curve C by let-
ting h approach zero (Figure 27b).

y

y = f (x)

y 

Q(x + h, f (x + h))

P(x, f(x))

C

x

x

x + h

y  =  f  ( x ) 

Q 

x 

P 

C 

h 

h 

h 

h 

FIGURE 27

(a) The points P(x, f(x)) and 
Q(x ⫹ h, f(x ⫹ h))

(b) As h approaches zero, Q approaches P.

Next, using the formula for the slope of a line, we can write the slope of the secant

line passing through P(x, f(x)) and Q(x ⫹ h, f(x ⫹ h)) as

f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2
1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ x

⫽

f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2

h

(3)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

9.3 THE DERIVATIVE

587

As we observed earlier, Q approaches P, and therefore the secant line through P and
Q approaches the tangent line T as h approaches zero. Consequently, we might expect
that the slope of the secant line would approach the slope of the tangent line T as h
approaches zero. This leads to the following definition.

Slope of a Tangent Line
The slope of the tangent line to the graph of f at the point P(x, f(x)) is given by

f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2

h

lim
 
hS0

(4)

if it exists.

Rates of Change
We now show that the problem of finding the slope of the tangent line to the graph of
a function f at the point P(x, f(x)) is mathematically equivalent to the problem of find-
ing the rate of change of f at x. To see this, suppose we are given a function f that
describes the relationship between the two quantities x and y—that is, y ⫽ f(x). The
number f(x ⫹ h) ⫺ f(x) measures the change in y that corresponds to a change h in x
(Figure 28).

y 

f  ( x +  h ) 

f  ( x ) 

y  =  f  ( x ) 

Q ( x +  h ,  f  ( x +  h )) 

f (x + h) – f (x) 

P ( x,  f  ( x )) 

h 

x 

x  +  h 

x 

FIGURE 28
f(x ⫹ h) ⫺ f(x) is the change in y that cor-
responds to a change h in x.

Then, the difference quotient

f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2

h

(5)

measures  the  average  rate  of  change  of  y with  respect  to  x over  the  interval 
[x, x ⫹ h]. For example, if y measures the position of a car at time x, then quotient (5)
gives the average velocity of the car over the time interval [x, x ⫹ h].

Observe that the difference quotient (5) is the same as (3). We conclude that the
difference quotient (5) also measures the slope of the secant line that passes through
the two points P(x, f(x)) and Q(x ⫹ h, f(x ⫹ h)) lying on the graph of y ⫽ f(x). Next, by
taking the limit of the difference quotient (5) as h goes to zero—that is, by evaluating

f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2

h

lim
 
hS0

(6)

we obtain the rate of change of f at x. For example, if y measures the position of a
car at time x, then the limit (6) gives the velocity of the car at time x. For emphasis,
the rate of change of a function f at x is often called the instantaneous rate of change

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

588

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

Explore & Discuss
Explain the difference
between the average rate of
change of a function and the
instantaneous rate of change
of a function.

FIGURE 29
The slope of the tangent line at 
P(x, f(x)) is f ⬘(x); f changes at the rate of
f ⬘(x) units per unit change in x at x.

of f at x. This distinguishes it from the average rate of change of f, which is computed
over an interval [x, x ⫹ h] rather than at a number x.

Observe that the limit (6) is the same as (4). Therefore, the limit of the difference
quotient also measures the slope of the tangent line to the graph of y ⫽ f(x) at the point
(x, f(x)). The following summarizes this discussion.

Average and Instantaneous Rates of Change
The average rate of change of f over the interval [x, x ⫹ h] or slope of the secant
line to the graph of f through the points (x, f(x)) and (x ⫹ h, f(x ⫹ h)) is

f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f  1x2

h

(7)

The instantaneous rate of change of f at x or slope of the tangent line to the
graph of f at (x, f(x)) is

f  1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f  1x2

h

lim
 
hS0

(8)

The Derivative
The limit (4) or (8), which measures both the slope of the tangent line to the graph of
y ⫽ f(x) at the point P(x, f(x)) and the (instantaneous) rate of change of f at x, is given
a special name: the derivative of f at x.

Derivative of a Function
The  derivative  of  a  function  f with  respect  to  x is  the  function  f ⬘ (read 
“f prime”),

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ lim

 
hS0

f  1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f  1x2

h

(9)

The domain of f ⬘ is the set of all x for which the limit exists.

Thus, the derivative of a function f is a function f ⬘ that gives the slope of the tangent line
to the graph of f at any point (x, f(x)) and also the rate of change of f at x (Figure 29).

y 

y  =  f  ( x ) 

T 

P ( x,  f  ( x )) 

f  ' ( x ) 

1 

x 

x 

Other notations for the derivative of f include:

Read “d sub x of f of x”

Read “d y d x”

Read “y prime”

Dx f1x2

dy
dx
y⬘

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

The last two are used when the rule for f is written in the form y ⫽ f(x).

The calculation of the derivative of f is facilitated by using the following four-step

process.

9.3 THE DERIVATIVE

589

Four-Step Process for Finding fⴕ(x)
1. Compute f(x ⫹ h).
2. Form the difference f(x ⫹ h) ⫺ f(x).
f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2

3. Form the quotient 

.

4. Compute the limit  

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ lim

 
hS0

h

f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2

h

.

EXAMPLE 2 Find the slope of the tangent line to the graph of f(x) ⫽ 3x ⫹ 5 at any
point (x, f(x)).

Solution The slope of the tangent line at any point on the graph of f is given by
the derivative of f at x. To find the derivative, we use the four-step process:

Step 1

Step 2

Step 3

Step 4

f1x ⫹ h2 ⫽ 31x ⫹ h2 ⫹ 5 ⫽ 3x ⫹ 3h ⫹ 5
f1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f(x2 ⫽ 13x ⫹ 3h ⫹ 52 ⫺ (3x ⫹ 52 ⫽ 3h
f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2
f  ¿1x2 ⫽ lim

⫽ 3
f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2

⫽ 3h
h

⫽ lim
hS0 

3 ⫽ 3

 
hS0

h

h

We expect this result, since the tangent line to any point on a straight line must coin-
cide with the line itself and therefore must have the same slope as the line. In this
case, the graph of f is a straight line with slope 3.

EXAMPLE 3 Let f(x) ⫽ x 2.
a. Find f ⬘(x).
b. Compute f ⬘(2), and interpret your result.

Solution
a. To find f ⬘(x), we use the four-step process:

Step 1

Step 2

Step 3

Step 4

f1x ⫹ h2 ⫽ 1x ⫹ h2 2 ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 2xh ⫹ h2
f1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 2xh ⫹ h2 ⫺ x 2 ⫽ 2xh ⫹ h2 ⫽ h12x ⫹ h2
f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2
f  ¿1x2 ⫽ lim

⫽ 2x ⫹ h
hS0 12x ⫹ h2 ⫽ 2x
⫽ lim

h12x ⫹ h2
f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2

 
hS0

⫽

h

h

h

b. f ⬘(2) ⫽ 2(2) ⫽ 4. This result tells us that the slope of the tangent line to the

graph of f at the point (2, 4) is 4. It also tells us that the function f is changing at
the rate of 4 units per unit change in x at x ⫽ 2. The graph of f and the tangent
line at (2, 4) are shown in Figure 30.

y 

y  =  x  2  

4 

(2,  4) 

–2 

2 

x 

FIGURE 30
The tangent line to the graph of 
f(x) ⫽ x 2 at (2, 4)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

590

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
1. Consider the function f(x) ⫽ x 2 of Example 3. Suppose we want to compute

f ⬘(2), using Equation (9). Thus,

f ¿122 ⫽ lim

 
hS0

f 12 ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 122

h

 12 ⫹ h2 2 ⫺ 22

h

⫽ lim
hS0

Use a graphing utility to plot the graph of

t 1x2 ⫽ 12 ⫹ x2 2 ⫺ 4

x

in the viewing window [⫺3, 3] ⫻ [⫺2, 6].

2. Use ZOOM and TRACE to find 
3. Explain why the limit found in part 2 is f ⬘(2).

lim
xS0

.

  t1x2

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 4 Let f(x) ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 4x.
a. Find f ⬘(x).
b. Find the point on the graph of f where the tangent line to the curve is 

horizontal.

c. Sketch the graph of f and the tangent line to the curve at the point found in 

part (b).

d. What is the rate of change of f at this point?

Solution
a. To find f ⬘(x), we use the four-step process:

Step 1

Step 2

Step 3

Step 4

f1x ⫹ h2 ⫽ 1x ⫹ h2 2 ⫺ 41x ⫹ h2 ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 2xh ⫹ h2 ⫺ 4x ⫺ 4h
f1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 2xh ⫹ h2 ⫺ 4x ⫺ 4h ⫺ 1x 2 ⫺ 4x2
f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2
f  ¿1x2 ⫽ lim

⫽ 2xh ⫹ h2 ⫺ 4h ⫽ h12x ⫹ h ⫺ 42
⫽ 2x ⫹ h ⫺ 4

hS0 12x ⫹ h ⫺ 42 ⫽ 2x ⫺ 4
⫽ lim

f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f  1x2

h12x ⫹ h ⫺ 42

 
hS0

⫽

h

h

h

b. At a point on the graph of f where the tangent line to the curve is horizontal 
and hence has slope zero, the derivative f ⬘ of f is zero. Accordingly, to find 
such point(s), we set f ⬘(x) ⫽ 0, which gives 2x ⫺ 4 ⫽ 0, or x ⫽ 2. The corre-
sponding value of y is given by y ⫽ f(2) ⫽ ⫺4, and the required point is 
(2, ⫺4).

c. The graph of f and the tangent line are shown in Figure 31.
d. The rate of change of f at x ⫽ 2 is zero.

EXAMPLE 5 Let 

f 1x2 ⫽ 1

x

.

a. Find f ⬘(x).
b. Find the slope of the tangent line T to the graph of f at the point where x ⫽ 1.
c. Find an equation of the tangent line T in part (b).

y 

y  =  x  2   – 4 x 

–1 
– 2  
– 3  
T 

1 2 3  

5 

x 

y  = – 4 

(2,  –  4) 

FIGURE 31
The tangent line to the graph of 
y ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 4x at (2, ⫺4) is y ⫽ ⫺4.

Explore & Discuss
Can the tangent line to the
graph of a function intersect
the graph at more than one
point? Explain your answer
using illustrations.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

y 

T 

1 
y  =  
x 

4 
3 

1 

(1,  1) 

–1 

1 2 3 4  

y  = – x  + 2 

x 

FIGURE 32
The tangent line to the graph of 
f(x) ⫽ 1> x at (1, 1)

Solution
a. To find f ⬘(x), we use the four-step process:

9.3 THE DERIVATIVE

591

Step 1

Step 2

Step 3

Step 4

x ⫹ h

f 1x ⫹ h2   ⫽ 1
f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2 ⫽ 1
f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2

⫺ 1
x

x ⫹ h
⫽ ⫺ h
x1x ⫹ h2
f  1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2

f ¿1x2 ⫽ lim

 
hS0

h

h

⫽

# 1
h

x ⫺ 1x ⫹ h2
x1x ⫹ h2 ⫽ ⫺ h
x1x ⫹ h2
⫽ ⫺ 1
x1x ⫹ h2
x1x ⫹ h2 ⫽ ⫺ 1
⫺ 1

(x2)

x2

⫽ lim
hS0 

See page 23.

b. The slope of the tangent line T to the graph of f where x ⫽ 1 is given by 

f ⬘(1) ⫽ ⫺1.

c. When x ⫽ 1, y ⫽ f(1) ⫽ 1 and T is tangent to the graph of f at the point (1, 1).

From part (b), we know that the slope of T is ⫺1. Thus, an equation of T is

y ⫺ 1 ⫽ ⫺11x ⫺ 12

y ⫽ ⫺x ⫹ 2

(Figure 32).

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
1. Use the results of Example 5 to draw the graph of f(x) ⫽ 1>x and its tangent
line at the point (1, 1) by plotting the graphs of y1 ⫽ 1>x and y2 ⫽ ⫺x ⫹ 2
in the viewing window [⫺4, 4] ⫻ [⫺4, 4].

2. Some graphing utilities draw the tangent line to the graph of a function at a 
given point automatically—you need only specify the function and give the 
x-coordinate of the point of tangency. If your graphing utility has this feature,
verify the result of part 1 without finding an equation of the tangent line.

Explore & Discuss
Consider the following alternative approach to the definition of the derivative of a function:
Let h be a positive number and suppose P(x ⫺ h, f(x ⫺ h)) and Q(x ⫹ h, f(x ⫹ h)) are two
points on the graph of f.
1. Give a geometric and a physical interpretation of the quotient

f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x ⫺ h2

2h

Make a sketch to illustrate your answer.

2. Give a geometric and a physical interpretation of the limit

f  1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x ⫺ h2

2h

 
lim
hS0

Make a sketch to illustrate your answer.

3. Explain why it makes sense to define

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ lim

 
hS0

f  1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x ⫺ h2

2h

4. Using the definition given in part 3, formulate a four-step process for finding f ⬘(x) simi-

lar to that given on page 589, and use it to find the derivative of f(x) ⫽ x 2. Compare
your answer with that obtained in Example 3 on page 589.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

592

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

APPLIED EXAMPLE 6 Velocity of a Car Suppose the distance (in feet) 
covered by a car moving along a straight road t seconds after starting from 

rest is given by the function f(t) ⫽ 2t2 (0 ⱕ t ⱕ 30).
a. Calculate the average velocity of the car over the time intervals [22, 23], 

[22, 22.1], and [22, 22.01].

b. Calculate the (instantaneous) velocity of the car when t ⫽ 22.
c. Compare the results obtained in part (a) with that obtained in part (b).

Solution

a. We first compute the average velocity (average rate of change of f ) over the

interval [t, t ⫹ h] using Formula (7). We find

f 1t ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1t2

 

⫽

h

2

21t ⫹ h2 2 ⫺ 2t 
2 ⫹ 4th ⫹ 2h2 ⫺ 2t 

h

2

 ⫽ 2t 

h

 ⫽ 4t ⫹ 2h

Next, using t ⫽ 22 and h ⫽ 1, we find that the average velocity of the car
over the time interval [22, 23] is

4(22) ⫹ 2(1) ⫽ 90

or 90 feet per second. Similarly, using t ⫽ 22, h ⫽ 0.1, and h ⫽ 0.01, we find
that its average velocities over the time intervals [22, 22.1] and [22, 22.01] are
88.2 and 88.02 feet per second, respectively.

b. Using the limit (8), we see that the instantaneous velocity of the car at any

time t is given by

f 1t ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1t2

h

 lim
 
hS0

hS0 14t ⫹ 2h2
⫽ lim

 ⫽ 4t

Use the results from part (a).

In particular, the velocity of the car 22 seconds from rest (t ⫽ 22) is 
given by

√ ⫽ 41222

or 88 feet per second.

c. The computations in part (a) show that, as the time intervals over which the

average velocity of the car are computed become smaller and smaller, the aver-
age velocities over these intervals do approach 88 feet per second, the instanta-
neous velocity of the car at t ⫽ 22.

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 7 Demand for Tires The management of Titan Tire
Company has determined that the weekly demand function of their Super 

p   ($) 

200 

100 

5 

10 

15 

Thousands  of  units 

x 

FIGURE 33
The graph of the demand function 
p ⫽ 144 ⫺ x2

Titan tires is given by

p ⫽ f1x2 ⫽ 144 ⫺ x 2

where p, the price per tire, is measured in dollars and x is measured in units of a
thousand (Figure 33).
a. Find the average rate of change in the unit price of a tire if the quantity

demanded is between 5000 and 6000 tires, between 5000 and 5100 tires, and
between 5000 and 5010 tires.

b. What is the instantaneous rate of change of the unit price when the quantity

demanded is 5000 units?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Solution

9.3 THE DERIVATIVE

593

a. The average rate of change of the unit price of a tire if the quantity demanded

(in thousands) is between x and x ⫹ h is

f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2

 

h

⫽ 3144 ⫺ 1x ⫹ h2 24 ⫺ 1144 ⫺ x22
 ⫽ 144 ⫺ x2 ⫺ 2xh ⫺ h2 ⫺ 144 ⫹ x2
 ⫽ ⫺2x ⫺ h

h

h

To find the average rate of change of the unit price of a tire when the quan-
tity demanded is between 5000 and 6000 tires (that is, over the interval [5, 6]),
we take x ⫽ 5 and h ⫽ 1, obtaining

⫺2152 ⫺ 1 ⫽ ⫺11

or ⫺$11 per 1000 tires. (Remember, x is measured in units of a thousand.) Simi-
larly, taking h ⫽ 0.1 and h ⫽ 0.01 with x ⫽ 5, we find that the average rates of
change of the unit price when the quantities demanded are between 5000 and 5100
and between 5000 and 5010 are ⫺$10.10 and ⫺$10.01 per 1000 tires, respectively.
b. The instantaneous rate of change of the unit price of a tire when the quantity

demanded is x units is given by

f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2

h

 lim
 
hS0

hS0 1⫺2x ⫺ h2
⫽ lim

 ⫽ ⫺2x

Use the results from part (a).

In particular, the instantaneous rate of change of the unit price per tire when
the quantity demanded is 5000 is given by ⫺2(5), or ⫺$10 per 1000 tires.

The  derivative  of  a  function  provides  us  with  a  tool  for  measuring  the  rate  of
change of one quantity with respect to another. Table 4 lists several other applications
involving this limit.

TABLE 4
Applications Involving Rate of Change

x stands for

y stands for

f1a ⴙ h2 ⴚ f1a2

h

measures

Time

Number of

items sold

Time

Time

Temperature

in a chemical
reaction

Concentration of a drug

in the bloodstream at
time x

Revenue at a sales level

of x units

Average rate of change in the

concentration of the drug over
the time interval [a, a ⫹ h]
Average rate of change in the 

revenue when the sales level is
between x ⫽ a and x ⫽ a ⫹ h

Volume of sales at time x

Average rate of change in the

Population of Drosophila

(fruit flies) at time x

Amount of product

formed in the chemical
reaction when the tem-
perature is x degrees

volume of sales over the
time interval [a, a ⫹ h]

Average rate of growth of the
fruit fly population over the
time interval [a, a ⫹ h]

Average rate of formation of 
chemical product over the 
temperature range [a, a ⫹ h]

 f1a ⴙ h2 ⴚ f1a2

h

measures

lim
hS 0

Instantaneous rate of change in the
concentration of the drug in the
bloodstream at time x ⫽ a

Instantaneous rate of change in the
revenue when the sales level is 
a units

Instantaneous rate of change in 

the volume of sales at time 
x ⫽ a

Instantaneous rate of change of 

the fruit fly population at time 
x ⫽ a

Instantaneous rate of formation of

chemical product when the 
temperature is a degrees

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

594

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

Differentiability and Continuity
In practical applications one encounters continuous functions that fail to be differen-
tiable—that is, do not have a derivative—at certain values in the domain of the func-
tion  f.  It  can  be  shown  that  a  continuous  function  f fails  to  be  differentiable  at 
x ⫽ a when the graph of f makes an abrupt change of direction at (a, f(a)). We call
such a point a “corner.” A function also fails to be differentiable at a point where the
tangent line is vertical, since the slope of a vertical line is undefined. These cases are
illustrated in Figure 34.

y 

y 

( a ,  f  ( a )) 

( a ,  f  ( a )) 

a 

x 

a 

x 

(a) The graph makes an abrupt change of
direction at x ⫽ a.

(b) The slope at x ⫽ a is undefined.

The next example illustrates a function that is not differentiable at a point.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 8 Wages Mary works at the B&O department store,
where, on a weekday, she is paid $8 an hour for the first 8 hours and $12 

an hour for overtime. The function

f 1x2 ⫽ e 8x

12x ⫺ 32

if 0 ⱕ x ⱕ 8
if 8 ⬍ x

(8, 64) 

gives Mary’s earnings on a weekday in which she worked x hours. Sketch the graph
of the function f, and explain why it is not differentiable at x ⫽ 8.

x 

Solution The graph of f is shown in Figure 35. Observe that the graph of f has a
corner at x ⫽ 8 and consequently is not differentiable at x ⫽ 8.

We close this section by mentioning the connection between the continuity and the
differentiability of a function at a given value x ⫽ a in the domain of f. By reexamining
the function of Example 8, it becomes clear that f is continuous everywhere and, in par-
ticular, when x ⫽ 8. This shows that in general the continuity of a function at x ⫽ a does
not necessarily imply the differentiability of the function at that number. The converse,
however, is true: If a function f is differentiable at x ⫽ a, then it is continuous there.

Differentiability and Continuity
If a function is differentiable at x ⫽ a, then it is continuous at x ⫽ a.

For a proof of this result, see Exercise 62, page 600.

FIGURE 34

y 

 
 s
 r
 a
 l
 l
 o
D

130 

110 

90 

70 

50 

30 

10 

2

4

6
8
Hours 

 
10   12 

FIGURE 35
The function f is not differentiable at 
(8, 64).

Explore & Discuss
Suppose a function f is dif-
ferentiable at x ⫽ a. Can
there be two tangent lines to
the graphs of f at the point
(a, f(a))? Explain your
answer.

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY

1. Use a graphing utility to plot the graph of f(x) ⫽ x1/3 in the viewing window

[⫺2, 2] ⫻ [⫺2, 2].

2. Use a graphing utility to draw the tangent line to the graph of f at the point

(0, 0). Can you explain why the process breaks down?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

9.3 THE DERIVATIVE

595

EXAMPLE 9 Figure 36 depicts a portion of the graph of a function. Explain why the
function fails to be differentiable at each of the numbers x ⫽ a, b, c, d, e, f, and t.

y

FIGURE 36
The graph of this function is not differen-
tiable at the numbers a–g.

a

b

c

d

e

f

g

x

Solution The function fails to be differentiable at x ⫽ a, b, and c because it is dis-
continuous at each of these numbers. The derivative of the function does not exist at
x ⫽ d, e, and f because it has a kink at each point on the graph corresponding to
these numbers. Finally, the function is not differentiable at x ⫽ t because the tan-
gent line is vertical at the corresponding point on the graph.

9.3 Self-Check Exercises

1. Let f(x) ⫽ ⫺x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫹ 3.

a. Find  the  derivative  f ⬘ of  f,  using  the  definition  of  the

derivative.

b. Find the slope of the tangent line to the graph of f at the

point (0, 3).

c. Find the rate of change of f when x ⫽ 0.
d. Find an equation of the tangent line to the graph of f at

the point (0, 3).

e. Sketch the graph of f and the tangent line to the curve at

the point (0, 3).

2. The losses (in millions of dollars) due to bad loans extended
chiefly  in  agriculture,  real  estate,  shipping,  and  energy  by
the Franklin Bank are estimated to be

A ⫽ f1t2 ⫽ ⫺t2 ⫹ 10t ⫹ 30

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

where t is the time in years (t ⫽ 0 corresponds to the begin-
ning  of  2005).  How  fast  were  the  losses  mounting  at  the
beginning of 2008? At the beginning of 2010? At the begin-
ning of 2012?

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 9.3 can be found on 
page 600.

9.3 Concept Questions

For Questions 1 and 2, refer to the following figure.

2. Refer to Question 1.

y

f(2 ⫹ h)

f(2)

y ⫽ f(x)

Q(2 ⫹ h, f(2 ⫹ h))

a. Find an expression for the average rate of change of f

over the interval [2, 2 ⫹ h].

b. Find an expression for the instantaneous rate of change

of f at 2.

c. Compare your answers for parts (a) and (b) with those

of Question 1.

P(2, f(2))

expression

f(2 ⫹ h) ⫺ f(2)

3. a. Give  a  geometric  and  a  physical  interpretation  of  the

h

 2

 2 ⫹ h

x

1. Let  P(2,  f(2))  and  Q(2  ⫹ h,  f(2  ⫹ h))  be  points  on  the

graph of a function f.
a. Find an expression for the slope of the secant line pass-

ing through P and Q.

b. Find  an  expression  for  the  slope  of  the  tangent  line

passing through P.

f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2

h

b. Give  a  geometric  and  a  physical  interpretation  of  the

expression

f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2

h

lim
 
hS0

4. Under what conditions does a function fail to have a deriv-

ative at a number? Illustrate your answer with sketches.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

596

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

9.3 Exercises

1. AVERAGE WEIGHT OF AN INFANT The following graph shows
the  weight  measurements  of  the  average  infant  from  the
time of birth (t ⫽ 0) through age 2 (t ⫽ 24). By computing
the slopes of the respective tangent lines, estimate the rate
of change of the average infant’s weight when t ⫽ 3 and
when  t ⫽ 18.  What  is  the  average  rate  of  change  in  the
average infant’s weight over the first year of life?

70
60
50
40
30
20
10

y (%)

T2

2

T1
12.3

4

42.3

2

4

6

8

10  12  14  16  18  20  22  24

t (hr)

T2

3.5

T1

6

y

30

)
s
d
n
u
o
p

 

n
i
(
 
s
t
n
a
f
n
i
 
f
o

 
t
h
g
i
e
w
 
e
g
a
r
e
v
A

22.5
20

10
7.5

7.5

5

2 4 6 8

3

10  12  14  16  18 20 22 24
Months

t

2. FORESTRY The following graph shows the volume of wood
produced in a single-species forest. Here, f(t) is measured
in cubic meters per hectare, and t is measured in years. By
computing the slopes of the respective tangent lines, esti-
mate the rate at which the wood grown is changing at the
beginning of year 10 and at the beginning of year 30.
Source: The Random House Encyclopedia.

d
e
c
u
d
o
r
p
 
d
o
o
w

 
f
o
 
e
m
u
l
o
V

)
e
r
a
t
c
e
h
/
s
r
e
t
e
m
 
c
i
b
u
c
(

y

30
25
20
15
10
5

T2

y = f(t )

10

8

T1

4

10 

20 

12

30 
Years

40 

50

t

4. CROP YIELD Productivity and yield of cultivated crops are
often reduced by insect pests. The following graph shows
the relationship between the yield of a certain crop, f(x), as
a  function  of  the  density  of  aphids  x.  (Aphids  are  small
insects  that  suck  plant  juices.)  Here,  f(x)  is  measured  in
kilograms  per  4000  square  meters,  and  x is  measured  in
hundreds of aphids per bean stem. By computing the slopes
of the respective tangent lines, estimate the rate of change
of the crop yield with respect to the density of aphids when
that  density  is  200  aphids/bean  stem  and  when  it  is  800
aphids/bean stem.
Source: The Random House Encyclopedia.

y

1000

300

500

500

)
2

 

m
0
0
0
4
/
g
k
(
 

d
l
e
i
y

 

p
o
r
C

300

150

T2

T1

200  400  600  800

1000 1200 1400 1600

Hundred aphids per bean stem

x

5. The positions of Car A and Car B, starting out side by side
and traveling along a straight road, are given by s ⫽ f(t)
and s ⫽ t(t), respectively, where s is measured in feet and
t is measured in seconds (see the accompanying figure).

s 

s =  g ( t ) 

s =  f ( t )

3. TV-VIEWING PATTERNS The following graph shows the per-
centage  of  U.S.  households  watching  television  during  a 
24-hr period on a weekday (t ⫽ 0 corresponds to 6 A.M.).
By  computing  the  slopes  of  the  respective  tangent  lines,
estimate  the  rate  of  change  of  the  percent  of  households
watching television at 4 P.M. and 11 P.M.
Source: A. C. Nielsen Company.

t1

t2

t3

t 

a. Which car is traveling faster at t1?
b. What can you say about the speed of the cars at t2?

Hint: Compare tangent lines.

c. Which car is traveling faster at t3?
d. What can you say about the positions of the cars at t3?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

6. The velocities of Car A and Car B, which start out side by
side and travel along a straight road, are given by √ ⫽ f(t) and
√ ⫽ t(t), respectively, where √ is measured in feet per second
and t is measured in seconds (see the accompanying figure).

√

√ = g(t)

√ = f(t)

t1

t2

t 

a. What can you say about the velocity and acceleration of
the two cars at t1? (Acceleration is the rate of change of
velocity.)

b. What can you say about the velocity and acceleration of

the two cars at t2?

7. EFFECT OF A BACTERICIDE ON BACTERIA In the following figure,
f(t) gives the population P1 of a certain bacteria culture at
time t after a portion of Bactericide A was introduced into
the population at t ⫽ 0. The graph of t gives the population
P2 of a similar bacteria culture at time t after a portion of
Bactericide B was introduced into the population at t ⫽ 0.
a. Which population is decreasing faster at t1?
b. Which population is decreasing faster at t2?

y 

y =  g ( t ) 

y =  f ( t ) 

t 

t1

t2

c. Which bactericide is more effective in reducing the pop-

ulation of bacteria in the short run? In the long run?

8. MARKET SHARE The following figure shows the devastating
effect the opening of a new discount department store had
on  an  established  department  store  in  a  small  town.  The
revenue of the discount store at time t (in months) is given
by f(t) million dollars, whereas the revenue of the estab-
lished  department  store  at  time  t is  given  by t(t)  million
dollars.  Answer  the  following  questions  by  giving  the
value of t at which the specified event took place.

y 

y =  g ( t ) 

y =  f ( t ) 

t1

t2

t3

t 

9.3 THE DERIVATIVE

597

a. The  revenue  of  the  established  department  store  is

decreasing at the slowest rate.

b. The  revenue  of  the  established  department  store  is

decreasing at the fastest rate.

c. The revenue of the discount store first overtakes that of

the established store.

d. The  revenue  of  the  discount  store  is  increasing  at  the

fastest rate.

In Exercises 9–16, use the four-step process to find the slope of
the tangent line to the graph of the given function at any point.

9. f1x2 ⫽ 13
11. f1x2 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 7
13. f1x2 ⫽ 2x 2
15. f1x2 ⫽ ⫺x 2 ⫹ 3x

10. f1x2 ⫽ ⫺6
12. f1x2 ⫽ 8 ⫺ 4x
f 1x2 ⫽ ⫺1
2  x2

14.

16. f1x2 ⫽ 2x 2 ⫹ 5x

In Exercises 17–22, find the slope of the tangent line to the graph
of the function at the given point, and determine an equation of
the tangent line.

17. f1x2 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 7 at 12, 112
18. f1x2 ⫽ ⫺3x ⫹ 4 at 1⫺1, 72
19. f1x2 ⫽ 3x 2 at 11, 32
20. f1x2 ⫽ 3x ⫺ x 2 at 1⫺2, ⫺102

21.

22.

x

f 1x2 ⫽ ⫺1
f 1x2 ⫽ 3

2x

3≤
 at ¢3, ⫺1
 at ¢1, 
2≤

3

23. Let f(x) ⫽ 2x 2 ⫹ 1.

a. Find the derivative f ⬘ of f.
b. Find an equation of the tangent line to the curve at the

point (1, 3).

c. Sketch the graph of f and its tangent line at 11, 32 .

24. Let f(x) ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 6x.

a. Find the derivative f ⬘ of f.
b. Find the point on the graph of f where the tangent line

to the curve is horizontal.
Hint: Find the value of x for which f ⬘(x) ⫽ 0.

c. Sketch the graph of f and the tangent line to the curve at

the point found in part (b).

25. Let f(x) ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫹ 1.

a. Find the derivative f ⬘ of f.
b. Find the point on the graph of f where the tangent line

to the curve is horizontal.

c. Sketch the graph of f and the tangent line to the curve at

the point found in part (b).

d. What is the rate of change of f at this point?

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

598

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

26. Let 

f 1x2 ⫽ 1

x ⫺ 1

.

.

point 

22
1⫺1, ⫺1
22
1⫺1, ⫺1

.

a. Find the derivative f ⬘ of f.
b. Find an equation of the tangent line to the curve at the

c. Sketch the graph of f and the tangent line to the curve at

27. Let y ⫽ f(x) ⫽ x 2 ⫹ x.

a. Find the average rate of change of y with respect to x in
the interval from x ⫽ 2 to x ⫽ 3, from x ⫽ 2 to x ⫽ 2.5,
and from x ⫽ 2 to x ⫽ 2.1.

b. Find the (instantaneous) rate of change of y at x ⫽ 2.
c. Compare the results obtained in part (a) with the result

of part (b).

28. Let y ⫽ f(x) ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 4x.

a. Find the average rate of change of y with respect to x in
the interval from x ⫽ 3 to x ⫽ 4, from x ⫽ 3 to x ⫽ 3.5,
and from x ⫽ 3 to x ⫽ 3.1.

b. Find the (instantaneous) rate of change of y at x ⫽ 3.
c. Compare the results obtained in part (a) with the result of 

part (b).

29. VELOCITY OF A CAR Suppose the distance s (in feet) covered
by a car moving along a straight road after t sec is given by
the function s ⫽ f(t) ⫽ 2t2 ⫹ 48t.
a. Calculate the average velocity of the car over the time

intervals [20, 21], [20, 20.1], and [20, 20.01].

b. Calculate  the  (instantaneous)  velocity  of  the  car  when 

t ⫽ 20.

c. Compare the results of part (a) with the result of part (b).

30. VELOCITY OF A BALL THROWN INTO THE AIR A  ball  is  thrown
straight up with an initial velocity of 128 ft/sec, so that its
height (in feet) after t sec is given by s(t) ⫽ 128t ⫺ 16t2.
a. What is the average velocity of the ball over the time

intervals [2, 3], [2, 2.5], and [2, 2.1]?

b. What is the instantaneous velocity at time t ⫽ 2?
c. What is the instantaneous velocity at time t ⫽ 5? Is the

ball rising or falling at this time?

d. When will the ball hit the ground?

31. VELOCITY OF A FALLING OBJECT During the construction of a
high-rise  building,  a  worker  accidentally  dropped  his
portable electric screwdriver from a height of 400 ft. After
t sec, the screwdriver had fallen a distance of s ⫽ 16t 2 ft.
a. How  long  did  it  take  the  screwdriver  to  reach  the

ground?

b. What  was  the  average  velocity  of  the  screwdriver
between the time it was dropped and the time it hit the
ground?

c. What was the velocity of the screwdriver at the time it

hit the ground?

32. VELOCITY OF A HOT-AIR BALLOON A hot-air balloon rises ver-
tically  from  the  ground  so  that  its  height  after  t sec  is
h ⫽ 1
2  t 
a. What is the height of the balloon at the end of 40 sec?
b. What  is  the  average  velocity  of  the  balloon  between 

2  t ft 10 ⱕ t ⱕ 602

2 ⫹ 1

.

t ⫽ 0 and t ⫽ 40?

c. What is the velocity of the balloon at the end of 40 sec?

33. At a temperature of 20°C, the volume V (in liters) of 1.33 g
of  O2 is  related  to  its  pressure  p (in  atmospheres)  by  the 
formula V ⫽ 1>p.
p as p increases from p ⫽ 2 to p ⫽ 3?

a. What is the average rate of change of V with respect to

b. What is the rate of change of V with respect to p when 

p ⫽ 2?

34. COST OF PRODUCING SURFBOARDS The total cost C(x) (in dol-
lars) incurred by Aloha Company in manufacturing x surf-
boards a day is given by

C1x2 ⫽ ⫺10x 2 ⫹ 300x ⫹ 130
a. Find C⬘(x).
b. What  is  the  rate  of  change  of  the  total  cost  when  the

10 ⱕ x ⱕ 152

level of production is ten surfboards a day?

35. EFFECT OF ADVERTISING ON PROFIT The  quarterly  profit  (in

thousands of dollars) of Cunningham Realty is given by

P1x2 ⫽ ⫺1

3  x2 ⫹ 7x ⫹ 30    10 ⱕ x ⱕ 502

where x (in thousands of dollars) is the amount of money
Cunningham spends on advertising per quarter.
a. Find P⬘(x).
b. What is the rate of change of Cunningham’s quarterly
profit  if  the  amount  it  spends  on  advertising  is
$10,000/quarter (x ⫽ 10) and $30,000/quarter (x ⫽ 30)?
36. DEMAND FOR TENTS The  demand  function  for  Sportsman 

5 ⫻ 7 tents is given by

p ⫽ f1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.1x 2 ⫺ x ⫹ 40

where p is measured in dollars and x is measured in units
of a thousand.
a. Find the average rate of change in the unit price of a tent
if  the  quantity  demanded  is  between  5000  and  5050
tents; between 5000 and 5010 tents.

b. What is the rate of change of the unit price if the quan-

tity demanded is 5000?

37. A COUNTRY’S GDP The gross domestic product (GDP) of a

certain country is projected to be

N1t2 ⫽ t 2 ⫹ 2t ⫹ 50

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 52

billion dollars t years from now. What will be the rate of
change  of  the  country’s  GDP  2  years  and  4  years  from
now?

38. GROWTH OF BACTERIA Under a set of controlled laboratory
conditions, the size of the population of a certain bacteria
culture at time t (in minutes) is described by the function

P ⫽ f1t2 ⫽ 3t 2 ⫹ 2t ⫹ 1

Find the rate of population growth at t ⫽ 10 min.

39. AIR TEMPERATURE The  air  temperature  at  a  height  of  h ft
from the surface of the earth is T ⫽ f(h) degrees Fahrenheit.
a. Give a physical interpretation of f ⬘(h). Give units.
b. Generally  speaking,  what  do  you  expect  the  sign  of

f ⬘(h) to be?

c. If you know that f ⬘(1000) ⫽ ⫺0.05, estimate the change
in the air temperature if the altitude changes from 1000 ft
to 1001 ft.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

40. REVENUE OF A TRAVEL AGENCY Suppose that the total revenue
realized by the Odyssey Travel Agency is R ⫽ f(x) thousand
dollars if x thousand dollars are spent on advertising.
a. What does

f 1b2 ⫺ f 1a2
b ⫺ a

      10 ⬍ a ⬍ b2

measure? What are the units?

b. What does f ⬘(x) measure? Give units.
c. Given that f ⬘(20) ⫽ 3, what is the approximate change
in the revenue if Odyssey increases its advertising bud-
get from $20,000 to $21,000?

In Exercises 41–46, let x and f(x) represent the given quantities.
Fix x ⫽ a and let h be a small positive number. Give an interpre-
tation of the quantities

f1a ⫹ h2 ⫺ f1a2

h

f1a ⫹ h2 ⫺ f1a2

h

and

lim
hS0

41. x denotes time, and f(x) denotes the population of seals at

time x.

42. x denotes time, and f(x) denotes the prime interest rate at 

time x.

43. x denotes time, and f(x) denotes a country’s industrial pro-

duction.

44. x denotes the level of production of a certain commodity,
and f(x) denotes the total cost incurred in producing x units
of the commodity.

45. x denotes altitude, and f(x) denotes atmospheric pressure.

46. x denotes the speed of a car (in mph), and f(x) denotes the fuel
consumption of the car measured in miles per gallon (mpg).

In each of Exercises 47–52, the graph of a function is shown. For
each function, state whether or not (a) f(x) has a limit at x ⫽ a as
x approaches a, (b) f(x) is continuous at x ⫽ a, and (c) f(x) is dif-
ferentiable at x ⫽ a. Justify your answers.
47.

48.

y 

y 

9.3 THE DERIVATIVE

599

51.

y 

52.

y 

a 

x 

a 

x 

53. VELOCITY OF A MOTORCYCLE The distance s (in feet) covered
by  a  motorcycle  traveling  in  a  straight  line  and  starting
from rest in t sec is given by the function

s1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.1t 3 ⫹ 2t 2 ⫹ 24t

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 32

Calculate the motorcycle’s average velocity over the time
interval [2, 2 ⫹ h] for h ⫽ 1, 0.1, 0.01, 0.001, 0.0001, and
0.00001, and use your results to guess at the motorcycle’s
instantaneous velocity at t ⫽ 2.

54. RATE OF CHANGE OF PRODUCTION COSTS The daily total cost
C(x) incurred by Trappee and Sons for producing x cases
of TexaPep hot sauce is given by

Calculate

C1x2 ⫽ 0.000002x3 ⫹ 5x ⫹ 400

C1100 ⫹ h2 ⫺ C11002

h

for h ⫽ 1, 0.1, 0.01, 0.001, and 0.0001, and use your results
to  estimate  the  rate  of  change  of  the  total  cost  function
when the level of production is 100 cases/day.

In Exercises 55 and 56, determine whether the statement is true
or  false.  If  it  is  true,  explain  why  it  is  true.  If  it  is  false,  give  an
example to show why it is false.
55. If f is continuous at x ⫽ a, then f is differentiable at x ⫽ a.
56. If f is continuous at x ⫽ a and t is differentiable at x ⫽ a,

then 

lim
xSa

 f 1x2t 1x2 ⫽ f 1a2t1a2

.

57. Sketch the graph of the function f(x) ⫽ 兩 x ⫹ 1兩, and show

that the function does not have a derivative at x ⫽ ⫺1.

58. Sketch  the  graph  of  the  function  f(x)  ⫽ 1>(x ⫺ 1),  and
show that the function does not have a derivative at x ⫽ 1.

x 

a 

49.

y 

50.

a 

y 

x 

a 

a 

x 

59. Let

x 

f 1x2 ⫽ e x2

ax ⫹ b

if x ⱕ 1
if x ⬎ 1

Find the values of a and b such that f is continuous and has
a derivative at x ⫽ 1. Sketch the graph of f.

60. Sketch the graph of the function f(x) ⫽ x 2/3. Is the function
continuous at x ⫽ 0? Does f ⬘(0) exist? Why or why not?

61. Prove  that  the  derivative  of  the  function  f(x)  ⫽ 兩 x 兩 for 

x ⫽ 0 is given by

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ e 1

⫺1

if x ⬎ 0
if x ⬍ 0

Hint: Recall the definition of the absolute value of a number.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

600

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

62. Show that if a function f is differentiable at x ⫽ a, then f

must be continuous at x ⫽ a.
Hint: Write

f 1x2 ⫺ f 1a2 ⫽ c f 1x2 ⫺ f 1a2

x ⫺ a

d1x ⫺ a2

lim
xSa

 3  f 1x2 ⫺ f 1a24 ⫽ 0

Use the Product Rule for limits and the definition of the derivative
to show that

9.3 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. a.

 
hS0

 f ¿1x2 ⫽ lim
 ⫽ lim
hS0

f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2
 3 ⫺1x ⫹ h2 2 ⫺ 21x ⫹ h2 ⫹ 34 ⫺ 1⫺x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫹ 32

h

h

 ⫽ lim
 
hS0

 ⫽ lim
 
hS0

⫺x 2 ⫺ 2xh ⫺ h2 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 2h ⫹ 3 ⫹ x 2 ⫹ 2x ⫺ 3
h1⫺2x ⫺ h ⫺ 22

h

h

 ⫽ lim
hS0

 1⫺2x ⫺ h ⫺ 22 ⫽ ⫺2x ⫺ 2

b. From the result of part (a), we see that the slope of the tan-
gent line to the graph of f at any point (x, f(x)) is given by

f ⬘1x2 ⫽ ⫺2x ⫺ 2

f ⬘102 ⫽ ⫺2

In particular, the slope of the tangent line to the graph of f
at (0, 3) is

c. The  rate  of  change  of  f when  x ⫽ 0  is  given  by 

f ⬘(0) ⫽ ⫺2, or ⫺2 units/unit change in x.

d. Using the result from part (b), we see that an equation of

the required tangent line is

 y ⫺ 3 ⫽ ⫺21x ⫺ 02
 y ⫽ ⫺2x ⫹ 3

e.

y 

y  = – x  2   – 2 x  + 3 

x 

y  =  –2 x  + 3 

2. The rate of change of the losses at any time t is given by 

f ⬘1t2
 ⫽ lim
 
hS0

 ⫽ lim
hS0

 ⫽ lim
 
hS0

 ⫽ lim
 
hS0

f 1t ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1t2
 3 ⫺1t ⫹ h2 2 ⫹ 101t ⫹ h2 ⫹ 304 ⫺ 1  ⫺t 

h

2 ⫺ 2th ⫺ h2 ⫹ 10t ⫹ 10h ⫹ 30 ⫹ t 

2 ⫹ 10t ⫹ 302
2 ⫺ 10t ⫺ 30

h

h

⫺t 
h1⫺2t ⫺ h ⫹ 102

h

 ⫽ lim

hS0 1⫺2t ⫺ h ⫹ 102

 ⫽ ⫺2t ⫹ 10

Therefore, the rate of change of the losses suffered by the
bank at the beginning of 2008 (t ⫽ 3) was
f ⬘132 ⫽ ⫺2132 ⫹ 10 ⫽ 4

In  other  words,  the  losses  were  increasing  at  the  rate  of 
$4 million/year. At the beginning of 2010 (t ⫽ 5),

f ⬘152 ⫽ ⫺2152 ⫹ 10 ⫽ 0

and we see that the growth in losses due to bad loans was
zero at this point. At the beginning of 2012 (t ⫽ 7),

f ⬘172 ⫽ ⫺2172 ⫹ 10 ⫽ ⫺4

and we conclude that the losses were decreasing at the rate
of $4 million/year.

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Graphing a Function and Its Tangent Line
We can use a graphing utility to plot the graph of a function f and the tangent line at
any point on the graph.

EXAMPLE 1 Let f(x) ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 4x.
a. Find an equation of the tangent line to the graph of f at the point (3, ⫺3).
b. Plot both the graph of f and the tangent line found in part (a) on the same set of axes.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

9.3 THE DERIVATIVE

601

Solution
a. The slope of the tangent line at any point on the graph of f is given by f ⬘(x). But

from Example 4 (page 590), we find f ⬘(x) ⫽ 2x ⫺ 4. Using this result, we see
that the slope of the required tangent line is

Finally, using the point-slope form of the equation of a line, we find that an equa-
tion of the tangent line is

f ⬘132 ⫽ 2132 ⫺ 4 ⫽ 2

 y ⫺ 1⫺32 ⫽ 21x ⫺ 32
 y ⫹ 3 ⫽ 2x ⫺ 6
 y ⫽ 2x ⫺ 9

b. Figure T1a shows the graph of f in the standard viewing window and the tangent

line of interest.

10

_10

_10

(a)

10

Plot1 Plot2 Plot3
\Y1= X^2-4X
\Y2= 2X-9
\Y3=
\Y4=
\Y5=
\Y6=
\Y7=

(b)

FIGURE T1
(a) The graph of f(x) ⫽ x2 ⫺ 4x and the
tangent line y ⫽ 2x ⫺ 9 in the standard
viewing window; (b) the TI-83/84 equa-
tion screen

Note Some graphing utilities will draw both the graph of a function f and the tangent
line to the graph of f at a specified point when the function and the specified value of
x are entered. If you use a TI-83 or TI-84 to plot the tangent line, proceed as follows:
1. Plot the graph of f in the usual manner.
2. Select the function 5:Tangent (from the Draw menu). (Press 

followed by 

2ND

DRAW

.)

3. Enter the x-coordinate of the point of tangency. In the present example, we press

the key 

3

to obtain x ⫽ 3.

4. Press 

ENTER

to obtain the desired result.

Finding the Derivative of a Function at a Given Point
The numerical derivative operation of a graphing utility can be used to give an approx-
imate value of the derivative of a function for a given value of x.

f 1x2 ⫽ 1x

EXAMPLE 2 Let 
a. Use the numerical derivative operation of a graphing utility to find the derivative

.

of f at (4, 2).

b. Find an equation of the tangent line to the graph of f at (4, 2).
c. Plot the graph of f and the tangent line on the same set of axes.

nDeriv(X^.5,X,4)
.250000002

Solution

a. Using the numerical derivative operation of a graphing utility, we find that

FIGURE T2
The TI-83/84 numerical derivative screen

(Figure T2).

(continued)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

f  ¿142 ⫽ 1

4

602

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

b. An equation of the required tangent line is

 y ⫺ 2 ⫽ 1

4  1x ⫺ 42
4  x ⫹ 1

 y ⫽ 1

c. Figure T3a shows the graph of f and the tangent line in the viewing window 

[0, 15] ⫻ [0, 5].

5

0
(a)

Plot1 Plot2 Plot3
\Y1=X^.5
\Y2=.25X+1
\Y3=
\Y4=
\Y5=
\Y6=
\Y7=

(b)

15

f 1x2 ⫽ 1x

FIGURE T3
(a) The graph of 
y ⫽ 1
gent line 
window [0, 15] ⫻ [0, 5]; (b) the 
TI-83/84 equation screen

4 x ⫹ 1

in the viewing

and the tan-

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

In Exercises 1–4, (a) find an equation of the tangent line to the
graph of f at the indicated point, and (b) plot the graph of f and
the tangent line on the same set of axes. Use a suitable viewing
window.

1. f1x2 ⫽ 2x 2 ⫹ x ⫺ 3; 12, 72

where C(t) is measured in cents/mile and t is measured in
years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to the beginning of 1991.
a. Plot  the  graph  of  C in  the  viewing  window  [0,  10]  ⫻

[35, 52].

b. What was the average cost of driving a car at the begin-

ning of 1995?

c. How fast was the average cost of driving a car changing

at the beginning of 1995?

Source: Automobile Association of America.

10. MODELING WITH DATA Annual  retail  sales  in  the  United
States from 2000 through the year 2008 (in billions of dol-
lars) are given in the following table:

Year
Sales

Year
Sales

2000
2.988

2005
3.698

2001
3.068

2006
3.882

2002
3.134

2007
4.005

2003
3.267

2008
3.959

2004
3.480

a. Let t ⫽ 0 correspond to 2000, and use QuadReg to find
a second-degree polynomial regression model based on
the given data.

b. Plot  the  graph  of  the  function  found  in  part  (a)  in  the

viewing window [0, 8] ⫻ [0, 5].

c. What were the annual retail sales in the United States in

2006 (t ⫽ 6)?

d. Approximately, how fast were the retail sales changing

in 2006 (t ⫽ 6)?

Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

2.

3.

4.

x

f 1x2 ⫽ x ⫹ 1
; 11, 22
f 1x2 ⫽ x 1/3; 18, 22
f 1x2 ⫽ 11x

; ¢4, 

1

2≤

In  Exercises  5–8,  (a)  use  the  numerical  derivative  operation  to
find the derivative of f for the given value of x (to two decimal
places  of accuracy), (b) find an equation of the tangent line to
the graph of f at the indicated point, and (c) plot the graph of f
and the tangent line on the same set of axes. Use a suitable view-
ing window.

6.

7.

8.

5. f1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫹ x ⫹ 1; x ⫽ 1; 11, 32

1

x ⫹ 1

f 1x2 ⫽ 1
f 1x2 ⫽ x2x2 ⫹ 1; x ⫽ 2; 12, 2152
12
f 1x2 ⫽

; x ⫽ 1; ¢1, 
2≤
; x ⫽ 1; ¢1, 

2≤

x2x2 ⫹ 1

9. DRIVING COSTS The average cost of owning and operating a
car in the United States from 1991 through 2001 is approx-
imated by the function

C1t2 ⫽ 0.06t 2 ⫹ 0.74t ⫹ 37.3

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 112

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

9.4

Basic Rules of Differentiation

9.4 BASIC RULES OF DIFFERENTIATION

603

Four Basic Rules
The method used in Section 9.3 for computing the derivative of a function is based on
a faithful interpretation of the definition of the derivative as the limit of a quotient. 
To find the rule for the derivative f ⬘ of a function f, we first computed the difference
quotient

f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2

h

and then evaluated its limit as h approached zero. As you have probably observed, this
method is tedious even for relatively simple functions.

The main purpose of this chapter is to derive certain rules that will simplify the

process of finding the derivative of a function. We will use the notation

d

dx  3  f 1x24

Read “d, d xof  f of x”

to mean “the derivative of f with respect to x at x.”

Rule 1: Derivative of a Constant

d

dx   1c2 ⫽ 0

(c, a constant)

The derivative of a constant function is equal to zero.

We can see this from a geometric viewpoint by recalling that the graph of a con-
stant function is a straight line parallel to the x-axis (Figure 37). Since the tangent line
to a straight line at any point on the line coincides with the straight line itself, its slope
[as given by the derivative of f(x) ⫽ c] must be zero. We can also use the definition
of the derivative to prove this result by computing

 
hS0

 f  ¿1x2   ⫽ lim
 ⫽ lim
 
hS0
 ⫽ lim
hS0

f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2
c ⫺ c

h

h

 0 ⫽ 0

y

f (x) = c

x

FIGURE 37
The slope of the tangent line to the
graph of f(x) ⫽ c, where c is a constant, is
zero.

EXAMPLE 1
a. If f(x) ⫽ 28, then

b. If f(x) ⫽ , then

p2

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ d

dx   1282 ⫽ 0

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ d

dx   1p22 ⫽ 0

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

604

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

Rule 2: The Power Rule

If n is any real number, then 

d

dx   1x n2 ⫽ nx n⫺1.

Let’s verify the Power Rule for the special case n ⫽ 2. If f(x) ⫽ x 2, then

f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2

h

 f  ¿1x2 ⫽  

d

 
hS0

dx   1x 22 ⫽ lim
 1x ⫹ h2 2 ⫺ x 2

h

 ⫽ lim
hS0

 ⫽ lim
 
hS0

x 2 ⫹ 2xh ⫹ h2 ⫺ x 2

h

2xh ⫹ h2

 ⫽ lim
 
hS0
 ⫽ lim
hS0

⫽ lim
hS0 
 12x ⫹ h2 ⫽ 2x

h

h12x ⫹ h2

h

as we set out to show.

The Power Rule for the general case is not easy to prove, and the proof, will be
omitted. However, you will be asked to prove the rule for the special case n ⫽ 3 in
Exercise 79, page 614.

EXAMPLE 2
a. If f(x) ⫽ x, then

b. If f(x) ⫽ x 8, then

c. If f(x) ⫽ x5/2, then

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ d

dx   1x2 ⫽ 1 # x 1⫺1 ⫽ x 0 ⫽ 1

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ d

dx   1x 82 ⫽ 8x 7

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ d

dx   1x 5/22 ⫽ 5

2  x 3/2

To differentiate a function whose rule involves a radical, we first rewrite the rule
using fractional powers. The resulting expression can then be differentiated by using
the Power Rule.

EXAMPLE 3 Find the derivative of the following functions:

a.

f  1x2 ⫽ 1x
1x

a. Rewriting 

Solution

b.

t 1x2 ⫽ 123 x

in the form x1/2, we obtain

(x2)

See page 39.

 f  ¿1x2 ⫽ d
 ⫽ 1
2

dx   1x 1/22
 x ⫺1/2 ⫽ 1
2x 1/2

21x
⫽ 1

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

b. Rewriting 

123 x

9.4 BASIC RULES OF DIFFERENTIATION

605

in the form x⫺1/3, we obtain

dx   1x ⫺1/32

 t¿1x2 ⫽ d
 ⫽ ⫺1
3

x ⫺4/3 ⫽ ⫺ 1
3x 4/3

In stating the remaining rules of differentiation, we assume that the functions f

and t are differentiable.

Rule 3: Derivative of a Constant Multiple of a Function

d

dx   3cf 1x24 ⫽ c  

d

dx   3  f 1x24

(c, a constant)

The derivative of a constant times a differentiable function is equal to the constant
times the derivative of the function.

This result follows from the following computations:
If t(x) ⫽ cf(x), then
 t ¿1x2 ⫽ lim

⫽ lim
 
hS0

 
hS0

t 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ t 1x2
f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2

h

cf 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ cf 1x2

h

 ⫽ c lim
 
hS0
 ⫽ cf  ¿1x2

h

EXAMPLE 4
a. If f(x) ⫽ 5x 3, then

b. If 

f1x2 ⫽ 31x

, then

Rule 4: The Sum Rule

 f  ¿1x2   ⫽ d

dx   15x 32 ⫽ 5 
 ⫽ 513x 22 ⫽ 15x 2

d

dx   1x 32

 f  ¿1x2 ⫽ d

dx   13x ⫺1/22

 ⫽ 3 a⫺1

2

x ⫺3/2b ⫽ ⫺ 3
2x 3/2

d

dx  3  f 1x2 ⫾ t 1x24 ⫽ d

dx  3  f 1x24 ⫾ d

dx  3t 1x24

The derivative of the sum (difference) of two differentiable functions is equal to the
sum (difference) of their derivatives.

This result may be extended to the sum and difference of any finite number of dif-

ferentiable functions. Let’s verify the rule for a sum of two functions.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

606

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

VIDEO

If s(x) ⫽ f(x) ⫹ t(x), then

 
hS0

 s¿1x2 ⫽ lim
 ⫽ lim
hS0

h

s1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ s1x2
 3  f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫹ t 1x ⫹ h24 ⫺ 3  f 1x2 ⫹ t 1x24
 3  f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f  1x24 ⫹ 3t1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ t 1x24
t1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ t 1x2
f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f  1x2

h

h

⫹ lim
 
hS0

h

 ⫽ lim
hS0

 ⫽ lim
 
hS0

h

 ⫽ f   ¿1x2 ⫹ t¿1x2

EXAMPLE 5 Find the derivatives of the following functions:
⫹ 5
t 

a. f1x2 ⫽ 4x 5 ⫹ 3x 4 ⫺ 8x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 3

t 1t2 ⫽ t 

b.

5

2

3

Solution

a.

 f  ¿1x2 ⫽ d
 ⫽ d

dx   14x 5 ⫹ 3x 4 ⫺ 8x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 32
dx   14x 52 ⫹ d

dx   13x 42 ⫺ d

dx   18x 22 ⫹ d

dx   1x2 ⫹ d

dx   132

 ⫽ 20x4 ⫹ 12x3 ⫺ 16x ⫹ 1

b. Here, the independent variable is t instead of x, so we differentiate with respect

to t. Thus,

 t¿1t2 ⫽ d
 ⫽ 2

dt   a1
2 ⫹ 5t ⫺3b
5  t 
5  t ⫺ 15t ⫺4 ⫽ 2

5

Rewrite 

 as t ⫺3

.

1
t 3

Rewrite t ⫺4 as 

1
t 4

.

t ⫺ 15
t 4

 ⫽ 2t 

5 ⫺ 75
5t 

4

EXAMPLE 6 Find the slope and an equation of the tangent line to the graph of

f1x2 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 1>1x

at the point (1, 3).

Solution The slope of the tangent line at any point on the graph of f is given by

 f  ¿1x2 ⫽ d
 ⫽ d

dx   a2x ⫹ 11xb
dx   12x ⫹ x ⫺1/22

x⫺3/2

 ⫽ 2 ⫺ 1
2
 ⫽ 2 ⫺ 1
2x3/2

Rewrite 

11x

 as 

1
x 1/2

⫽ x ⫺1/2

.

Use the Sum Rule.

Rewrite 

1
2

x ⫺3/2 as 

1

2x 3/2

.

In particular, the slope of the tangent line to the graph of f at (1, 3) (where x ⫽ 1) is

f ¿112 ⫽ 2 ⫺ 1

2113/22 ⫽ 2 ⫺ 1

2

⫽ 3
2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.4 BASIC RULES OF DIFFERENTIATION

607

Using the point-slope form of the equation of a line with slope  and the point 
(1, 3), we see that an equation of the tangent line is

3
2

y ⫺ 3 ⫽ 3

2  1x ⫺ 12

y ⫺ y1 ⫽ m(x ⫺ x1)

(x2)

See page 77.

or, upon simplification,

(see Figure 38).

y ⫽ 3

2  x ⫹ 3

2

FIGURE 38
The tangent line to the graph of 
f1x2 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 1
>

at (1, 3).

1x

y

12

10

8

6

4

2

y ⫽ 2x ⫹

1
x

y ⫽ x ⫹

3
2

3
2

1

2

3

x

4

APPLIED EXAMPLE 7 Conservation of a Species A group of marine biolo-
gists at the Neptune Institute of Oceanography recommended that a series 

of conservation measures be carried out over the next decade to save a certain
species of whale from extinction. After implementation of the conservation mea-
sures, the population of this species is expected to be

N1t2 ⫽ 3t 3 ⫹ 2t2 ⫺ 10t ⫹ 600

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

where N(t) denotes the population at the end of year t. Find the rate of growth of
the whale population when t ⫽ 2 and t ⫽ 6. How large will the whale population
be 8 years after implementing the conservation measures?

Solution The rate of growth of the whale population at any time t is given by

In particular, when t ⫽ 2 and t ⫽ 6, we have

N⬘1t2 ⫽ 9t2 ⫹ 4t ⫺ 10
 N¿122 ⫽ 9122 2 ⫹ 4122 ⫺ 10
 N¿162 ⫽ 9162 2 ⫹ 4162 ⫺ 10

 ⫽ 34

 ⫽ 338

Thus, the whale population’s rate of growth will be 34 whales per year after 
2 years and 338 per year after 6 years.

The whale population at the end of the eighth year will be

 N182 ⫽ 3182 3 ⫹ 2182 2 ⫺ 10182 ⫹ 600

 ⫽ 2184

The graph of the function N appears in Figure 39. Note the rapid growth of the
population in the later years, as the conservation measures begin to pay off, com-
pared with the growth in the early years.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

608

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

FIGURE 39
The whale population at the end of year t
is given by N(t).

VIDEO

y

4000

3000

2000

1000

y = N(t)

2

4

6

8

10

t (year)

APPLIED EXAMPLE 8 Altitude of a Rocket An experimental rocket lifts off
vertically. Its altitude (in feet) t seconds into flight is given by

1t ⱖ 02
a. Find an expression √ for the rocket’s velocity at any time t.
b. Compute the rocket’s velocity when t ⫽ 0, 30, 50, 64, and 70. Interpret your

s ⫽ f1t2 ⫽ ⫺t3 ⫹ 96t2 ⫹ 5

results.

c. Using the results from the solution to part (b) and the observation that at the
highest point in its trajectory the rocket’s velocity is zero, find the maximum
altitude attained by the rocket.

Solution

a. The rocket’s velocity at any time t is given by

b. The rocket’s velocity when t ⫽ 0, 30, 50, 64, and 70 is given by

√ ⫽ f ⬘1t2 ⫽ ⫺3t2 ⫹ 192t
 f  ¿102 ⫽ ⫺3102 2 ⫹ 192102 ⫽ 0
 f  ¿1302 ⫽ ⫺31302 2 ⫹ 1921302 ⫽ 3060
 f  ¿1502 ⫽ ⫺31502 2 ⫹ 1921502 ⫽ 2100
f  ¿1642 ⫽ ⫺31642 2 ⫹ 1921642 ⫽ 0
 f  ¿1702 ⫽ ⫺31702 2 ⫹ 1921702 ⫽ ⫺1260
or 0, 3060, 2100, 0, and ⫺1260 feet per second (ft/sec).

Thus, the rocket has an initial velocity of 0 ft/sec at t ⫽ 0 and accelerates

to a velocity of 3060 ft/sec at t ⫽ 30. Fifty seconds into the flight, the 
rocket’s velocity is 2100 ft/sec, which is less than the velocity at t ⫽ 30. 
This means that the rocket begins to decelerate after an initial period of accel-
eration. (Later on, we will learn how to determine the rocket’s maximum
velocity.)

The deceleration continues: The velocity is 0 ft/sec at t ⫽ 64 and 

⫺1260 ft/sec when t ⫽ 70. This result tells us that 70 seconds into flight, the
rocket is heading back to the earth with a speed of 1260 ft/sec.

c. The results of part (b) show that the rocket’s velocity is zero when t ⫽ 64. At

this instant, the rocket’s maximum altitude is

 s ⫽ f  1642 ⫽ ⫺1642 3 ⫹ 961642 2 ⫹ 5
 ⫽ 131,077

or 131,077 feet. A sketch of the graph of f appears in Figure 40.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

9.4 BASIC RULES OF DIFFERENTIATION

609

s

150,000

100,000

t
e
e
F

50,000

s ⫽ f(t)

20

40

60

80

100

Seconds

t

FIGURE 40
The rocket’s altitude t seconds into flight
is given by f(t).

You  may  have  observed  that  the  domain  of  the  function  f in  Example  8  is
restricted, for practical reasons, to the interval 
. Since the definition of the deriv-
ative of a function f at a number a requires that f be defined in an open interval con-
taining a, the derivative of f is not, strictly speaking, defined at 0. But notice that the
function f can, in fact, be defined for all values of t, and hence it makes sense to cal-
culate 
. You will encounter situations such as this throughout the book, especially
in exercises pertaining to real-world applications. The nature of the functions appear-
ing in these applications obviates the necessity to consider “one-sided” derivatives.

30, ⬁2

f ¿102

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
Refer to Example 8.
1. Use a graphing utility to plot the graph of the velocity function

√ ⫽ f ⬘1t2 ⫽ ⫺3t2 ⫹ 192t

using the viewing window [0, 120] ⫻ [⫺5000, 5000]. Then, using ZOOM and
TRACE or  the  root-finding  capability  of  your  graphing  utility,  verify  that
f ⬘(64) ⫽ 0.

2. Plot the graph of the position function of the rocket

s ⫽ f1t2 ⫽ ⫺t3 ⫹ 96t2 ⫹ 5

using  the  viewing  window  [0,  120]  ⫻ [0,  150,000].  Then,  using  ZOOM and
TRACE repeatedly, verify that the maximum altitude of the rocket is 131,077 feet.
3. Use ZOOM and TRACE or the root-finding capability of your graphing utility

to find when the rocket returns to the earth.

9.4 Self-Check Exercises

1. Find the derivative of each function using the rules of dif-

3. A certain country’s gross domestic product (GDP) (in bil-

ferentiation.

a. f1x2 ⫽ 1.5x 2 ⫹ 2x 1.5
t 1x2 ⫽ 21x ⫹ 31x

b.

2. Let f(x) ⫽ 2x 3 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫹ 2x ⫺ 1.

a. Compute f ⬘(x).
b. What is the slope of the tangent line to the graph of f

when x ⫽ 2?

c. What is the rate of change of the function f at x ⫽ 2?

lions of dollars) is described by the function

G1t2 ⫽ ⫺2t 3 ⫹ 45t 2 ⫹ 20t ⫹ 6000
where t ⫽ 0 corresponds to the beginning of 2002.
a. At what rate was the GDP changing at the beginning of
2007?  At  the  beginning  of  2009?  At  the  beginning  of
2012?

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 112

b. What was the average rate of growth of the GDP from

the beginning of 2007 to the beginning of 2012?

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 9.4 can be found on page 614.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

610

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

9.4 Concept Questions

1. State the following rules of differentiation in your own

words.
a. The Rule for Differentiating a Constant Function
b. The Power Rule
c. The Constant Multiple Rule
d. The Sum Rule

9.4 Exercises

In Exercises 1–34, find the derivative of the function f by using
the rules of differentiation.

10.

2. f1x2 ⫽ 365
4. f1x2 ⫽ x 7
6. f1x2 ⫽ x 0.8
8. f1x2 ⫽ ⫺2x 3
3  pr3

1. f1x2 ⫽ ⫺3
3. f1x2 ⫽ x 5
5. f1x2 ⫽ x 3.1
7. f1x2 ⫽ 4x 2
9. f1r2 ⫽ pr 2
11. f1x2 ⫽ 6x 1/3
f 1x2 ⫽ 31x
15. f1x2 ⫽ 7x⫺12
16. f1x2 ⫽ 0.3x⫺1.2
18. f1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫹ 1
17. f1x2 ⫽ 4x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫹ 7
19. f1x2 ⫽ ⫺x 3 ⫹ 2x 2 ⫺ 6 20. f1x2 ⫽ x 4 ⫺ 2x 2 ⫹ 5
21. f1x2 ⫽ 0.03x 2 ⫺ 0.4x ⫹ 10
22. f1x2 ⫽ 0.002x 3 ⫺ 0.05x 2 ⫹ 0.1x ⫺ 20

f 1r2   ⫽ 4
f 1x2 ⫽ 5
f 1u2   ⫽ 21u

x4/5

13.

14.

12.

4

x

23.

f 1x2 ⫽ 2x 3 ⫺ 4x 2 ⫹ 3
f 1x2 ⫽ x3 ⫹ 2x2 ⫹ x ⫺ 1
25. f1x2 ⫽ 4x 4 ⫺ 3x 5/2 ⫹ 2

24.

x

26.

f 1x2 ⫽ 5x4/3 ⫺ 2

3

x3/2 ⫹ x2 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 1

28.

f 1x2 ⫽ ⫺1

3  1x⫺3 ⫺ x62

44.

27. f1x2 ⫽ 5x⫺1 ⫹ 4x⫺2
⫹ 2
t

⫺ 3
3
t 

t 

4

29.

f 1t2 ⫽ 4
30. f 1x2 ⫽ 5

⫺ 2
x2

⫺ 1
x

⫹ 200

x3

2. If f ⬘(2) ⫽ 3 and t⬘(2) ⫽ ⫺2, find
a. h⬘(2) if h(x) ⫽ 2f(x)
b. F⬘(2) if F(x) ⫽ 3f(x) ⫺ 4t(x)

3. Suppose f and t are differentiable functions and a and b are

nonzero numbers. Find F⬘(x) if

a. F1x2 ⫽ af1x2 ⫹ bt1x2
b. F1x2 ⫽

f 1x2

a

f 1x2 ⫽ 3x ⫺ 51x
f 1x2 ⫽ 2

⫺ 3
x1/3

x2

31.

33.

32.

34.

f 1t2 ⫽ 2t 
f 1x2 ⫽ 3

x3

2 ⫹ 2t 
⫹ 41x

3

⫹ 1

35. Let f(x) ⫽ 2x 3 ⫺ 4x. Find:
b. f ⬘102
b. f ⬘1162

a. f ⬘1⫺22
a. f ⬘142

36. Let f(x) ⫽ 4x 5/4 ⫹ 2x 3/2 ⫹ x. Find:

c. f ⬘122

In Exercises 37–40, find each limit by evaluating the derivative of
a suitable function at an appropriate point.
Hint: Look at the definition of the derivative.

 11 ⫹ h2 3 ⫺ 1

h

38.

x5 ⫺ 1
x ⫺ 1

 
lim
xS1
Hint: Let h ⫽ x ⫺ 1.

37.

39.

lim
hS0

lim
 
hS0

40.

 
lim
tS0

h

312 ⫹ h2 2 ⫺ 12 ⫹ h2 ⫺ 10
1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ t2 2
t 11 ⫹ t2 2

In Exercises 41–44, find the slope and an equation of the tangent
line to the graph of the function f at the specified point.

41. f1x2 ⫽ 2x 2 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 4; 12, 62

42.

f 1x2 ⫽ ⫺5

3   x2 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 2; a⫺1, ⫺5
3b

43. f1x2 ⫽ x 4 ⫺ 3x 3 ⫹ 2x 2 ⫺ x ⫹ 1; 12, ⫺12

f 1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 11x

; a4, 

5

2b

45. Let f(x) ⫽ x 3.

a. Find the point on the graph of f where the tangent line is

horizontal.

b. Sketch  the  graph  of  f and  draw  the  horizontal  tangent 

line.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

46. Let  f(x)  ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 4x 2.  Find  the  points  on  the  graph  of  f

where the tangent line is horizontal.

47. Let f(x) ⫽ x 3 ⫹ 1.

a. Find the points on the graph of f where the slope of the

tangent line is equal to 12.

b. Find the equation(s) of the tangent line(s) of part (a).
c. Sketch the graph of f showing the tangent line(s).

48. Let 

3 x3 ⫹ x2 ⫺ 12x ⫹ 6

. Find the values of x for

b. f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 0

f 1x2 ⫽ 2

which

a. f ⬘1x2 ⫽ ⫺12
c. f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 12
f 1x2 ⫽ 1

49. Let 

4 x4 ⫺ 1

3 x3 ⫺ x2

. Find the points on the graph of

f where the slope of the tangent line is equal to
a. ⫺2x
c. 10x

b. 0

50. A  straight  line  perpendicular  to  and  passing  through  the
point of tangency of the tangent line is called the normal to
the curve at that point. Find an equation of the tangent line
and the normal to the curve y ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 1 at the point
(2, 3).

51. GROWTH OF A CANCEROUS TUMOR The volume of a spherical

cancerous tumor is given by the function

V1r2   ⫽ 4

3  pr 

3

where r is the radius of the tumor in centimeters. Find the
rate of change in the volume of the tumor with respect to
its radius when

a.

r ⫽ 2
3

  cm

b.

r ⫽ 5
4

  cm

52. VELOCITY OF BLOOD IN AN ARTERY The  velocity  (in 
centimeters/second) of blood r cm from the central axis
of an artery is given by

√1r2 ⫽ k1R2 ⫺ r 22

where k is a constant and R is the radius of the artery (see
the  accompanying  figure).  Suppose  k ⫽ 1000  and  R ⫽
0.2 cm. Find √(0.1) and √⬘(0.1), and interpret your results.

R

r

Blood vessel

53. SALES OF DIGITAL CAMERAS The worldwide shipments of dig-

ital point-and-shoot cameras are given by

N1t2 ⫽ 16.3t 0.8766

11 ⱕ t ⱕ 82

where  N(t)  is  measured  in  millions  and  t is  measured  in
years, with t ⫽ 1 corresponding to 2001.

9.4 BASIC RULES OF DIFFERENTIATION

611

a. How many digital cameras were sold in 2001 (t ⫽ 1)?
b. How fast were sales increasing in 2001?
c. What were the sales in 2005?
d. How fast did the sales grow in 2005?
Source: International Data Corp.

54. ONLINE BUYERS As  use  of  the  Internet  grows,  so  does  the
number  of  consumers  who  shop  online.  The  number  of
online buyers, as a percentage of net users, is expected to be

P1t2 ⫽ 53t 0.12

11 ⱕ t ⱕ 72

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 1 corresponding to
the beginning of 2002.
a. How many online buyers, as a percentage of net users,

were there at the beginning of 2007?

b. How  fast  was  the  number  of  online  buyers,  as  a  per-
centage of net users, changing at the beginning of 2007?

Source: Strategy Analytics.

55. MARRIED COUPLES WITH CHILDREN The percentage of fami-
lies that were married couples with children between 1970
and 2000 is approximately

P1t2   ⫽ 49.6

0.27

t 

    11 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

where t is measured in decades, with t ⫽ 1 corresponding
to 1970.
a. What percentage of families were married couples with

children in 1970? In 1980? In 1990? In 2000?

b. How fast was the percentage of families that were mar-
ried couples with children changing in 1980? In 1990?

Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

56. EFFECT OF STOPPING ON AVERAGE SPEED According  to  data
from a study, the average speed of your trip A (in miles per
hour) is related to the number of stops per mile you make
on the trip x by the equation.

A ⫽ 26.5
x0.45

Compute dA>dx for x ⫽ 0.25 and x ⫽ 2. How is the rate of

change with respect to x of the average speed of your trip
affected by the number of stops per mile?
Source: General Motors.

57. ONLINE VIDEO VIEWERS As broadband Internet grows more
popular, video services such as YouTube will continue to
expand. The number of online video viewers (in millions)
is projected to grow according to the rule

N1t2 ⫽ 52t 0.531

11 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

where t ⫽ 1 corresponds to 2003. 
a. What was the projected number of online video viewers

in 2010?

b. How  fast  was  the  projected  number  of  online  video

viewers changing in 2010?

Source: eMarketer.com.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

612

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

58. DEMAND FUNCTIONS The demand function for the Luminar

desk lamp is given by

p ⫽ f1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.1x 2 ⫺ 0.4x ⫹ 35

where x is the quantity demanded in thousands and p is the
unit price in dollars.
a. Find f ⬘(x).
b. What  is  the  rate  of  change  of  the  unit  price  when  the
quantity demanded is 10,000 units (x ⫽ 10)? What is the
unit price at that level of demand?

59. STOPPING DISTANCE OF A RACING CAR During a test by the edi-
tors of an auto magazine, the distance s (in feet) traveled by
the  MacPherson  X-2  racing  car  t seconds  after  the  brakes
were applied conformed to the rule

s ⫽ f1t2 ⫽ 120t ⫺ 15t 2

1t ⱖ 02

a. Find an expression for the car’s velocity √ at any time t.
b. What was the car’s velocity when the brakes were first

applied?

c. What was the car’s stopping distance for that particular

test?
Hint: The stopping time is found by setting √ ⫽ 0.

60. INSTANT MESSAGING ACCOUNTS Mobile  instant  messaging
(IM) is a small portion of total IM usage, but it is growing
sharply. The function

P1t2 ⫽ 0.257t2 ⫹ 0.57t ⫹ 3.9

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

gives  the  mobile  IM  accounts  as  a  percentage  of  total
enterprise IM accounts from 2006 (t ⫽ 0) through 2010
(t ⫽ 4).
a. What  percentage  of  total  enterprise  IM  accounts  were

the mobile accounts in 2008?

b. How fast was this percentage changing in 2008?
Source: The Radical Group.

61. CHILD OBESITY The  percentage  of  obese  children,  ages
12–19 years, in the United States has grown dramatically in
recent years. The percentage of obese children from 1980
through the year 2000 is approximated by the function

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 202

P1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.0105t 2 ⫹ 0.735t ⫹ 5
where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
the beginning of 1980.
a. What  percentage  of  children  were  obese  at  the  begin-
ning of 1980? At the beginning of 1990? At the begin-
ning of the year 2000?

b. How fast was the percentage of obese children changing

at the beginning of 1985? At the beginning of 1990?

Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

62. SPENDING ON MEDICARE Based  on  the  current  eligibility
requirement,  a  study  conducted  in  2004  showed  that 
federal  spending  on  entitlement  programs,  particularly
Medicare, would grow enormously in the future. The study
predicted that spending on Medicare, as a percentage of the
gross domestic product (GDP), will be

P1t2 ⫽ 0.27t 2 ⫹ 1.4t ⫹ 2.2

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 52

percent  in  year  t,  where  t is  measured  in  decades,  with 
t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 2000.
a. How fast was the spending on Medicare, as a percent-
age of the GDP, growing in 2010? How fast will it be
growing in 2020?

b. What was the predicted spending on Medicare in 2010?

What will it be in 2020?

Source: Congressional Budget Office.

63. FISHERIES The  total  groundfish  population  on  Georges
Bank in New England between 1989 and 1999 is approxi-
mated by the function

f1t2 ⫽ 5.303t 2 ⫺ 53.977t ⫹ 253.8

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

where f (t) is measured in thousands of metric tons and t
in  years,  with  t ⫽ 0  corresponding  to  the  beginning  of
1989.
a. What was the rate of change of the groundfish popu-
lation at the beginning of 1994? At the beginning of
1996?

b. Fishing  restrictions  were  imposed  on  Dec.  7,  1994.

Were the conservation measures effective?
Source: New England Fishery Management Council.

64. WORKER EFFICIENCY An  efficiency  study  conducted  for
Elektra Electronics showed that the number of Space Com-
mander  walkie-talkies  assembled  by  the  average  worker
during the morning shift t hr after starting work at 8 A.M. is
given by

N1t2 ⫽ ⫺t 3 ⫹ 6t 2 ⫹ 15t

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

a. Find the rate at which the average worker will be assem-

bling walkie-talkies t hr after starting work.

b. At  what  rate  will  the  average  worker  be  assembling

walkie-talkies at 10 A.M.? At 11 A.M.?

c. How  many  walkie-talkies  will  the  average  worker

assemble between 10 A.M. and 11 A.M.?

65. CONSUMER PRICE INDEX An  economy’s  consumer  price

index (CPI) is described by the function

I1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.2t 3 ⫹ 3t 2 ⫹ 100
where t ⫽ 0 corresponds to 2002.
a. At what rate was the CPI changing in 2007? In 2009? In

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

2012?

b. What was the average rate of increase in the CPI over

the period from 2007 to 2012?

66. EFFECT OF ADVERTISING ON SALES The relationship between
the amount of money x that Cannon Precision Instruments
spends on advertising and the company’s total sales S(x) is
given by the function

S1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.002x 3 ⫹ 0.6x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 500

10 ⱕ x ⱕ 2002

where x is measured in thousands of dollars. Find the rate
of change of the sales with respect to the amount of money
spent on advertising. Are Cannon’s total sales increasing at
a faster rate when the amount of money spent on advertis-
ing is (a) $100,000 or (b) $150,000?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

67. SUPPLY FUNCTIONS The supply function for a certain make

of satellite radio is given by

p ⫽ f1x2 ⫽ 0.0001x 5/4 ⫹ 10

where x is the quantity supplied and p is the unit price in
dollars.
a. Find f ⬘(x).
b. What is the rate of change of the unit price if the quan-

tity supplied is 10,000 satellite radios?

68. POPULATION GROWTH A study prepared for a Sunbelt town’s
chamber of commerce projected that the town’s population
in the next 3 years will grow according to the rule

P1t2 ⫽ 50,000 ⫹ 30t 3/2 ⫹ 20t

where P(t) denotes the population t months from now. How
fast  will  the  population  be  increasing  9  months  and  16
months from now?

69. AVERAGE SPEED OF A VEHICLE ON A HIGHWAY The average speed
of a vehicle on a stretch of Route 134 between 6  A.M. and 
10 A.M. on a typical weekday is approximated by the function

f 1t2 ⫽ 20t ⫺ 401t ⫹ 50    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

where f(t) is measured in miles per hour and t is measured
in hours, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 6 A.M.
a. Compute f ⬘(t).
b. What is the average speed of a vehicle on that stretch of

Route 134 at 6 A.M.? At 7 A.M.? At 8 A.M.?

c. How fast is the average speed of a vehicle on that stretch
of Route 134 changing at 6:30 A.M.? At 7 A.M.? At 8 A.M.?
70. CURBING POPULATION GROWTH Five  years  ago,  the  govern-
ment of a Pacific Island country launched an extensive pro-
paganda campaign aimed toward curbing the country’s pop-
ulation  growth.  According  to  the  Census  Department,  the
population (measured in thousands of people) for the follow-
ing 4 years was

P1t2   ⫽ ⫺1
3  t 

3 ⫹ 64t ⫹ 3000

where  t is  measured  in  years  and  t ⫽ 0  corresponds  to 
the  start  of  the  campaign.  Find  the  rate  of  change  of  the
population at the end of years 1, 2, 3, and 4. Was the plan
working?

71. CONSERVATION OF SPECIES A certain species of turtle faces
extinction because dealers collect truckloads of turtle eggs
to be sold as aphrodisiacs. After severe conservation mea-
sures are implemented, it is hoped that the turtle population
will grow according to the rule

N1t2 ⫽ 2t 3 ⫹ 3t 2 ⫺ 4t ⫹ 1000

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

where N(t) denotes the population at the end of year t. Find
the rate of growth of the turtle population when t ⫽ 2 and 
t ⫽ 8. What will be the population 10 years after the con-
servation measures are implemented?

72. FLIGHT OF A MODEL ROCKET The altitude (in feet) of a model

rocket t sec into a trial flight is given by

s ⫽ f1t2 ⫽ ⫺2t 3 ⫹ 12t 2 ⫹ 5

1t ⱖ 02

9.4 BASIC RULES OF DIFFERENTIATION

613

a. Find an expression √ for the rocket’s velocity at any time t.
b. Compute the rocket’s vertical velocity when t ⫽ 0, 2, 4,

and 6. Interpret your results.

c. Using the results from the solution to part (b), find the

maximum altitude attained by the rocket.
Hint: At its highest point, the velocity of the rocket is zero.

73. OBESITY IN AMERICA The body mass index (BMI) measures
body weight in relation to height. A BMI of 25 to 29.9 is
considered overweight, a BMI of 30 or more is considered
obese,  and  a  BMI  of  40  or  more  is  morbidly  obese.  The
percentage of the U.S. population that is obese is approxi-
mated by the function

P1t2 ⫽ 0.0004t 3 ⫹ 0.0036t 2 ⫹ 0.8t ⫹ 12
10 ⱕ t ⱕ 132
where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
the beginning of 1991.
a. What  percentage  of  the  U.S.  population  was  deemed
obese at the beginning of 1991? At the beginning of 2004?
b. How fast was the percentage of the U.S. population that
is deemed obese changing at the beginning of 1991? At
the beginning of 2004?

(Note: A  formula  for  calculating  the  BMI  of  a  person  is
given in Exercise 33, page 853.)
Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

74. HEALTH-CARE SPENDING Despite  efforts  at  cost  contain-
ment, the cost of the Medicare program is increasing. Two
major reasons for this increase are an aging population and
extensive use by physicians of new technologies. Based on
data  from  the  Health  Care  Financing  Administration  and
the U.S. Census Bureau, health-care spending through the
year 2000 may be approximated by the function

S1t2 ⫽ 0.02836t3 ⫺ 0.05167t2 ⫹ 9.60881t ⫹ 41.9
10 ⱕ t ⱕ 352

where  S(t)  is  the  spending  in  billions  of  dollars  and  t is
measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to the begin-
ning of 1965.
a. Find an expression for the rate of change of health-care

spending at any time t.

b. How  fast  was  health-care  spending  changing  at  the

beginning of 1980? At the beginning of 2000?

c. What  was  the  amount  of  health-care  spending  at  the

beginning of 1980? At the beginning of 2000?

Source: Health Care Financing Administration and U.S. Census Bureau.
75. AGING POPULATION The population age 65 and over (in mil-
lions)  of  developed  countries  from  2005  through  2034  is
projected to be

f1t2 ⫽ 3.567t ⫹ 175.2

15 ⱕ t ⱕ 352

where t is measured in years and t ⫽ 5 corresponds to 2005.
On the other hand, the population age 65 and over of under-
developed/emerging countries over the same period is pro-
jected to be

t1t2 ⫽ 0.46t2 ⫹ 0.16t ⫹ 287.8
15 ⱕ t ⱕ 352
a. What does the function D ⫽ t ⫹ f represent?
b. Find D⬘ and D⬘(10), and interpret your results.
Sources: U.S. Census Bureau; United Nations.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

614

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

76. SHORTAGE OF NURSES The  projected  number  of  nurses  (in

millions) from 2000 through 2015 is given by

N1t2 ⫽ e 1.9

⫺0.0004t2 ⫹ 0.038t ⫹ 1.72

if 0 ⱕ t ⬍ 5
if 5 ⱕ t ⱕ 15

where t ⫽ 0 corresponds to 2000. The projected number of
nursing jobs (in millions) over the same period is

J1t2 ⫽ e ⫺0.0002t 2 ⫹ 0.032t ⫹ 2

⫺0.0016t 2 ⫹ 0.12t ⫹ 1.26

if 0 ⱕ t ⬍ 10
if 10 ⱕ t ⱕ 15

a. Find the rule for the function G ⫽ J ⫺ N giving the gap
between the supply and the demand of nurses from 2000
through 2015.

b. How  fast  was  the  gap  between  the  supply  and  the

demand of nurses changing in 2008? In 2012?
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

9.4 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

In Exercises 77 and 78, determine whether the statement is true
or  false.  If  it  is  true,  explain  why  it  is  true.  If  it  is  false,  give  an
example to show why it is false.
77. If f and t are differentiable, then

d

dx   32 f 1x2 ⫺ 5t 1x24 ⫽ 2 f ¿1x2 ⫺ 5t ¿1x2

78. If f(x) ⫽ p x, then f ⬘(x) ⫽ xp x⫺1.

79. Prove the Power Rule (Rule 2) for the special case n ⫽ 3.

Hint: Compute 

hS0  c1x ⫹ h2 3 ⫺ x 3

lim

h

d

.

 f ¿1x2 ⫽ d

dx   11.5x 22 ⫹ d

dx   12x 1.52
 ⫽ 11.5212x2 ⫹ 12211.5x0.52
 ⫽ 3x ⫹ 3x 0.5

3. a. The  rate  at  which  the  GDP  was  changing  at  any  time 

t (0 ⬍ t ⬍ 11) is given by

G⬘1t2 ⫽ ⫺6t 2 ⫹ 90t ⫹ 20

1. a.

b.

 t ¿1x2   ⫽ d

dx   12x 1/22 ⫹ d

dx   13x ⫺1/22
2  x⫺1/2b ⫹ 132 a⫺1

 ⫽ 122 a1
 ⫽ x ⫺1/2 ⫺ 3
2

 x ⫺3/2 ⫽ 1
2

2. a.

 f  ¿1x2 ⫽ d

dx   12x 32 ⫺ d

dx   13x 22 ⫹ d
 ⫽ 12213x22 ⫺ 13212x2 ⫹ 2
 ⫽ 6x 2 ⫺ 6x ⫹ 2

2  x⫺3/2b
 x ⫺3/212x ⫺ 32 ⫽ 2x ⫺ 3
2x 3/2  
dx   12x2 ⫺ d

dx   112

In particular, the rates of change of the GDP at the begin-
ning of the years 2007 (t ⫽ 5), 2009 (t ⫽ 7), and 2012 
(t ⫽ 10) are given by
G⬘152 ⫽ 320

G⬘1102 ⫽ 320

G⬘172 ⫽ 356

respectively—that  is,  by  $320  billion/year,  $356  bil-
lion/year, and $320 billion/year, respectively.

b. The average rate of growth of the GDP over the period
from the beginning of 2007 (t ⫽ 5) to the beginning of
2012 (t ⫽ 10) is given by

G1102 ⫺ G152

 

10 ⫺ 5

⫽ 3 ⫺21102 3 ⫹ 451102 2 ⫹ 201102 ⫹ 60004
 ⫽ ⫺ 3 ⫺2152 3 ⫹ 45152 2 ⫹ 20152 ⫹ 60004
 ⫽ 8700 ⫺ 6975

5

5

5

or $345 billion/year.

b. The  slope  of  the  tangent  line  to  the  graph  of  f when 

x ⫽ 2 is given by 

f ⬘122 ⫽ 6122 2 ⫺ 6122 ⫹ 2 ⫽ 14

c. The rate of change of f at x ⫽ 2 is given by f ⬘(2). Using
the  results  of  part  (b),  we  see  that  the  required  rate  of
change is 14 units/unit change in x.

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Finding the Rate of Change of a Function
We can use the numerical derivative operation of a graphing utility to obtain the value
of the derivative at a given value of x. Since the derivative of a function f measures
the rate of change of the function with respect to x, the numerical derivative operation
can be used to answer questions pertaining to the rate of change of one quantity y with
respect to another quantity x, where y ⫽ f(x), for a specific value of x.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.4 BASIC RULES OF DIFFERENTIATION

615

3 ⫹ 21t.

EXAMPLE 1 Let 
a. Use the numerical derivative operation of a graphing utility to find how fast y is

y ⫽ 3t 

changing with respect to t when t ⫽ 1.

nDeriv((3X^3+2X^
.5),X,1)
      10.00000313

b. Verify the result of part (a), using the rules of differentiation of this section.

FIGURE T1
The TI-83/84 numerical derivative screen
for computing f ⬘( 1 )

Solution

a. Write 

3 ⫹ 21t

f 1t2 ⫽ 3t 

. Using the numerical derivative operation of a graphing 

utility, we find that the rate of change of y with respect to t when t ⫽ 1 is given
by f ⬘(1) ⫽ 10 (Figure T1).
b. Here, f(t) ⫽ 3t3 ⫹ 2t 1/2 and
f  ¿1t2 ⫽ 9t 

2  t⫺1/2b ⫽ 9t 

2 ⫹ 2 a1

2 ⫹ 11t

Using this result, we see that when t ⫽ 1, y is changing at the rate of

f  ¿112 ⫽ 91122 ⫹ 111

⫽ 10

units per unit change in t, as obtained earlier.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 2 Fuel Economy of Cars According to data obtained
from the U.S. Department of Energy and the Shell Development Company, 
a typical car’s fuel economy depends on the speed it is driven and is approximated
by the function

f(x) ⫽ 0.00000310315x 4 ⫺ 0.000455174x 3

⫹ 0.00287869x 2 ⫹ 1.25986x

(0 ⱕ x ⱕ 75)

50

0
FIGURE T2
The graph of the function f on the interval
[0, 75]

75

where  x is  measured  in  miles  per  hour  and  f(x)  is  measured  in  miles  per  gallon
(mpg).
a. Use a graphing utility to graph the function f on the interval [0, 75].
b. Find the rate of change of f when x ⫽ 20 and when x ⫽ 50.
c. Interpret your results.
Source: U.S. Department of Energy and the Shell Development Company.

Solution

a. The graph is shown in Figure T2.
b. Using the numerical derivative operation of a graphing utility, we see that 

f ⬘(20) ⫽ 0.9280996. The rate of change of f when x ⫽ 50 is given by 
f ⬘(50) ⫽ ⫺0.3145009995. (See Figure T3a and T3b.)

nDeriv(.0000031
0315X^4-.0004551
74X^3+.00287869X
^2+1.25986X,X,20)

         .9280996

nDeriv(.0000031
0315X^4-.0004551
74X^3+.00287869X
^2+1.25986X,X,5
0)

  -.3145009995

FIGURE T3
The TI-83/84 numerical derivative screen
for computing (a) f⬘(20) and (b) f⬘(50)

(a)

(b)

c. The results of part (b) tell us that when a typical car is being driven at 20 mph,

its fuel economy increases at the rate of approximately 0.9 mpg per 1 mph
increase in its speed. At a speed of 50 mph, its fuel economy decreases at the
rate of approximately 0.3 mpg per 1 mph increase in its speed.

(continued)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

616

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

In Exercises 1–6, use the numerical derivative operation to find
the rate of change of f at the given value of x. Give your answer
accurate to four decimal places.

1. f1x2 ⫽ 4x 5 ⫺ 3x 3 ⫹ 2x 2 ⫹ 1; x ⫽ 0.5
2. f1x2 ⫽ ⫺x 5 ⫹ 4x 2 ⫹ 3; x ⫽ 0.4
f 1x2 ⫽ x ⫺ 21x; x ⫽ 3
f 1x2 ⫽

1x ⫺ 1

; x ⫽ 2

x

3.

4.

5. f1x2 ⫽ x 1/2 ⫺ x 1/3; x ⫽ 1.2
6. f1x2 ⫽ 2x 5/4 ⫹ x; x ⫽ 2

7. CARBON MONOXIDE IN THE ATMOSPHERE The projected aver-
age global atmospheric concentration of carbon monoxide
is approximated by the function

f1t2 ⫽ 0.881443t 4 ⫺ 1.45533t 3 ⫹ 0.695876t 2

⫹ 2.87801t ⫹ 293

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

where t is measured in 40-year intervals, with t ⫽ 0 corre-
sponding to the beginning of 1860, and f(t) is measured in
parts per million by volume.
a. Plot  the  graph  of  f in  the  viewing  window  [0,  4]  ⫻

[280, 400].

b. Use a graphing utility to estimate how fast the projected
average  global  atmospheric  concentration  of  carbon
monoxide was changing at the beginning of 1900 (t ⫽ 1)
and at the beginning of 2000 (t ⫽ 3.5).

Source: Meadows et al., Beyond the Limits.

8. SPREAD OF HIV The  estimated  number  of  children  newly
infected with HIV through mother-to-child contact world-
wide is given by

f1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.2083t3 ⫹ 3.0357t2 ⫹ 44.0476t ⫹ 200.2857
10 ⱕ t ⱕ 122

where f(t) is measured in thousands and t is measured in
years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to the beginning of 1990.
a. Plot  the  graph  of  f in  the  viewing  window  [0,  12]  ⫻

[0, 800].

b. How fast was the estimated number of children newly
infected  with  HIV  through  mother-to-child  contact
worldwide increasing at the beginning of the year 2000?

Source: United Nations.

9. MODELING WITH DATA A hedge fund is a lightly regulated
pool of professionally managed money. The assets (in bil-
lions of dollars) of hedge funds from the beginning of 1999
(t ⫽ 0) through the beginning of 2004 are given in the fol-
lowing table:

Year
Assets ($ billions)

1999
472

2000
517

2001
594

2002
650

2003
817

2004
950

a. Use CubicReg to find a third-degree polynomial func-
tion for the data, letting t ⫽ 0 correspond to the begin-
ning of 1999.

b. Plot the graph of the function found in part (a).
c. Use the numerical derivative capability of your graph-
ing utility to find the rate at which the assets of hedge
funds were increasing at the beginning of 2000 and the
beginning of 2003.

Sources: Hennessee Group; Institutional Investor.

10. MODELING WITH DATA The number of people (in millions)
enrolled in HMOs from 1994 through 2002 is given in the
following table:

Year
People 45.4

1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002
67.0 76.4 81.3 80.9 80.0 74.2

50.6 58.7

a. Use QuartReg to find a fourth-degree polynomial regres-

sion model for this data. Let t ⫽ 0 correspond to 1994.

b. Use  the  model  to  estimate  the  number  of  people
enrolled in HMOs in 2000. How does this number com-
pare with the actual number?

c. How fast was the number of people receiving their care

in an HMO changing in 2001?

Source: Group Health Association of America.

9.5

The Product and Quotient Rules; Higher-Order Derivatives

In this section, we study two more rules of differentiation: the Product Rule and the
Quotient Rule.

The Product Rule
The derivative of the product of two differentiable functions is given by the following rule:

Rule 5: The Product Rule

d
dx

 3   f 1x2t 1x24 ⫽ f 1x2t¿1x2 ⫹ t 1x2 f  ¿1x2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.5 THE PRODUCT AND QUOTIENT RULES; HIGHER-ORDER DERIVATIVES

617

The derivative of the product of two functions is the first function times the derivative
of the second plus the second function times the derivative of the first.

The Product Rule may be extended to the case involving the product of any finite
number of functions (see Exercise 83, page 628). We prove the Product Rule at the
end of this section.

The derivative of the product of two functions is not given by the product of the
derivatives of the functions; that is, in general,

and 

d
dx

 3   f  1x2t 1x24 ⫽ f  ¿1x2t¿1x2
t1x2 ⫽ 2x 2

f 1x2 ⫽ x
 3 f1x2t1x24 ⫽ d
 3x12x 224 ⫽ d
f ¿1x2t¿1x2 ⫽ 11214x2 ⫽ 4x

. Then

. So

dx

dx

d
dx

 12x 32 ⫽ 6x 2

For example, if 

On the other hand, 

d
dx

 3 f1x2t1x24 ⫽ f ¿1x2t¿1x2

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 1 Find the derivative of the function

f1x2 ⫽ 12x 2 ⫺ 121x 3 ⫹ 32

Solution By the Product Rule,

 f  ¿1x2 ⫽ 12x 2 ⫺ 12  

d

dx   1x 3 ⫹ 32 ⫹ 1x 3 ⫹ 32  

 ⫽ 12x 2 ⫺ 1213x 22 ⫹ 1x 3 ⫹ 3214x2
 ⫽ 6x 4 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫹ 4x 4 ⫹ 12x
 ⫽ 10x 4 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫹ 12x
 ⫽ x110x 3 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 122

Factor out x.

Combine like terms.

d

dx   12x 2 ⫺ 12

(x2)

See page 12.

EXAMPLE 2 Differentiate (that is, find the derivative of) the function

f 1x2 ⫽ x311x ⫹ 12
f1x2 ⫽ x 31x1/2 ⫹ 12

d

dx   1x 1/2 ⫹ 12 ⫹ 1x 1/2 ⫹ 12   
2  x ⫺1/2b ⫹ 1x 1/2 ⫹ 1213x 22

d
dx

 x 3

 ⫽ x 3 a 1
 ⫽ 1

2  x 5/2 ⫹ 3x 5/2 ⫹ 3x 2
2  x 5/2 ⫹ 3x 2

 ⫽ 7

Solution First, we express the function in exponential form, obtaining

By the Product Rule,

 f  ¿1x2 ⫽ x 3 

 

Note We can also solve the problem by first expanding the product before differen-
tiating f. Examples for which this is not possible will be considered in Section 9.6,
where the true value of the Product Rule will be appreciated.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

618

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

The Quotient Rule
The derivative of the quotient of two differentiable functions is given by the follow-
ing rule:

Rule 6: The Quotient Rule

d
dx

 c f 1x2
t 1x2d ⫽

t 1x2  f  ¿1x2 ⫺ f 1x2t¿1x2

3t 1x24 2

    1t 1x2 ⫽ 02

As an aid to remembering this expression, observe that it has the following form:

d
dx

 c f 1x2
t 1x2d

⫽  

1Denominator2 aDerivative of

numerator b ⫺ 1Numerator2 aDerivative of
denominator b
1Square of denominator2

For a proof of the Quotient Rule, see Exercise 84, page 628.

The derivative of a quotient is not equal to the quotient of the derivatives; 
that is,

d
dx

 cf 1x2
t 1x2d ⫽

f  ¿1x2
t¿1x2
For example, if f(x) ⫽ x3 and t(x) ⫽ x2, then
 ax3
x2b ⫽ d

 cf 1x2
t 1x2d ⫽ d

d
dx

dx

dx  1x2 ⫽ 1

which is not equal to

f  ¿1x2
t¿1x2 ⫽

d

dx   1x 32
dx   1x 22

d

⫽ 3x 2
2x

⫽ 3
2  x

EXAMPLE 3 Find f ⬘1x2 if 

f 1x2 ⫽ x

2x ⫺ 4

.

Solution Using the Quotient Rule, we obtain

 f  ¿1x2 ⫽

d

12x ⫺ 42  

dx   1x2 ⫺ x  
12x ⫺ 42 2
 ⫽ 12x ⫺ 42112 ⫺ x122
12x ⫺ 42 2
 ⫽ 2x ⫺ 4 ⫺ 2x
12x ⫺ 42 2

⫽ ⫺

d

dx   12x ⫺ 42

4

12x ⫺ 42 2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.5 THE PRODUCT AND QUOTIENT RULES; HIGHER-ORDER DERIVATIVES

619

EXAMPLE 4 Find f ⬘1x2 if 

f 1x2 ⫽ x2 ⫹ 1

x2 ⫺ 1

.

Solution By the Quotient Rule,

1x 2 ⫺ 12  

d

dx   1x 2 ⫹ 12 ⫺ 1x 2 ⫹ 12  

d

dx   1x 2 ⫺ 12

 f  ¿1x2 ⫽

1x 2 ⫺ 12 2
 ⫽ 1x 2 ⫺ 1212x2 ⫺ 1x 2 ⫹ 1212x2
1x 2 ⫺ 12 2
 ⫽ 2x 3 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 2x 3 ⫺ 2x

1x 2 ⫺ 12 2

1x

.

x2 ⫹ 1

 ⫽ ⫺ 4x

1x 2 ⫺ 12 2
EXAMPLE 5 Find h⬘1x2 if 
h 1x2 ⫽
Solution Rewrite h1x2 in the form 
1x 2 ⫹ 12  

 h¿1x2   ⫽

. By the Quotient Rule, we find

d

x2 ⫹ 1

h 1x2 ⫽ x1/2
dx   1x 1/22 ⫺ x 1/2
1x 2 ⫹ 12 2

d

dx   1x 2 ⫹ 12

  

1

 ⫽ 1x2 ⫹ 1211

2 x⫺1/22 ⫺ x1/212x2
1x2 ⫹ 12 2
2 x⫺1/21x2 ⫹ 1 ⫺ 4x22
 ⫽
1x2 ⫹ 12 2
 ⫽ 1 ⫺ 3x2
21x1x2 ⫹ 12 2

Factor out 
from the numerator.

2  x ⫺1/2
1

(x2)

See page 10.

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 6 Rate of Change of DVD Sales The annual sales (in
millions of dollars per year) of a DVD recording of a hit movie t years 

from the date of release is given by

S1t2 ⫽ 5t

t 

2 ⫹ 1

a. Find the rate at which the annual sales are changing at time t.
b. How fast are the annual sales changing at the time the DVDs are released 

(t ⫽ 0)? Two years from the date of release?

Solution
a. The rate at which the annual sales are changing at time t is given by S⬘(t).

Using the Quotient Rule, we obtain

t

t 

t 

dt

d
dt

 c 5t
 S ¿1t2 ⫽ d
2 ⫹ 1d ⫽ 5  
 c
2 ⫹ 12112 ⫺ t 12t2
 ⫽ 5 c1t 
 ⫽ 5 ct 

1t 
2 ⫹ 12 2
2 ⫹ 1 ⫺ 2t 
2
d ⫽
2 ⫹ 12 2
1t 

2 ⫹ 1d
d
22
511 ⫺ t 
1t 
2 ⫹ 12 2

(x2)

See page 22.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

620

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

b. The rate at which the annual sales are changing at the time the DVDs are

released is given by

S ¿102 ⫽

511 ⫺ 02
10 ⫹ 12 2

⫽ 5

That is, they are increasing at the rate of $5 million per year per year.

Two years from the date of release, the annual sales are changing at the

rate of

S ¿122 ⫽

511 ⫺ 42
14 ⫹ 12 2

⫽ ⫺3
5

⫽ ⫺0.6

That is, they are decreasing at the rate of $600,000 per year per year.

The graph of the function S is shown in Figure 41.

S (t)

r
a
e
y
/
s
r
a
l
l
o
d

 
f
o

 
s
n
o
i
l
l
i

M

3

2

1

FIGURE 41
After a spectacular rise, the annual sales
begin to taper off.

2

4

6

Years

8

10

t

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
Refer to Example 6.
1. Use a graphing utility to plot the graph of the function S, using the viewing

window [0, 10] ⫻ [0, 3].

2. Use TRACE and ZOOM to determine the coordinates of the highest point on the

graph of S in the interval [0, 10]. Interpret your results.

Explore & Discuss
Suppose the revenue of a company is given by R(x) ⫽ xp(x), where x is the number of units
of the product sold at a unit price of p(x) dollars.

1. Compute R⬘(x) and explain, in words, the relationship between R⬘(x) and p(x) and/or its

derivative.

2. What can you say about R⬘(x) if p(x) is constant? Is this expected?

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 7 Oxygen-Restoration Rate in a Pond When organic
waste is dumped into a pond, the oxidation process that takes place 

reduces the pond’s oxygen content. However, given time, nature will restore the
oxygen content to its natural level. Suppose the oxygen content t days after
organic waste has been dumped into the pond is given by

f 1t2 ⫽ 100 ct 

t 

2 ⫹ 10t ⫹ 100

2 ⫹ 20t ⫹ 100d    10 ⬍ t ⬍ ⬁2

percent of its normal level.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

9.5 THE PRODUCT AND QUOTIENT RULES; HIGHER-ORDER DERIVATIVES

621

a. Derive a general expression that gives the rate of change of the pond’s oxygen

level at any time t.

b. How fast is the pond’s oxygen content changing 1 day, 10 days, and 20 days

after the organic waste has been dumped?

Solution

a. The rate of change of the pond’s oxygen level at any time t is given by the

derivative of the function f. Thus, the required expression is

 f  ¿1t2 ⫽ 100  

d

dt   ct 
1t 

2 ⫹ 10t ⫹ 100
t 

2 ⫹ 20t ⫹ 100d
2 ⫹ 20t ⫹ 1002  

d

dt   1t 

2 ⫹ 10t ⫹ 1002 ⫺ 1t 

2 ⫹ 10t ⫹ 1002  

1t 
2 ⫹ 20t ⫹ 1002 2
2 ⫹ 10t ⫹ 100212t ⫹ 202
2 ⫹ 20t ⫹ 100212t ⫹ 102 ⫺ 1t 

d

dt   1t 

2 ⫹ 20t ⫹ 1002

§

 ⫽ 100 £
 ⫽ 100 c1t 
 ⫽ 100 c2t 
 ⫽ 100 c

1t 
2 ⫹ 20t ⫹ 1002 2
2 ⫹ 200t ⫹ 200t ⫹ 1000 ⫺ 2t 
1t 

3 ⫺ 20t 
2 ⫹ 20t ⫹ 1002 2

Combine like terms in the numerator.

3 ⫹ 10t 

2 ⫹ 40t 

10t 

2 ⫺ 1000

2 ⫹ 20t ⫹ 1002 2d

1t 

d
2 ⫺ 20t 

(x2)

See page 22.

2 ⫺ 200t ⫺ 200t ⫺ 2000

d

b. The rate at which the pond’s oxygen content is changing 1 day after the

organic waste has been dumped is given by

f  ¿112 ⫽ 100 c

10 ⫺ 1000

11 ⫹ 20 ⫹ 1002 2d ⬇ ⫺6.76

That is, it is dropping at the rate of 6.8% per day. After 10 days, the rate is

f  ¿1102 ⫽ 100 c

101102 2 ⫺ 1000
1102 ⫹ 201102 ⫹ 1002 2d ⫽ 0

That is, it is neither increasing nor decreasing. After 20 days, the rate is

f  ¿1202 ⫽ 100 c

101202 2 ⫺ 1000
1202 ⫹ 201202 ⫹ 1002 2d ⬇ 0.37

That is, the oxygen content is increasing at the rate of 0.37% per day, and the
restoration process has indeed begun.

Higher-Order Derivatives
The derivative f ⬘ of a function f is also a function. As such, the differentiability of f ⬘
may be considered. Thus, the function f ⬘ has a derivative f ⬙ at a point x in the domain
of f ⬘ if the limit of the quotient

f  ¿1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f  ¿1x2

h

exists as h approaches zero. In other words, it is the derivative of the first derivative.
The  function  f ⬙ obtained  in  this  manner  is  called  the  second  derivative  of
the  function  f, just  as  the  derivative  f ⬘ of  f is  often  called  the  first  derivative 
of  f.  Continuing  in  this  fashion,  we  are  led  to  considering  the  third,  fourth,  and 

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

622

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

higher-order derivatives of f whenever they exist. Notations for the first, second, third,
and, in general, nth derivatives of a function f at a point x are

or

f ⬘1x2, f ⬙1x2, f ⵮1x2, . . . , f (n)1x2
D1f1x2, D2f1x2, D3f1x2, . . . , Dnf1x2

If f is written in the form y ⫽ f(x), then the notations for its derivatives are

y¿, y–, y‡, . . . , y1n2
dy
dx

3y
d 
dx3, . . . , 

2y
d 
2, 
dx 

, 

dny
n
dx 

or

D1y, D2y, D3y, . . . , Dny

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 8 Find the derivatives of all orders of the polynomial function

f1x2 ⫽ x 5 ⫺ 3x 4 ⫹ 4x 3 ⫺ 2x 2 ⫹ x ⫺ 8

Solution We have

 f  ¿1x2 ⫽ 5x 4 ⫺ 12x 3 ⫹ 12x 2 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 1
 f  –1x2 ⫽ d
 f  ‡1x2 ⫽ d
 f   142 1x2 ⫽ d
 f   152 1x2 ⫽ d

dx    f  ¿1x2 ⫽ 20x 3 ⫺ 36x 2 ⫹ 24x ⫺ 4
dx    f  –1x2 ⫽ 60x 
dx    f  ‡1x2 ⫽ 120x ⫺ 72
dx    f   142 1x2 ⫽ 120

2 ⫺ 72x ⫹ 24

and

f (n)1x2 ⫽ 0 for n ⬎ 5

EXAMPLE 9 Find the third derivative of the function f defined by y ⫽ x 2/3. What is
its domain?

Solution We have

 y¿ ⫽ 2
3  x⫺1/3
3b a⫺1
 y– ⫽ a 2

3b  x⫺4/3 ⫽ ⫺2

9

x⫺4/3

so the required derivative is

y‡ ⫽ a⫺2

9b a⫺4

3b  x⫺7/3 ⫽ 8

27

 x⫺7/3  ⫽ 8
27x7/3

y

4

2

– 4  

– 2

x

2

4

FIGURE 42
The graph of the function y ⫽ x2/3

The common domain of the functions f ⬘, f ⬙, and f ⵮ is the set of all real numbers
except x ⫽ 0. The domain of y ⫽ x 2/3 is the set of all real numbers. The graph of the
function y ⫽ x 2/3 appears in Figure 42.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

9.5 THE PRODUCT AND QUOTIENT RULES; HIGHER-ORDER DERIVATIVES

623

Note Always simplify an expression before differentiating it to obtain the next order
derivative.

Just as the derivative of a function f at a point x measures the rate of change of the
function f at that point, the second derivative of f (the derivative of f ⬘) measures the
rate of change of the derivative f ⬘ of the function f. The third derivative of the func-
tion f, f ⵮, measures the rate of change of f ⬙, and so on.

In Chapter 10, we will discuss applications involving the geometric interpretation
of the second derivative of a function. The following example gives an interpretation
of the second derivative in a familiar role.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 10 Acceleration of a Maglev Refer to the example 
on pages 548–550. The distance s (in feet) covered by a maglev moving 
along a straight track t seconds after starting from rest is given by the function 
s ⫽ 4t 2 (0 ⱕ t ⱕ 10). What is the maglev’s acceleration at any time t?

Solution The velocity of the maglev t seconds from rest is given by

√

⫽ ds
dt

⫽ d
dt   14t 

22 ⫽ 8t

The acceleration of the maglev t seconds from rest is given by the rate of change
of the velocity of t—that is,
√

2s
2
dt 

⫽ d
dt  18t2 ⫽ 8

a ⫽ d
dt

⫽ d
dt   a ds

dt b ⫽ d 

or 8 feet per second per second, normally abbreviated 8 ft/sec2.

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 11 Acceleration and Velocity of a Falling Object A ball is
thrown straight up into the air from the roof of a building. The height of the 

ball as measured from the ground is given by

s ⫽ ⫺16t 2 ⫹ 24t ⫹ 120

where s is measured in feet and t in seconds. Find the velocity and acceleration 
of the ball 3 seconds after it is thrown into the air.
Solution The velocity √ and acceleration a of the ball at any time t are given by

√

⫽ ds
dt

⫽ d
dt   1⫺16t 

2 ⫹ 24t ⫹ 1202 ⫽ ⫺32t ⫹ 24

I(t)

and

2s
a ⫽ d 
2
dt 

dt   a ds
⫽ d

dt b ⫽ d

dt   1⫺32t ⫹ 242 ⫽ ⫺32

Therefore, the velocity of the ball 3 seconds after it is thrown into the air is

√ ⫽ ⫺32132 ⫹ 24 ⫽ ⫺72

That is, the ball is falling downward at a speed of 72 ft/sec. The acceleration of
the ball is 32 ft/sec2 downward at any time during the motion.

Another interpretation of the second derivative of a function—this time from the
field of economics—follows. Suppose the consumer price index (CPI) of an economy
between the years a and b is described by the function I(t) (a ⱕ t ⱕ b) (Figure 43).

a

Years

t

b

FIGURE 43
The CPI of a certain economy from year a
to year b is given by I(t).

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

624

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

Then the first derivative of I at t ⫽ c, I⬘(c), where a ⬍ c ⬍ b, gives the rate of change
of I at c. The quantity

I ¿1c2
I 1c2

measures  the  inflation  rate of  the  economy  at  t ⫽ c.  The  second  derivative  of  I at 
t ⫽ c, I ⬙(c), gives the rate of change of I⬘ at t ⫽ c. Now, it is possible for I⬘(t) to be
positive and I ⬙(t) to be negative at t ⫽ c (see Example 12). This tells us that at t ⫽ c,
the economy is experiencing inflation (the CPI is increasing) but the rate at which the
CPI is growing is in fact decreasing. This is precisely the situation described by an
economist or a politician when she claims that “inflation is slowing.” One may not
jump to the conclusion from the aforementioned quote that prices of goods and ser-
vices are about to drop!

APPLIED EXAMPLE 12 Inflation Rate of an Economy The function

I1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.2t 3 ⫹ 3t 2 ⫹ 100

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 92

gives the CPI of an economy, where t ⫽ 0 corresponds to the beginning of 2004.
a. Find the inflation rate at the beginning of 2010 (t ⫽ 6).
b. Show that inflation was moderating at that time.

Solution
a. We find I⬘(t) ⫽ ⫺0.6t 2 ⫹ 6t. Next, we compute
I⬘162 ⫽ ⫺0.6162 2 ⫹ 6162 ⫽ 14.4 and I162 ⫽ ⫺0.2162 3 ⫹ 3162 2 ⫹ 100 ⫽ 164.8

from which we see that the inflation rate is

I ¿162
I 162 ⫽ 14.4

164.8

⬇ 0.0874

y = I(t)

b. We find

or approximately 8.7%.

I –1t2 ⫽ d

dt   1⫺0.6t 

2 ⫹ 6t2 ⫽ ⫺1.2t ⫹ 6

I(t)

200

180

160

140

120

100

2

4
6
Years

8

9

FIGURE 44
The CPI of an economy is given by I(t).

Since

t

I ⬙162 ⫽ ⫺1.2162 ⫹ 6 ⫽ ⫺1.2

we see that I⬘ is indeed decreasing at t ⫽ 6, and we conclude that inflation was
moderating at that time (Figure 44).

Verification of the Product Rule
We will now verify the Product Rule. If p(x) ⫽ f(x)t(x), then

 p ¿1x2 ⫽ lim

 
hS0

p 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ p 1x2

h

⫽ lim
 
hS0

f 1x ⫹ h2t1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2t1x2

h

By adding ⫺f(x ⫹ h)t(x) ⫹ f(x ⫹ h)t(x) (which is zero!) to the numerator and fac-
toring, we have

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

9.5 THE PRODUCT AND QUOTIENT RULES; HIGHER-ORDER DERIVATIVES

625

 
hS0

p ¿1x2 ⫽ lim
⫽ lim

h

f 1x ⫹ h23t1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ t1x24 ⫹ t1x23  f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x24
d ⫹ t1x2cf 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2
 t1x2 c f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2

t1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ t1x2
t1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ t1x2

hS0 b  f 1x ⫹ h2c

⫹ lim
hS0

d  r

d

h

h

h

h

d

By Property 3 of limits

t1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ t1x2
f 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2

h

h

By Property 4 of limits

⫽ lim
hS0

⫽ lim
hS0  

  f 1x ⫹ h2c
f 1x ⫹ h2 # lim
t1x2 # lim

 
hS0

 
hS0

  ⫹ lim
hS0 
⫽ f 1x2t¿1x2 ⫹ t1x2f  ¿1x2
  f1x ⫹ h2 ⫽ f 1x2

Observe  that  in  the  last  link  in  the  chain  of  equalities,  we  have  used  the  fact  that
lim
hS0

because f is continuous at x.

9.5 Self-Check Exercises

1. Find the derivative of 

f 1x2 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 1

x2 ⫺ 1

.

2. Find the third derivative of

f1x2 ⫽ 2x 5 ⫺ 3x 3 ⫹ x 2 ⫺ 6x ⫹ 10

3. The total sales of Security Products in its first 2 years of

operation are given by

9.5 Concept Questions

1. State the rule of differentiation in your own words.

a. Product Rule

b. Quotient Rule

2. If f (1) ⫽ 3, t(1) ⫽ 2, f ⬘(1) ⫽ ⫺1, and t⬘(1) ⫽ 4, find
f 1x2
b. F⬘112 if F 1x2 ⫽
t1x2

a. h⬘112 if h1x2 ⫽ f1x2t1x2

9.5 Exercises

In Exercises 1–30, find the derivative of each function.

1. f1x2 ⫽ 2x1x 2 ⫹ 12
2. f1x2 ⫽ 3x 21x ⫺ 12
3. f1t2 ⫽ 1t ⫺ 1212t ⫹ 12
4. f1x2 ⫽ 12x ⫹ 3213x ⫺ 42
5. f1x2 ⫽ 13x ⫹ 221x 2 ⫺ 22

S ⫽ f 1t2 ⫽ 0.3t 

1 ⫹ 0.4t 

3

    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 22

2

where S is measured in millions of dollars and t ⫽ 0 corre-
sponds  to  the  year  Security  Products  began  operations.
How fast were the sales increasing at the beginning of the
company’s second year of operation?

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 9.5 can be found on 
page 629.

3. a. What is the second derivative of a function f ?

b. How do you find the second derivative of a function f,

assuming that it exists?

4. If s ⫽ f(t) gives the position of an object moving on the

coordinate line, what do f ⬘(t) and f ⬙(t) measure?

6. f1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 1212x 2 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 12
7. f1x2 ⫽ 1x 3 ⫺ 1212x ⫹ 12
8. f1x2 ⫽ 1x 3 ⫺ 12x213x 2 ⫹ 2x2
9. f1w2 ⫽ 1w 3 ⫺ w 2 ⫹ w ⫺ 121w 2 ⫹ 22
10. f 1x2 ⫽ 1

5  x5 ⫹ 1x2 ⫹ 121x2 ⫺ x ⫺ 12 ⫹ 28

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

626

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

2x ⫹ 4

11.

12.

13.

19.

18.

17.

16.

15.

14.

x ⫺ 2

1 ⫹ 3t

2x ⫹ 1

f 1x2 ⫽ 15x2 ⫹ 12121x ⫺ 12
f 1t2 ⫽ 11 ⫹ 1t212t 
2 ⫺ 32
f 1x2 ⫽ 1x2 ⫺ 5x ⫹ 22ax ⫺ 2
xb
f 1x2 ⫽ 1x3 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 12a2 ⫹ 1
x2b
t 1x2 ⫽ 3
f 1x2 ⫽ 1
f 1x2 ⫽ 2x ⫺ 1
f 1t2 ⫽ 1 ⫺ 2t
f 1x2 ⫽ 1
f 1u2 ⫽ u
f 1s2 ⫽ s2 ⫺ 4
f 1x2 ⫽ x3 ⫺ 2
1x ⫹ 1
f 1x2 ⫽ x2 ⫹ 11x
f 1x2 ⫽
f 1x2 ⫽ x2 ⫹ 2
f 1x2 ⫽
f 1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 121x2 ⫹ 12
f 1x2 ⫽ 13x2 ⫺ 12ax2 ⫺ 1
xb
⫺ x ⫺ 1
f 1x2 ⫽ x
x2 ⫹ 4
x2 ⫺ 4
œ3
x苶
⫹
30. f1x2 ⫽ ᎏx
ᎏ
x ⫺
1
3

x2 ⫹ x ⫹ 1

x2 ⫹ 1

x2 ⫹ 1

x2 ⫹ 1

x ⫺ 2

s ⫹ 1

20.

28.

29.

21.

23.

25.

22.

24.

26.

27.

u2 ⫹ 1

x ⫹ 1

2x2 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 3

In Exercises 31–34, suppose f and g are functions that are differ-
entiable at x ⫽ 1 and that f(1) ⫽ 2, fⴕ(1) ⫽ ⫺1, g(1) ⫽ ⫺2, and
gⴕ(1) ⫽ 3. Find the value of hⴕ(1).

31. h1x2 ⫽ f1x2t1x2
x f 1x2
x ⫹ t 1x2

h 1x2 ⫽

33.

32. h1x2 ⫽ 1x 2 ⫹ 12t1x2
f 1x2t 1x2
f 1x2 ⫺ t 1x2

h 1x2 ⫽

34.

In Exercises 35–38, find the derivative of each function, and eval-
uate fⴕ(x) at the given value of x.

35. f1x2 ⫽ 12x ⫺ 121x 2 ⫹ 32 ; x ⫽ 1

36.

37.

38.

2x ⫺ 1

; x ⫽ 2

f 1x2 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 1
f 1x2 ⫽
f 1x2 ⫽ 11x ⫹ 2x21x3/2 ⫺ x2; x ⫽ 4

x4 ⫺ 2x2 ⫺ 1

; x ⫽ ⫺1

x

In Exercises 39–42, find the slope and an equation of the tangent
line to the graph of the function f at the specified point.

39. f1x2 ⫽ 1x 3 ⫹ 121x 2 ⫺ 22 ; 12, 182
40. f 1x2 ⫽ x2

; a2, 

x ⫹ 1

3b

4

41.

42.

x2 ⫹ 1

f 1x2 ⫽ x ⫹ 1
f 1x2 ⫽ 1 ⫹ 2x1/2

; 11, 12
1 ⫹ x3/2 ; a4, 

5

9b

In  Exercises  43–48,  find  the  first  and  second  derivatives  of  the
function.

43. f1x2 ⫽ 2x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫹ 1
44. f1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.2x 2 ⫹ 0.3x ⫹ 4
45. f1x2 ⫽ 2x 3 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫹ 1
46. t1x2 ⫽ ⫺3x 3 ⫹ 24x 2 ⫹ 6x ⫺ 64
47. h1t2 ⫽ t 4 ⫺ 2t 3 ⫹ 6t 2 ⫺ 3t ⫹ 10
48. f1x2 ⫽ x 5 ⫺ x 4 ⫹ x 3 ⫺ x 2 ⫹ x ⫺ 1

In Exercises 49–52, find the third derivative of the given function.

49. f1x2 ⫽ 3x 4 ⫺ 2x 3
50. f1x2 ⫽ 3x 5 ⫺ 6x 4 ⫹ 2x 2 ⫺ 8x ⫹ 12

f 1x2 ⫽ 1

51.
53. Suppose t(x) ⫽ x2f(x) and it is known that f(2) ⫽ 3 and 

52.

x2

x

f 1x2 ⫽ 2

f ⬘(2) ⫽ ⫺1. Evaluate t⬘(2).

54. Suppose t(x) ⫽ (x2 ⫹ 1) f(x) and it is known that f(2) ⫽ 3

and f ⬘(2) ⫽ ⫺1. Evaluate t⬘(2).

55. Find  an  equation  of  the  tangent  line  to  the  graph  of  the
function f(x) ⫽ (x 3 ⫹ 1)(3x 2 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 2) at the point (1, 2).

56. Find  an  equation  of  the  tangent  line  to  the  graph  of  the 

function 

f 1x2 ⫽ 3x

x2 ⫺ 2

at the point (2, 3).

57. Let f(x) ⫽ (x 2 ⫹ 1)(2 ⫺ x). Find the point(s) on the graph

of f where the tangent line is horizontal.

58. Let 

f 1x2 ⫽ x

x2 ⫹ 1

where the tangent line is horizontal.

.  Find  the  point(s)  on  the  graph  of  f

59. Find  the  point(s)  on  the  graph  of  the  function  f(x)  ⫽
(x 2 ⫹ 6)(x ⫺ 5) where the slope of the tangent line is equal
to ⫺2.

60. Find the point(s) on the graph of the function

where the slope of the tangent line is equal to 

⫺1
2

.

f 1x2 ⫽ x ⫹ 1

x ⫺ 1

61. A  straight  line  perpendicular  to  and  passing  through  the
point of tangency of the tangent line is called the normal to
the curve at that point. Find the equation of the tangent line
and the normal to the curve 
y ⫽ 1

1 ⫹ x2

at the point 

11, 1
22

.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.5 THE PRODUCT AND QUOTIENT RULES; HIGHER-ORDER DERIVATIVES

627

62. CONCENTRATION OF A DRUG IN THE BLOODSTREAM The  con-
centration of a certain drug in a patient’s bloodstream t hr
after injection is given by

C 1t2 ⫽ 0.2t

2 ⫹ 1

t 

a. Find the rate at which the concentration of the drug is

changing with respect to time.

b. How fast is the concentration changing  ᎏ1
ᎏ hr, 1 hr, and 
2

2 hr after the injection?

63. COST OF REMOVING TOXIC WASTE A city’s main water reser-
voir was recently found to be contaminated with trichloro-
ethylene, a cancer-causing chemical, as a result of an aban-
doned chemical dump leaching chemicals into the water. A
proposal submitted to the city’s council members indicates
that the cost, measured in millions of dollars, of removing
x% of the toxic pollutant is given by

C 1x2 ⫽ 0.5x

100 ⫺ x

Find C⬘(80), C⬘(90), C⬘(95), and C⬘(99). What does your
result tell you about the cost of removing all of the pol-
lutant?

64. DRUG DOSAGES Thomas Young has suggested the follow-
ing rule for calculating the dosage of medicine for children
1  to  12  years  old.  If  a denotes  the  adult  dosage  (in  mil-
ligrams)  and  if  t is  the  child’s  age  (in  years),  then  the
child’s dosage is given by

D 1t2 ⫽ at

t ⫹ 12

Suppose the adult dosage of a substance is 500 mg. Find an
expression that gives the rate of change of a child’s dosage
with respect to the child’s age. What is the rate of change
of  a  child’s  dosage  with  respect  to  his  or  her  age  for  a 
6-year-old child? A 10-year-old child?

65. EFFECT OF BACTERICIDE The number of bacteria N(t) in a cer-
tain culture t min after an experimental bactericide is intro-
duced is given by

N 1t2 ⫽

10,000
1 ⫹ t 
2

⫹ 2000

Find the rate of change of the number of bacteria in the cul-
ture  1  min  and  2  min  after  the  bactericide  is  introduced.
What is the population of the bacteria in the culture 1 min
and 2 min after the bactericide is introduced?

66. DEMAND FUNCTIONS The  demand  function  for  the  Sicard

sports watch is given by

d 1x2 ⫽

50

0.01x 2 ⫹ 1

    10 ⱕ x ⱕ 202

where x (measured in units of a thousand) is the quantity
demanded per week and d(x) is the unit price in dollars.
a. Find d⬘(x).
b. Find d⬘(5), d⬘(10), and d⬘(15), and interpret your results.

67. REVENUE FUNCTIONS Refer to Exercise 66.

a. Find  an  expression  for  the  revenue  function  R for  the

Sicard sports watch.

Hint: R(x) = xd(x)
b. Find R⬘(x).
c. Find R⬘(8), R⬘(10), and R⬘(12), and interpret your results.

68. PROFIT FUNCTIONS Refer  to  Exercise  66.  The  total  profit
function  P (in thousands of dollars) for the Sicard sports
watch is given by

P1x2 ⫽

50x

0.01x 2 ⫹ 1

⫺ 0.025x 3 ⫹ 0.35x 2 ⫺ 10x ⫺ 30
10 ⱕ x ⱕ 202

where x is measured in units of a thousand.
a. Find P(0), and interpret your result.
b. Find P⬘(5) and P⬘(10), and interpret your results.

69. LEARNING CURVES From  experience,  Emory  Secretarial
School  knows  that  the  average  student  taking  Advanced
Typing will progress according to the rule

N 1t2 ⫽ 60t ⫹ 180

t ⫹ 6

    1t ⱖ 02

where N(t) measures the number of words per minute the
student can type after t weeks in the course.
a. Find an expression for N⬘(t).
b. Compute N⬘(t) for t ⫽ 1, 3, 4, and 7, and interpret your

results.

c. Sketch the graph of the function N. Does it confirm the

results obtained in part (b)?

d. What will be the average student’s typing speed at the

end of the 12-week course?

70. BOX-OFFICE RECEIPTS The  total  worldwide  box-office
receipts  for  a  long-running  movie  are  approximated  by
the function

T 1x2 ⫽ 120x2

x2 ⫹ 4

where T(x) is measured in millions of dollars and x is the
number of years since the movie’s release. How fast are the
total receipts changing 1 year, 3 years, and 5 years after its
release?

71. FORMALDEHYDE LEVELS A  study  on  formaldehyde  levels
in 900 homes indicates that emissions of various chemi-
cals  can  decrease  over  time.  The  formaldehyde  level
(parts  per  million)  in  an  average  home  in  the  study  is
given by

f 1t2 ⫽ 0.055t ⫹ 0.26

t ⫹ 2

    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 122

where  t is  the  age  of  the  house  in  years.  How  fast  is  the
formaldehyde level of the average house dropping when it
is new? At the beginning of its fourth year?
Source: Bonneville Power Administration.

(continued)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

628

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

72. POPULATION GROWTH A  major  corporation  is  building  a
4325-acre complex of homes, offices, stores, schools, and
churches in the rural community of Glen Cove. As a result
of this development, the planners have estimated that Glen
Cove’s population (in thousands) t years from now will be
given by

P1t2   ⫽ 25t 

2 ⫹ 125t ⫹ 200
2 ⫹ 5t ⫹ 40
t 

a. Find the rate at which Glen Cove’s population is chang-

ing with respect to time.

b. What will be the population after 10 years? At what rate

will the population be increasing when t ⫽ 10?

73. ACCELERATION OF A FALLING OBJECT During  the  construc-
tion  of  an  office  building,  a  hammer  is  accidentally
dropped  from  a  height  of  256  ft.  The  distance  (in  feet)
the hammer falls in t sec is s ⫽ 16t 2. What is the ham-
mer’s  velocity  when  it  strikes  the  ground?  What  is  its
acceleration?

74. ACCELERATION OF A CAR The distance s (in feet) covered by

a car after t sec is given by

s ⫽ ⫺t 3 ⫹ 8t 2 ⫹ 20t

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 6)

Find a general expression for the car’s acceleration at any
time t (0 ⱕ t ⱕ 6). Show that the car is decelerating after 
2 ᎏ2
ᎏ sec.
3

75. CRIME RATES The  number  of  major  crimes  committed  in
Bronxville between 2005 and 2012 is approximated by the
function

N1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.1t 3 ⫹ 1.5t 2 ⫹ 100

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 72

where  N(t)  denotes  the  number  of  crimes  committed  in
year t, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 2005. Enraged by the
dramatic increase in the crime rate, Bronxville’s citizens,
with  the  help  of  the  local  police,  organized  “Neighbor-
hood Crime Watch” groups in early 2009 to combat this
menace.
a. Verify  that  the  crime  rate  was  increasing  from  2005

through 2012.
Hint: Compute N⬘(0), N⬘(1), . . . , N⬘(7).

b. Show  that  the  Neighborhood  Crime  Watch  program 
was  working  by  computing  N ⬙(4),  N ⬙(5),  N ⬙(6),  and
N ⬙(7).

76. GDP  OF A DEVELOPING COUNTRY A  developing  country’s
gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  from  2004  to  2012  is
approximated by the function

G1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.2t 3 ⫹ 2.4t 2 ⫹ 60

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 82

where  G(t)  is  measured  in  billions  of  dollars,  with  t ⫽ 0
corresponding to 2004.
a. Compute G⬘(0), G⬘(1), . . . , G⬘(8).
b. Compute G ⬙(0), G ⬙(1), . . . , G ⬙(8).
c. Using the results obtained in parts (a) and (b), show that
after a slow start, the GDP increases quickly and then
cools off.

77. DISABILITY BENEFITS The  number  of  persons  age  18–64
years receiving disability benefits through Social Security,
Supplemental Security Income, or both from 1990 through
2000 is approximated by the function

N1t2 ⫽ 0.00037t 3 ⫺ 0.0242t 2 ⫹ 0.52t ⫹ 5.3

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

where N(t) is measured in units of a million and t is mea-
sured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to the beginning
of  1990.  Compute  N(8),  N⬘(8),  and  N ⬙(8),  and  interpret
your results.
Source: Social Security Administration.

78. OBESITY IN AMERICA The body mass index (BMI) measures
body weight in relation to height. A BMI of 25 to 29.9 is
considered overweight, a BMI of 30 or more is considered
obese,  and  a  BMI  of  40  or  more  is  morbidly  obese.  The
percent  of  the  U.S.  population  that  is  obese  is  approxi-
mated by the function

P1t2 ⫽ 0.0004t 3 ⫹ 0.0036t 2 ⫹ 0.8t ⫹ 12
10 ⱕ t ⱕ 132
where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to the
beginning of 1991. Show that the rate of the rate of change
of the percent of the U.S. population that is deemed obese
was positive from 1991 to 2004. What does this mean?
Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

In Exercises 79–82, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
79. If f and t are differentiable, then

d

dx   3  f 1x2t 1x24 ⫽ f  ¿1x2t¿1x2

80. If f is differentiable, then

d

dx  3xf 1x24 ⫽ f 1x2 ⫹ xf  ¿1x2

81. If f is differentiable, then

d

dx  c f 1x2

x 2 d ⫽

f  ¿1x2

2x
82. If f, t, and h are differentiable, then
dx    cf 1x2t 1x2
h 1x2

d ⫽

d

3h 1x24 2

f  ¿1x2t 1x2h 1x2 ⫹ f 1x2t¿1x2h 1x2 ⫺ f 1x2t 1x2h¿1x2

83. Extend the Product Rule for differentiation to the follow-

ing case involving the product of three differentiable
functions: Let h(x) ⫽ u(x)√(x)w(x), and show that
h⬘(x) ⫽ u(x)√ (x)w⬘(x) ⫹ u(x)√⬘(x)w(x) ⫹ u⬘(x)√(x)w(x).
Hint: Let f(x) ⫽ u(x)√(x), t(x) ⫽ w(x), and h(x) ⫽ f(x)t(x), and apply
the Product Rule to the function h.

84. Prove the Quotient Rule for differentiation (Rule 6).

Hint: Let k(x) ⫽ f(x)>t(x), and verify the following steps:
f 1x ⫹ h2t 1x2 ⫺ f 1x2t 1x ⫹ h2

k 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ k 1x2

⫽

a.

h

ht 1x ⫹ h2t 1x2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.5 THE PRODUCT AND QUOTIENT RULES; HIGHER-ORDER DERIVATIVES

629

b. By adding [⫺f(x)t(x) ⫹ f(x)t(x)] to the numerator and simplifying,

c.

show that

 k ¿1x2 ⫽ lim

 
hS0

k 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ k 1x2
t 1x2 f  ¿1x2 ⫺ f 1x2t ¿1x2

h

3t 1x24 2

 ⫽

k 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ k 1x2

 

h

⫽

1

t 1x ⫹ h2t 1x2

h

   ⫻b  Bf 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f 1x2
R # t 1x2
   ⫺Bt 1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ t 1x2
R # f 1x2r

h

9.5 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. We use the Quotient Rule to obtain

3. The rate at which the company’s total sales are changing at

1x 2 ⫺ 12  

d

dx   12x ⫹ 12 ⫺ 12x ⫹ 12  

d

dx   1x 2 ⫺ 12

 f  ¿1x2 ⫽

1x 2 ⫺ 12 2
 ⫽ 1x 2 ⫺ 12122 ⫺ 12x ⫹ 1212x2
1x 2 ⫺ 12 2
 ⫽ 2x 2 ⫺ 2 ⫺ 4x 2 ⫺ 2x

1x 2 ⫺ 12 2
⫺2x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 2
1x 2 ⫺ 12 2
1x 2 ⫺ 12 2

⫺21x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 12

 ⫽

 ⫽

2. f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 10x 4 ⫺ 9x 2 ⫹ 2x ⫺ 6
f ⬙1x2 ⫽ 40x 3 ⫺ 18x ⫹ 2
f ⵮1x2 ⫽ 120x 2 ⫺ 18

any time t is given by

11 ⫹ 0.4t 

22  

 S ¿1t2 ⫽

 ⫽ 11 ⫹ 0.4t 

d

dt   11 ⫹ 0.4t 

22

3

d

 2  

dt   10.3t 32 ⫺ 10.3t 
11 ⫹ 0.4t 
22 2
22 ⫺ 10.3t 
3210.8t2

2210.9t 
11 ⫹ 0.4t 

22 2

Therefore, at the beginning of the second year of operation,
Security Products’ sales were increasing at the rate of

S ¿112 ⫽ 11 ⫹ 0.4210.92 ⫺ 10.3210.82

11 ⫹ 0.42 2

⬇ 0.52

or $520,000/year.

USING

TECHNOLOGY

The Product and Quotient Rules; Higher-Order Derivatives
. Find f ⬘10.22 .

f 1x2 ⫽ 121x ⫹ 0.5x2 a 0.3x 3 ⫹ 2x ⫺ 0.3
x b

EXAMPLE 1 Let 

Solution Using the numerical derivative operation of a graphing utility, we find

See Figure T1.

FIGURE T1
The TI-83/84 numerical derivative screen
for computing f ⬘(0.2)

f ⬘10.22 ⫽ 6.4797499802

nDeriv((2X^.5+.5
X)(.3X^3+2X-.3/X),
X,.2)
      6.4797499802

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(continued)

630

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

100

0
FIGURE T2

24

APPLIED EXAMPLE 2 Importance of Time in Treating Heart Attacks Accord-
ing to the American Heart Association, the treatment benefit for heart attacks 

depends on the time until treatment and is described by the function

f 1t2 ⫽ 0.44t4 ⫹ 700

0.1t4 ⫹ 7

    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 242

where t is measured in hours and f(t) is expressed as a percent.
a. Use a graphing utility to graph the function f using the viewing window 

[0, 24] ⫻ [0, 100].

b. Use a graphing utility to find the derivative of f when t ⫽ 0 and t ⫽ 2.
c. Interpret the results obtained in part (b).
Source: American Heart Association.

Solution

a. The graph of f is shown in Figure T2.
b. Using the numerical derivative operation of a graphing utility, we find

f ⬘102 ⬇ 0
f ⬘122 ⬇ ⫺28.95402429

(see Figure T3).

nDeriv((.44X^4+7
00)/(.1X^4+7),X,
0)

0

nDeriv((.44X^4+7
00)/(.1X^4+7),X,
2)

-28.95402429

FIGURE T3
TI-83/84 numerical derivative screens 
(a) for computing f ⬘(0) and (b) for 
computing f ⬘(2)

(a)

(b)

c. The results of part (b) show that there is no drop in the treatment benefit when

the heart attack is treated immediately. But the treatment benefit drops off at
the rate of approximately 29% per hour when the time to treatment is 2 hours.
Thus, it is extremely urgent that a patient suffering a heart attack receive med-
ical attention as soon as possible.

Some  graphing  utilities  have  the  capability  of  numerically  computing  the  second
derivative of a function at a point. If your graphing utility has this capability, use it to
work through the examples and exercises of this section.

EXAMPLE 3 Use the (second) numerical derivative operation of a graphing utility
to find the second derivative of 

when x ⫽ 4.

f 1x2 ⫽ 1x

Solution Using the (second) numerical derivative operation, we find

f ⬙142 ⫽ der21xˆ.5, x, 42 ⫽ ⫺.03125

(Figure T4).

FIGURE T4
The TI-86 second derivative screen for
computing f ⬙( 4 )

der2(x^.5,x,4)

-.03125

evalF nDer der1

der2 Fnlnt

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

9.5 THE PRODUCT AND QUOTIENT RULES; HIGHER-ORDER DERIVATIVES

631

APPLIED EXAMPLE 4 Prevalence of Alzheimer’s Patients The number of
Alzheimer’s patients in the United States is given by

f1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.02765t 4 ⫹ 0.3346t 3 ⫺ 1.1261t 2
10 ⱕ t ⱕ 52

⫹ 1.7575t ⫹ 3.7745

where f(t) is measured in millions and t is measured in decades, with t ⫽ 0 corre-
sponding to the beginning of 1990.
a. How fast is the number of Alzheimer’s patients in the United States antici-

pated to be changing at the beginning of 2030?

b. How fast is the rate of change of the number of Alzheimer’s patients in the

United States anticipated to be changing at the beginning of 2030?

c. Plot the graph of f in the viewing window [0, 5] ⫻ [0, 12].
Source: Alzheimer’s Association.

Solution

a. Using the numerical derivative operation of a graphing utility, we find that the
number of Alzheimer’s patients at the beginning of 2030 can be anticipated to
be changing at the rate of

That is, the number is increasing at the rate of approximately 1.7 million
patients per decade.

b. Using the (second) numerical derivative operation of a graphing utility, we

find that

f ⬘142 ⫽ 1.7311

f ⬙142 ⫽ 0.4694

(Figure T5); that is, the rate of change of the number of Alzheimer’s patients
is increasing at the rate of approximately 0.5 million patients per decade per
decade.

c. Figure T6 shows the graph.

der2(-.02765x^4+.334
6x^3-1.1261x^2+1.75
75x+3.7745,x,4)

.4694

12

evalF nDer der1

der2 Fnlnt

FIGURE T5
The TI-86 second derivative screen
for computing f ⬙( 4 )

0
FIGURE T6
The graph of f in the viewing window 
[0, 5] ⫻ [0,12]

5

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

In Exercises 1–6, use the numerical derivative operation to find
the rate of change of f(x) at the given value of x. Give your answer
accurate to four decimal places.

2.

1. f1x2 ⫽ 12x 2 ⫹ 121x 3 ⫹ 3x ⫹ 42; x ⫽ ⫺0.5
f 1x2 ⫽ 11x ⫹ 1212x2 ⫹ x ⫺ 32; x ⫽ 1.5
3. f 1x2 ⫽

1x ⫺ 1
1x ⫹ 1

; x ⫽ 3

4.

5.

f 1x2 ⫽

f 1x2 ⫽

6. f 1x2 ⫽

x3 ⫹ 1

1x1x2 ⫹ 42
1x11 ⫹ x⫺12
x212 ⫹ 1x2
1 ⫹ 1x

x ⫹ 1

; x ⫽ 4

; x ⫽ 1

; x ⫽ 1

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(continued)

632

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

7. NEW CONSTRUCTION JOBS The president of a major housing
construction company claims that the number of construc-
tion jobs created in the next t months is given by

f 1t2 ⫽ 1.42 a7t 

3t 

2 ⫹ 140t ⫹ 700

2 ⫹ 80t ⫹ 550 b

where f(t) is measured in millions of jobs per year. At what
rate  will  construction  jobs  be  created  1  year  from  now,
assuming that her projection is correct?

8. POPULATION GROWTH A major corporation is building a 4325-
acre complex of homes, offices, stores, schools, and churches
in  the  rural  community  of  Glen  Cove.  As  a  result  of  this
development, the planners have estimated that Glen Cove’s
population (in thousands) t years from now will be given by

P 1t2 ⫽ 25t 

2 ⫹ 125t ⫹ 200
2 ⫹ 5t ⫹ 40
t 

a. What will be the population 10 years from now?
b. At what rate will the population be increasing 10 years

from now?

In Exercises 9–16, find the value of the second derivative of f at
the given value of x. Express your answer correct to four decimal
places.

9. f1x2 ⫽ 2x 3 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫹ 1; x ⫽ ⫺1
10. f1x2 ⫽ 2.5x 5 ⫺ 3x 3 ⫹ 1.5x ⫹ 4; x ⫽ 2.1
11. f1x2 ⫽ 2.1x 3.1 ⫺ 4.2x 1.7 ⫹ 4.2; x ⫽ 1.4
12. f1x2 ⫽ 1.7x 4.2 ⫺ 3.2x 1.3 ⫹ 4.2x ⫺ 3.2; x ⫽ 2.2
13. f 1x2 ⫽ x2 ⫹ 2x ⫺ 5

; x ⫽ 2.1

x3 ⫹ 1

9.6

The Chain Rule

; x ⫽ 1.2

14.

15.

16.

2x2 ⫺ 5x ⫹ 4

f 1x2 ⫽ x3 ⫹ x ⫹ 2
f 1x2 ⫽ x1/2 ⫹ 2x3/2 ⫹ 1
1x ⫺ 1
2x ⫹ 1x ⫹ 4
f 1x2 ⫽

2x1/2 ⫹ 3

; x ⫽ 0.5

; x ⫽ 2.3

17. RATE OF BANK FAILURES The rate at which banks were fail-

ing between 1982 and 1988 is given by

f1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.063447t 4 ⫺ 1.953283t 3 ⫹ 14.632576t 2
10 ⱕ t ⱕ 62

⫺ 6.684704t ⫹ 47.458874

where f(t) is measured in the number of banks per year and
t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to the begin-
ning of 1982. Compute f ⬙(6), and interpret your results.
Source: Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.

18. MODELING WITH DATA The revenues (in billions of dollars)
from cable advertisement for the years 1995 through 2000
follow:

Year
Revenue

1995
5.1

1996
6.6

1997
8.1

1998
9.4

1999
11.1

2000
13.7

a. Use CubicReg to find a third-degree polynomial regres-
sion model for the data. Let t ⫽ 0 correspond to 1995.
b. Plot the graph of the function f found in part (a), using

the viewing window [0, 6] ⫻ [0, 14].

c. Compute f ⬙(5), and interpret your results.
Source: National Cable Television Association.

The population of Americans age 55 years and older as a percentage of the total pop-
ulation is approximated by the function

f1t2 ⫽ 10.7210.9t ⫹ 102 0.3

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 202

where t is measured in years with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to the year 2000 (Figure 45).

y

40

30

20

10

t
n
e
c
r
e
P

FIGURE 45
Population of Americans age 55 years and
older
Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

5

10

15

Years

t

20

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

9.6 THE CHAIN RULE

633

How fast will the population age 55 years and older be increasing at the beginning of
2012? To answer this question, we have to evaluate f ⬘(12), where f ⬘ is the derivative
of f. But the rules of differentiation that we have developed up to now will not help us
find the derivative of f .

In this section, we will introduce another rule of differentiation called the Chain
Rule. When used in conjunction with the rules of differentiation developed in the last
two sections, the Chain Rule enables us to greatly enlarge the class of functions that
we are able to differentiate. (In Exercise 72, page 641, we will use the Chain Rule to
answer the question posed in the introductory example.)

The Chain Rule
Consider the function h1x2 ⫽ 1x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 12 2. If we were to compute h⬘1x2 using only
expand h1x2. Thus,

the rules of differentiation from the previous sections, then our approach might be to

 h1x2 ⫽ 1x2 ⫹ x ⫹ 12 2 ⫽ 1x2 ⫹ x ⫹ 121x2 ⫹ x ⫹ 12

 ⫽ x4 ⫹ 2x3 ⫹ 3x2 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 1

from which we find

h⬘1x2 ⫽ 4x 3 ⫹ 6x 2 ⫹ 6x ⫹ 2

But what about the function H1x2 ⫽ 1x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 12 100? The same technique may

be used to find the derivative of the function H, but the amount of work involved in
this  case  would  be  prodigious!  Consider,  also,  the  function 
.  For 
each of the two functions H and G, the rules of differentiation of the previous sections
cannot be applied directly to compute the derivatives H⬘ and G⬘.

G 1x2 ⫽ 2x2 ⫹ 1

Observe that both H and G are composite functions; that is, each is composed of,
or built up from, simpler functions. For example, the function H is composed of the

two simpler functions f1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 1 and t1x2 ⫽ x100 as follows:

 ⫽ 1x2 ⫹ x ⫹ 12 100

 H1x2 ⫽ t3  f 1x24 ⫽ 3  f 1x24 100
t 1x2 ⫽ 1x

 G 1x2 ⫽ t3  f 1x24 ⫽ 2f 1x2

. Thus,

 ⫽ 2x2 ⫹ 1

In a similar manner, we see that the function G is composed of the two simpler func-

tions f1x2 ⫽ x2 ⫹ 1 and 

As a first step toward finding the derivative h⬘ of a composite function h ⫽ t 폶 f

defined by h(x) ⫽ t[ f(x)], we write
u ⫽ f1x2

and

y ⫽ t3 f1x24 ⫽ t1u2

The dependency of h on t and f is illustrated in Figure 46. Since u is a function of x,
we may compute the derivative of u with respect to x, if f is a differentiable function,
obtaining du>dx ⫽ f ⬘(x). Next, if t is a differentiable function of u, we may compute
the derivative of t with respect to u, obtaining dy>du ⫽ t⬘(u). Now, since the function
h is composed of the function t and the function f, we might suspect that the rule h⬘(x)
for the derivative h⬘ of h will be given by an expression that involves the rules for the
derivatives of f and t. But how do we combine these derivatives to yield h⬘?

h = g$f

f

g

FIGURE 46
The composite function h(x) ⫽g[f(x)]

x

f (x)=u

y=g(u)=g[ f(x)]

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

634

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

This question can be answered by interpreting the derivative of each function as
the rate of change of that function. For example, suppose u ⫽ f(x) changes three times
as fast as x—that is,

And suppose y ⫽ t(u) changes twice as fast as u—that is,

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ du

dx

⫽ 3

t¿1u2 ⫽

dy
du

⫽ 2

Then we would expect y ⫽ h(x) to change six times as fast as x—that is,

or, equivalently,

h⬘1x2 ⫽ t⬘1u2 f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 122132 ⫽ 6

dy
dx

⫽

# du
dx

dy
du

⫽ 122132 ⫽ 6

This observation suggests the following result, which we state without proof.

Rule 7: The Chain Rule
If h(x) ⫽ t[ f(x)], then

h ¿1x2 ⫽ d

dx  t 3   f  1x24 ⫽ t¿  3  f  1x24   f  ¿1x2

Equivalently, if we write y ⫽ h(x) ⫽ t(u), where u ⫽ f(x), then

dy
dx

⫽

dy
du

# du
dx

(10)

(11)

Notes

1. If we label the composite function h in the following manner:

Inside function

앗

h(x) ⫽ t[ f(x)]

앖

Outside function

then h⬘(x) is just the derivative of the “outside function” evaluated at the “inside
function” times the derivative of the “inside function.”

2. Equation (11) can be remembered by observing that if we “cancel” the du’s, then

dy
dx

⫽

dy
du

# du
dx

⫽

dy
dx

The Chain Rule for Powers of Functions
Many composite functions have the special form h(x) ⫽ t( f(x)) where t is defined by
the rule t(x) ⫽ xn (n, a real number)—that is,

In other words, the function h is given by the power of a function f. The functions

h1x2 ⫽ 1x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 12 2

h1x2 ⫽ 3 f1x24 n
H1x2 ⫽ 1x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 12 100

G1x2 ⫽ 2x2 ⫹ 1

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

discussed earlier are examples of this type of composite function. By using the fol-
lowing corollary of the Chain Rule, the General Power Rule, we can find the deriva-
tive of this type of function much more easily than by using the Chain Rule directly.

9.6 THE CHAIN RULE

635

The General Power Rule
If the function f is differentiable and h(x) ⫽ [ f(x)]n (n, a real number), then

h ¿1x2 ⫽ d

dx  3  f 1x24 n ⫽ n3  f 1x24 n⫺1f ¿1x2

(12)

To see this, we observe that h(x) ⫽ t( f(x)) where t(x) ⫽ x n, so by virtue of the Chain
Rule, we have

 h¿1x2 ⫽ t¿3   f 1x24   f ¿1x2
 ⫽ n3  f 1x24 n⫺1f ¿1x2

since t⬘(x) ⫽ nx n⫺1.
EXAMPLE 1 Let F1x2 ⫽ 13x ⫹ 12 2.
a. Find F⬘(x), using the General Power Rule.
b. Verify your result without the benefit of the Chain Rule or the General Power Rule.

Solution

a. Using the General Power Rule, we obtain

d

dx   13x ⫹ 12

  

 F ¿1x2 ⫽ 213x ⫹ 12 1
 ⫽ 213x ⫹ 12132
 ⫽ 613x ⫹ 12

F1x2 ⫽ 13x ⫹ 12 2 ⫽ 9x 2 ⫹ 6x ⫹ 1

b. We first expand F(x). Thus,

Next, differentiating, we have

 F ¿1x2 ⫽ d

dx  19x2 ⫹ 6x ⫹ 12

 ⫽ 18x ⫹ 6
 ⫽ 613x ⫹ 12

as before.

EXAMPLE 2 Differentiate the function 

G 1x2 ⫽ 2x2 ⫹ 1

.

Solution We rewrite the function G(x) as

and apply the General Power Rule, obtaining

G1x2 ⫽ 1x 2 ⫹ 12 1/2

d

 G ¿1x2 ⫽ 1
2  1x2 ⫹ 12 ⫺1/2
2  1x2 ⫹ 12 ⫺1/2 # 2x ⫽
 ⫽ 1

dx  1x2 ⫹ 12

 

x2x2 ⫹ 1

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

636

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 3 Differentiate the function f1x2 ⫽ x 212x ⫹ 32 5.

Solution Applying the Product Rule followed by the General Power Rule, we
obtain

 f  ¿1x2 ⫽ x 2

 

d

dx   12x ⫹ 32 5 ⫹ 12x ⫹ 32 5

  

d

dx   1x 22

dx   12x ⫹ 32 ⫹ 12x ⫹ 32 512x2

 ⫽ 1x 22512x ⫹ 32 4 # d
 ⫽ 5x 212x ⫹ 32 4122 ⫹ 2x12x ⫹ 32 5
 ⫽ 2x12x ⫹ 32 415x ⫹ 2x ⫹ 32 ⫽ 2x17x ⫹ 3212x ⫹ 32 4

EXAMPLE 4 Find f ⬘1x2 if f1x2 ⫽ 12x 2 ⫹ 32 413x ⫺ 12 5.

Solution Applying the Product Rule, we have

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ 12x 2 ⫹ 32 4

  

d

dx   13x ⫺ 12 5 ⫹ 13x ⫺ 12 5

  

d

dx   12x 2 ⫹ 32 4

Next, we apply the General Power Rule to each term, obtaining

 f  ¿1x2 ⫽ 12x 2 ⫹ 32 4 # 513x ⫺ 12 4

  

d

dx   13x ⫺ 12 ⫹ 13x ⫺ 12 5 # 412x 2 ⫹ 32 3

 ⫽ 512x 2 ⫹ 32 413x ⫺ 12 4 # 3 ⫹ 413x ⫺ 12 512x 2 ⫹ 32 314x2

d

dx   12x 2 ⫹ 32

  

Finally, observing that (2x2 ⫹ 3)3(3x ⫺ 1)4 is common to both terms, we can factor
and simplify as follows:

 f  ¿1x2 ⫽ 12x2 ⫹ 32 313x ⫺ 12 431512x2 ⫹ 32 ⫹ 16x13x ⫺ 124

 ⫽ 12x2 ⫹ 32 313x ⫺ 12 4130x2 ⫹ 45 ⫹ 48x2 ⫺ 16x2
 ⫽ 12x2 ⫹ 32 313x ⫺ 12 4178x2 ⫺ 16x ⫹ 452

EXAMPLE 5 Find f ⬘1x2 if 
Solution Rewriting f1x2 and then applying the General Power Rule, we obtain

14x2 ⫺ 72 2

f 1x2 ⫽

.

1

 f  ¿1x2 ⫽ d

dx

 c

1

14x 2 ⫺ 72 2d ⫽ d

dx   14x 2 ⫺ 72 ⫺2

d

dx   14x 2 ⫺ 72

 ⫽ ⫺214x 2 ⫺ 72 ⫺3
 ⫽ ⫺214x 2 ⫺ 72 ⫺318x2 ⫽ ⫺ 16x

  

14x 2 ⫺ 72 3

EXAMPLE 6 Find the slope of the tangent line to the graph of the function

f 1x2 ⫽ a2x ⫹ 1
3x ⫹ 2b3

at the point 

10, 1
82

.

Solution The slope of the tangent line to the graph of f at any point x is given by
f ⬘(x). To compute f ⬘(x), we use the General Power Rule followed by the Quotient
Rule, obtaining

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.6 THE CHAIN RULE

637

 

d
dx

 a2x ⫹ 1
3x ⫹ 2b

 f  ¿1x2 ⫽ 3 a2x ⫹ 1
3x ⫹ 2b2
3x ⫹ 2b2  c13x ⫹ 22122 ⫺ 12x ⫹ 12132
 ⫽ 3 a2x ⫹ 1
13x ⫹ 22 2
3x ⫹ 2b2  c6x ⫹ 4 ⫺ 6x ⫺ 3
 ⫽ 3 a2x ⫹ 1
d
312x ⫹ 12 2
13x ⫹ 22 4

13x ⫹ 22 2

Combine like terms, and simplify.

 ⫽

d

(x2)

See page 22.

is given by

10, 1
82

In particular, the slope of the tangent line to the graph of f at 

310 ⫹ 12 2
10 ⫹ 22 4

⫽ 3
16

f ¿102 ⫽

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
Refer to Example 6.

1. Use a graphing utility to plot the graph of the function f, using the viewing
window [⫺2, 1] ⫻ [⫺1, 2]. Then draw the tangent line to the graph of f at
the point 

.

2. For  a  better  picture,  repeat  part  1  using  the  viewing  window  [⫺1,  1]  ⫻

10, 1
82
[⫺0.1, 0.3].

3. Use the numerical differentiation capability of the graphing utility to verify

that the slope of the tangent line at 

10, 1
82

is 

.3
16

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 7 Growth in a Health Club‘s Membership The member-
ship of The Fitness Center, which opened a few years ago, is approximated 

by the function

N1t2 ⫽ 100164 ⫹ 4t2 2/3

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 522

where N(t) gives the number of members at the beginning of week t.
a. Find N⬘(t).
b. How fast was the center’s membership increasing initially (t ⫽ 0)?
c. How fast was the membership increasing at the beginning of the 40th week?
d. What was the membership when the center first opened? At the beginning of

the 40th week?

Solution

a. Using the General Power Rule, we obtain

 N ¿1t2 ⫽ d

 ⫽ 100  

d

dt    3100164 ⫹ 4t2 2/34
dt   164 ⫹ 4t2 2/3
3b  164 ⫹ 4t2 ⫺1/3
3    164 ⫹ 4t2 ⫺1/3142
3164 ⫹ 4t2 1/3

800

 ⫽ 100 a 2
 ⫽ 200

 ⫽

d

dt   164 ⫹ 4t2

  

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

638

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

b. The rate at which the membership was increasing when the center first opened

is given by

N ¿102 ⫽ 800
31642 1/3

or approximately 67 people per week.

⬇ 66.7

c. The rate at which the membership was increasing at the beginning of the 40th

week is given by

N ¿1402 ⫽

800

3164 ⫹ 1602 1/3

⬇ 43.9

or approximately 44 people per week.

d. The membership when the center first opened is given by

N102 ⫽ 1001642 2/3 ⫽ 1001162 ⫽ 1600

or approximately 1600 people. The membership at the beginning of the 40th
week is given by

N1402 ⫽ 100164 ⫹ 1602 2/3 ⬇ 3688.3

or approximately 3688 people.

Explore & Discuss
The profit P of a one-product software manufacturer depends on the number of units of its prod-
uct sold. The manufacturer estimates that it will sell x units of its product per week. Suppose 
P ⫽ t(x) and x ⫽ f(t), where t and f are differentiable functions and t is measured in weeks.
1. Write an expression giving the rate of change of the profit with respect to the number of

units sold.

2. Write an expression giving the rate of change of the number of units sold per week.
3. Write an expression giving the rate of change of the profit per week.

a

A

h

FIGURE 47
Cross section of the aorta

APPLIED EXAMPLE 8 Arteriosclerosis Arteriosclerosis begins during child-
hood when plaque (soft masses of fatty material) forms in the arterial walls, 

blocking the flow of blood through the arteries and leading to heart attacks,
strokes, and gangrene. Suppose the idealized cross section of the aorta is circular
with radius a cm and by year t, the thickness of the plaque (assume that it is 
uniform) is h ⫽ t(t) cm (Figure 47). Then the area of the opening is given by 
A ⫽ p(a ⫺ h)2 square centimeters (cm2).

Suppose the radius of an individual’s artery is 1 cm (a ⫽ 1) and the thickness

of the plaque in centimeters in year t is given by

h ⫽ t1t2 ⫽ 1 ⫺ 0.01110,000 ⫺ t221/2 ⫺ 0.001t

Since the area of the arterial opening is given by

the rate at which A is changing with respect to time is given by

A ⫽ f1h2 ⫽ p11 ⫺ h2 2

dA
 
dt

# dh
dt

⫽ f ¿1h2 # t¿1t2
⫽ dA
dh
 ⫽ 2p11 ⫺ h21⫺12c⫺0.01a1
 ⫽ ⫺2p11 ⫺ h2c

0.01t

110,000 ⫺ t 

By the Chain Rule

2b110,000 ⫺ t 
⫺ 0.001d
22 1/2

22 ⫺1/2 1⫺2t2 ⫺ 0.001d

Use the Chain
Rule thrice.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

For example, when t ⫽ 50,

h ⫽ t(50) ⫽ 1 ⫺ 0.01(10,000 ⫺ 2500)1/2 ⫺ (0.001)(50) ⬇ 0.08397

9.6 THE CHAIN RULE

639

so that

dA
dt

⫽ ⫺2p11 ⫺ 0.083972 c

10.0121502
210,000 ⫺ 1502 2

⫺ 0.001d ⬇ ⫺0.027

That is, the area of the arterial opening is decreasing at the rate of 0.03 cm2 per 
year.

Explore & Discuss
Suppose the population P of a certain bacteria culture is given by P ⫽ f(T), where T is the
temperature of the medium. Further, suppose the temperature T is a function of time t in
seconds—that is, T ⫽ t(t). Give an interpretation of each of the following quantities:

1.

dP
dT

2.

dT
dt

3.

dP
dt

4. ( f 폶 t)(t)

5. f ⬘[t(t)]t⬘(t)

9.6 Self-Check Exercises

1. Find the derivative of

f 1x2 ⫽ ⫺

122x2 ⫺ 1

2. Suppose the life expectancy at birth (in years) of a female

in a certain country is described by the function

t1t2 ⫽ 50.0211 ⫹ 1.09t2 0.1

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 1502

9.6 Concept Questions

1. In your own words, state the Chain Rule for differentiating

the composite function h(x) ⫽ t[ f (x)].

2. State the General Power Rule for differentiating the func-

tion h(x) ⫽ [ f (x)]n, where n is a real number.

3. If f(t) gives the number of units of a certain product sold by
a company after t days and t(x) gives the revenue (in dol-
lars)  realized  from  the  sale  of  x units  of  the  company’s
products, what does (t 폶 f )⬘(t) describe?

9.6 Exercises

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
the beginning of 1900.
a. What is the life expectancy at birth of a female born at

the beginning of 1980? At the beginning of 2010?

b. How fast is the life expectancy at birth of a female born

at any time t changing?

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 9.6 can be found on 
page 643.

4. Suppose f(x) gives the air temperature in the gondola of a
hot-air  balloon  when  it  is  at  an  altitude  of  x ft  from  the
ground and t(t) gives the altitude of the balloon t min after
lifting off from the ground. Find a function giving the rate
of change of the air temperature in the gondola at time t.

In Exercises 1–48, find the derivative of each function.

1. f1x2 ⫽ 12x ⫺ 12 3
3. f1x2 ⫽ 1x 2 ⫹ 22 5
5. f1x2 ⫽ 12x ⫺ x 22 4

2. f1x2 ⫽ 11 ⫺ x2 3
4. f1t2 ⫽ 21t 3 ⫺ 12 5
6. f1x2 ⫽ 31x 3 ⫺ x2 4

7. f1x2 ⫽ 12x ⫹ 12 ⫺2
9. f1x2 ⫽ 1x 2 ⫺ 42 5/2
f 1x2 ⫽ 13x ⫺ 2

11.

8.

2 ⫹ t2 ⫺3

f 1t2 ⫽ 1
2  12t 
10. f1t2 ⫽ 13t 2 ⫺ 2t ⫹ 12 3/2
12. f 1t2 ⫽ 23t 

2 ⫺ t

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

640

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

f 1x2 ⫽ 23 1 ⫺ x2
f 1x2 ⫽
12x ⫹ 32 3
112t ⫺ 4
f 1t2 ⫽

1

13.

15.

17.

14.

16.

18.

19.

y ⫽

1

14x4 ⫹ x2 3/2

21. f1x2 ⫽ 13x 2 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 12 ⫺2
22. f1t2 ⫽ 15t 3 ⫹ 2t 2 ⫺ t ⫹ 42 ⫺3
23. f1x2 ⫽ 1x 2 ⫹ 12 3 ⫺ 1x 3 ⫹ 12 2
24. f1t2 ⫽ 12t ⫺ 12 4 ⫹ 12t ⫹ 12 4
25. f1t2 ⫽ 1t⫺1 ⫺ t⫺22 3
f 1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 1 ⫹ 1x ⫺ 1

27.

f 1x2 ⫽ 22x2 ⫺ 2x ⫹ 3
f 1x2 ⫽
f 1x2 ⫽

2

1x2 ⫺ 12 4
122x2 ⫺ 1
423 2t 

2 ⫹ t

20.

f 1t2 ⫽

26. f1√2 ⫽ 1√⫺3 ⫹ 4√⫺22 3

28. f1u2 ⫽ 12u ⫹ 12 3/2 ⫹ (u2 ⫺ 12 ⫺3/2
29. f1x2 ⫽ 2x 213 ⫺ 4x2 4
31. f1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫺ 12 212x ⫹ 12 4
32. t1u2 ⫽ 11 ⫹ u22 511 ⫺ 2u22 8

30. h1t2 ⫽ t 213t ⫹ 42 3

t

x2

36.

38.

40.

42.

39.

35.

37.

34.

33.

2x ⫺ 1

3u ⫹ 2

f 1x2 ⫽ ax ⫹ 3
x ⫺ 2b3
2t ⫹ 1b3/2
s1t2 ⫽ a
t 1u2 ⫽ A u ⫹ 1
f 1x2 ⫽
1x2 ⫺ 12 4
h 1x2 ⫽ 13x2 ⫹ 12 3
1x2 ⫺ 12 4
12x ⫹ 1
f 1x2 ⫽
2t ⫹ 12t 
t 1t2 ⫽

f 1x2 ⫽ ax ⫹ 1
x ⫺ 1b5
sb3/2
t 1s2 ⫽ as2 ⫹ 1
t 1x2 ⫽ A 2x ⫹ 1
t 1u2 ⫽ 2u2
1u2 ⫹ u2 3
t 1t2 ⫽ 12t ⫺ 12 2
13t ⫹ 22 4
f 1t2 ⫽
22t 
2x2 ⫹ 1
f 1x2 ⫽
2x2 ⫺ 1
47. Find the second derivative of f1x2 ⫽ 1x 2 ⫹ 22 5.
48. Find the second derivative of t1t2 ⫽ t 213t ⫹ 12 4.

x2 ⫺ 1

2 ⫹ 1

43.

44.

45.

46.

41.

2

4t 

2 ⫹ 2t ⫺ 1

In Exercises 49–54, find 

du
dx
49. y ⫽ u4/3 and u ⫽ 3x 2 ⫺1

dy
du

, 

, and 

dy
dx

.

y ⫽ 1u

50.

and u ⫽ 7x ⫺ 2x 2

51. y ⫽ u⫺2/3 and u ⫽ 2x 3 ⫺ x ⫹ 1

52. y ⫽ 2u2 ⫹ 1 and u ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 1

53.

and u ⫽ x 3 ⫺ x

y ⫽ 1u ⫹ 11u
y ⫽ 1
u

 and u ⫽ 1x ⫹ 1

54.
55. If t(x) ⫽ f (2x ⫹ 1), what is t⬘(x)?
56. If h(x) ⫽ f (⫺x3), what is h⬘(x)?
57. Suppose F(x) ⫽ t( f(x)) and f (2) ⫽ 3, f ⬘(2) ⫽ ⫺3, 

t(3) ⫽ 5, and t⬘(3) ⫽ 4. Find F⬘(2).

58. Suppose h ⫽ f 폶 t. Find h⬘(0) given that f(0) ⫽ 6, 

f ⬘(5) ⫽ ⫺2, t(0) ⫽ 5, and t⬘(0) ⫽ 3.

59. Suppose F(x) ⫽ f(x 2 ⫹ 1). Find F⬘(1) if f ⬘(2) ⫽ 3.

60. Let F(x) ⫽ f( f(x)). Does it follow that F⬘(x) ⫽ [ f ⬘(x)]2?

Hint: Let f(x) ⫽ x 2.

61. Suppose h ⫽ t 폶 f. Does it follow that h⬘ ⫽t⬘ 폶 f ⬘?

Hint: Let f(x) ⫽ x and t(x) ⫽ x 2.

62. Suppose h ⫽ f 폶 t. Show that h⬘ ⫽( f ⬘ 폶 t)t⬘.
In  Exercises  63–66,  find  an  equation  of  the  tangent  line  to  the
graph of the function at the given point.

63. f1x2 ⫽ 11 ⫺ x21x 2 ⫺ 12 2; 12, ⫺92

64.

65.

66.

f 1x2 ⫽ ax ⫹ 1
x ⫺ 1b2
; 13, 42
f 1x2 ⫽ x22x2 ⫹ 7; 13, 152
; 12, 22
f 1x2 ⫽

82x2 ⫹ 6x

67. TELEVISION VIEWING The number of viewers of a television
series introduced several years ago is approximated by the
function

N1t2 ⫽ 160 ⫹ 2t2 2/3

11 ⱕ t ⱕ 262

where N(t) (measured in millions) denotes the number of
weekly viewers of the series in the tth week. Find the rate
of increase of the weekly audience at the end of week 2 and
at  the  end  of  week  12.  How  many  viewers  were  there  in
week 2? In week 24?

68. OUTSOURCING OF JOBS According  to  a  study  conducted  in
2003,  the  total  number  of  U.S.  jobs  that  are  projected  to
leave the country by year t, where t ⫽ 0 corresponds to the
beginning of 2000, is

N1t2 ⫽ 0.00184251t ⫹ 52 2.5

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 152

where N(t) is measured in millions. How fast was the num-
ber  of  U.S.  jobs  that  were  outsourced  changing  in  2005 
(t ⫽5)? In 2010 (t ⫽ 10)?
Source: Forrester Research.

69. WORKING MOTHERS The  percentage  of  mothers  who  work
outside the home and have children younger than age 6 is
approximated by the function

P1t2 ⫽ 33.551t ⫹ 5) 0.205

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 212

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.6 THE CHAIN RULE

641

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
the beginning of 1980. Compute P⬘(t). At what rate was the
percentage of these mothers changing at the beginning of
2000?  What  was  the  percentage  of  these  mothers  at  the
beginning of 2000?
Source: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

74. CONTINUING EDUCATION ENROLLMENT The  registrar  of  Kel-
logg University estimates that the total student enrollment
in the Continuing Education division will be given by

N 1t2 ⫽ ⫺

20,000

11 ⫹ 0.2t

⫹ 21,000

70. SELLING PRICE OF DVD RECORDERS The rise of digital music
and the improvement to the DVD format are some of the
reasons why the average selling price of stand-alone DVD
recorders will drop in the coming years. The function

where N(t) denotes the number of students enrolled in the
division  t years  from  now.  Find  an  expression  for  N⬘(t).
How  fast  is  the  student  enrollment  increasing  currently?
How fast will it be increasing 5 years from now?

A 1t2 ⫽

699

1t ⫹ 12 0.94

    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 52

gives  the  projected  average  selling  price  (in  dollars)  of
stand-alone  DVD  recorders  in  year  t,  where  t ⫽ 0  corre-
sponds to the beginning of 2002. How fast was the average
selling  price  of  stand-alone  DVD  recorders  falling  at  the
beginning of 2002? How fast was it falling at the beginning
of 2006?
Source: Consumer Electronics Association.

71. BRAIN CANCER SURVIVAL RATE Glioblastoma  is  the  most
common and most deadly of brain tumors, and it kills most
patients in a little over a year. The probability of survival
for patients with a glioblastoma t years after diagnosis is
approximated by the function

P 1t2 ⫽

100

11 ⫹ 0.14t2 9.2

    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

where P is the percent of surviving patients.
a. Compute P(0) and P(1), and interpret your results.
b. Compute P⬘(0) and P⬘(1), and interpret your results.
Source: National Cancer Institute.

72. AGING POPULATION The  population  of  Americans  age  55
and older as a percentage of the total population is approx-
imated by the function

f1t2 ⫽ 10.7210.9t ⫹ 102 0.3

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 202

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
the year 2000. At what rate was the percentage of Ameri-
cans age 55 and older changing at the beginning of 2000?
At what rate was the percentage of Americans age 55 and
older  changing  in  2012?  What  was  the  percentage  of  the
population of Americans age 55 and older in 2012?
Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

73. CONCENTRATION OF CARBON MONOXIDE (CO)  IN THE AIR
According  to  a  joint  study  conducted  by  Oxnard’s  Envi-
ronmental  Management  Department  and  a  state  govern-
ment  agency,  the  concentration  of  CO  in  the  air  due  to
automobile exhaust t years from now is given by

C1t2 ⫽ 0.0110.2t2 ⫹ 4t ⫹ 642 2/3

75. AIR POLLUTION According  to  the  South  Coast  Air  Quality
Management District, the level of nitrogen dioxide, a brown
gas that impairs breathing, present in the atmosphere on a cer-
tain May day in downtown Los Angeles is approximated by

A1t2 ⫽ 0.03t 31t ⫺ 72 4 ⫹ 60.2

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 72

where A(t) is measured in pollutant standard index and t is
measured in hours, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 7 A.M.
a. Find A⬘(t).
b. Find A⬘(1), A⬘(3), and A⬘(4), and interpret your results.
Source: Los Angeles Times.

76. EFFECT OF LUXURY TAX ON CONSUMPTION Government econ-
omists  of  a  developing  country  determined  that  the  pur-
chase of imported perfume is related to a proposed “luxury
tax” by the formula

N 1x2 ⫽ 210,000 ⫺ 40x ⫺ 0.02x2    10 ⱕ x ⱕ 2002

where N(x) measures the percentage of normal consumption
of perfume when a “luxury tax” of x% is imposed on it. Find
the rate of change of N(x) for taxes of 10%, 100%, and 150%.

77. PULSE RATE OF AN ATHLETE The  pulse  rate  (the  number  of
heartbeats/minute)  of  a  long-distance  runner  t sec  after
leaving the starting line is given by

30021

P 1t2 ⫽

2 ⫹ 2t ⫹ 25

2 t 
t ⫹ 25

    1t ⱖ 02

Compute P⬘(t). How fast is the athlete’s pulse rate increas-
ing  10  sec,  60  sec,  and  2  min  into  the  run?  What  is  her
pulse rate 2 min into the run?

78. THURSTONE LEARNING MODEL Psychologist L. L. Thurstone
suggested the following relationship between learning time
T and the length of a list n:

T ⫽ f 1n2 ⫽ An1n ⫺ b

where A and b are constants that depend on the person and
the task.

a. Compute dT>dn, and interpret your result.
b. For a certain person and a certain task, suppose A ⫽ 4
and  b ⫽ 4.  Compute  f ⬘(13)  and  f ⬘(29),  and  interpret
your results.

parts per million.
a. Find the rate at which the level of CO is changing with

respect to time.

b. Find the rate at which the level of CO will be changing 

5 years from now.

79. OIL SPILLS In calm waters, the oil spilling from the ruptured
hull of a grounded tanker spreads in all directions. Assum-
ing that the area polluted is a circle and that its radius is
increasing at a rate of 2 ft/sec, determine how fast the area
is increasing when the radius of the circle is 40 ft.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

642

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

80. ARTERIOSCLEROSIS Refer to Example 8, page 638. Suppose
the radius of an individual’s artery is 1 cm and the thickness
of the plaque (in centimeters) t years from now is given by

where x denotes the number of housing starts. Suppose the
number of housing starts in the next t months is expected
to be

h ⫽ t 1t2 ⫽ 0.5t 

2 ⫹ 10

t 

2

    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

How  fast  will  the  arterial  opening  be  decreasing  5  years
from now?

81. TRAFFIC FLOW Opened in the late 1950s, the Central Artery
in downtown Boston was designed to move 75,000 vehi-
cles  a  day.  The  number  of  vehicles  moved  per  day  is
approximated by the function

x ⫽ f1t2 ⫽ 6.25t 2 ⫹ 19.75t ⫹ 74.75

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 4.52

where  x is  measured  in  thousands  and  t in  decades,  with 
t ⫽ 0 corresponding to the beginning of 1959. Suppose the
average speed of traffic flow in mph is given by

S ⫽ t1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.00075x 2 ⫹ 67.5

175 ⱕ x ⱕ 3502

where x has the same meaning as before. What was the rate
of change of the average speed of traffic flow at the begin-
ning of 1999? What was the average speed of traffic flow
at that time?
Hint: S ⫽ t[ f (t)]

82. HOTEL OCCUPANCY RATES The  occupancy  rate  of  the  all-
suite Wonderland Hotel, located near an amusement park,
is given by the function

r 1t2 ⫽ 10
81  t 

3 ⫺ 10
3  t 

2 ⫹ 200

9  t ⫹ 56.2    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 122

where t is measured in months, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
the beginning of January. Management has estimated that
the monthly revenue (in thousands of dollars per month) is
approximated by the function

R 1r2 ⫽ ⫺ 3

5000  r 

3 ⫹ 9
50  r 
where r is the occupancy rate.
a. Find an expression that gives the rate of change of Won-

2    10 ⱕ r ⱕ 1002

derland’s occupancy rate with respect to time.

b. Find an expression that gives the rate of change of Won-
derland’s  monthly  revenue  with  respect  to  the  occu-
pancy rate.

c. What  is  the  rate  of  change  of  Wonderland’s  monthly
revenue with respect to time at the beginning of Janu-
ary? At the beginning of July?
Hint: Use the Chain Rule to find R⬘(r(0))r⬘(0) and
R⬘(r(6))r⬘(6).

83. EFFECT OF HOUSING STARTS ON JOBS The president of a major
housing construction firm claims that the number of con-
struction jobs created is given by

N1x2 ⫽ 1.42x

x 1t2 ⫽ 7t 

3t 

2 ⫹ 140t ⫹ 700
2 ⫹ 80t ⫹ 550

million  units  per  year.  Find  an  expression  that  gives  the
rate at which the number of construction jobs will be cre-
ated t months from now. At what rate will construction jobs
be created 1 year from now?

84. DEMAND FOR PCS The quantity demanded per month, x, of
a certain make of tablet PC is related to the average unit
price, p (in dollars), of tablet PCs by the equation

x ⫽ f  1 p2 ⫽ 100

9

2810,000 ⫺ p2

It is estimated that t months from now, the average price of
a tablet PC will be given by

81t
p1t2 ⫽ 400
1 ⫹ 1

⫹ 200    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 602

dollars. Find the rate at which the quantity demanded per
month of the tablet PCs will be changing 16 months from
now.

85. DEMAND FOR WATCHES The demand equation for the Sicard

sports watch is given by

x ⫽ f  1 p2 ⫽ 10 B 50 ⫺ p

p

     10 ⬍ p ⱕ 502

where  x (measured  in  units  of  a  thousand)  is  the  quantity
demanded each week and p is the unit price in dollars. Find the
rate of change of the quantity demanded of the sports watches
with respect to the unit price when the unit price is $25.

86. CRUISE SHIP BOOKINGS The  management  of  Cruise  World,
operators of Caribbean luxury cruises, expects that the per-
centage of young adults booking passage on their cruises in
the  years  ahead  will  rise  dramatically.  They  have  con-
structed the following model, which gives the percentage
of young adult passengers in year t:

p ⫽ f 1t2 ⫽ 50 at 

t 

2 ⫹ 2t ⫹ 4

2 ⫹ 4t ⫹ 8b    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 52

Young adults normally pick shorter cruises and generally
spend less on their passage. The following model gives an
approximation of the average amount of money R (in dol-
lars) spent per passenger on a cruise when the percentage
of young adults is p:

R 1  p2 ⫽ 1000 a 

p ⫹ 4

p ⫹ 2b

Find the rate at which the amount of money spent per pas-
senger on a cruise will be changing 2 years from now.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In Exercises 87–90, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
87. If  f and t are  differentiable  and  h ⫽ f 폶 t,  then  h⬘(x)  ⫽

f ⬘[t(x)]t⬘(x).

88. If f is differentiable and c is a constant, then

91. In Section 9.4, we proved that

d

dx   1x n2 ⫽ nx n⫺1

for  the  special  case  when  n ⫽ 2.  Use  the  Chain  Rule  to
show that

9.6 THE CHAIN RULE

643

d

dx  3  f 1cx24 ⫽ cf ¿1cx2

89. If f is differentiable, then

d

dx  2f 1x2 ⫽

f ¿1x2
22f 1x2

90. If f is differentiable, then

d

dx    c f  a1

xbd ⫽ f  ¿  a1
xb

9.6 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. Rewriting, we have

f1x2 ⫽ ⫺12x 2 ⫺ 12 ⫺1/2

Using the General Power Rule, we find

 f  ¿1x2 ⫽ ⫺ d
 ⫽ ⫺a⫺1
 ⫽ 1

dx   12x 2 ⫺ 12 ⫺1/2
2b 12x 2 ⫺ 12 ⫺3/2
2  12x 2 ⫺ 12 ⫺3/214x2
12x 2 ⫺ 12 3/2

 ⫽

2x

  

d

dx   12x 2 ⫺ 12

2. a. The  life  expectancy  at  birth  of  a  female  born  at  the

beginning of 1980 is given by

t1802 ⫽ 50.0231 ⫹ 1.0918024 0.1 ⬇ 78.29

d

dx   1x 1/n2 ⫽ 1

n   x 1/n⫺1

for any nonzero integer n, assuming that f(x) ⫽ x1/n is dif-
ferentiable.
Hint: Let f(x) ⫽ x1/n, so that [ f(x)]n ⫽ x. Differentiate both sides
with respect to x.

92. With the aid of Exercise 91, prove that

d

dx   1x r2 ⫽ rx 

r⫺1

for every rational number r.
Hint: Let r ⫽ m>n, where m and n are integers, with n ⫽ 0, and
write xr ⫽ (x m)1/n.

or approximately 78 years. Similarly, the life expectancy
at birth of a female born at the beginning of the year 2010
is given by

t11102 ⫽ 50.0231 ⫹ 1.09111024 0.1 ⬇ 80.80

or approximately 81 years.
b. The rate of change of the life expectancy at birth of a
female  born  at  any  time  t is  given  by t⬘(t).  Using  the
General Power Rule, we have

 t¿1t2 ⫽ 50.02  

d

dt    11 ⫹ 1.09t2 0.1

d

dt    11 ⫹ 1.09t2

   

 ⫽ 150.02210.1211 ⫹ 1.09t2 ⫺0.9
 ⫽ 150.02210.1211.09211 ⫹ 1.09t2 ⫺0.9
 ⫽ 5.4521811 ⫹ 1.09t2 ⫺0.9
 ⫽ 5.45218
11 ⫹ 1.09t2 0.9

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Finding the Derivative of a Composite Function
EXAMPLE 1 Find the rate of change of 

f 1x2 ⫽ 1x11 ⫹ 0.02x22 3/2

when x ⫽ 2.1.

Solution Using the numerical derivative operation of a graphing utility, we find

f ⬘12.12 ⫽ 0.5821463392

(continued)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

644

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

or approximately 0.58 unit per unit change in x. (See Figure T1.)

nDeriv(X^.5(1+.0
2X^2)^1.5,X,2.1)

    .5821463392

FIGURE T1
The TI-83/84 numerical derivative screen
for computing f⬘(2.1)

APPLIED EXAMPLE 2 Amusement Park Attendance The management of
AstroWorld (“The Amusement Park of the Future”) estimates that the 

total number of visitors (in thousands) to the amusement park t hours after open-
ing time at 9 A.M. is given by

nDeriv((30X)/(2+
X^2)^.5,X,1.5)
        6.848066034

N 1t2 ⫽ 30t22 ⫹ t 

2

What is the rate at which visitors are admitted to the amusement park at 10:30 A.M.?

Solution Using the numerical derivative operation of a graphing utility, we find

FIGURE T2
The TI-83/84 numerical derivative screen
for computing N ⬘(1.5)

or approximately 6848 visitors per hour. (See Figure T2.)

N⬘11.52 ⬇ 6.8481

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

In Exercises 1–6, use the numerical derivative operation to find
the rate of change of f at the given value of x. Give your answer
accurate to four decimal places.
1.

f 1x2 ⫽ 2x2 ⫺ x4; x ⫽ 0.5
f 1x2 ⫽ x ⫺ 21 ⫺ x2; x ⫽ 0.4
f 1x2 ⫽ x21 ⫺ x2; x ⫽ 0.2
f 1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 2x2 ⫹ 42 3/2; x ⫽ 1
f 1x2 ⫽
f 1x2 ⫽

1 ⫹ 11 ⫹ x22 3/2; x ⫽ 3

; x ⫽ ⫺1

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

21 ⫹ x2

x3 ⫹ 2

x3

a. What  was  the  rate  of  change  of  the  number  of  people
watching TV on mobile phones at the beginning of 2007?
b. What is the rate of change of the number of people watch-
ing TV on mobile phones expected to be at the beginning
of 2011?

Source: IDC, U.S. forecast.

8. ACCUMULATION YEARS Demographic  studies  pertaining  to
investors  are  of  particular  importance  to  financial  institu-
tions. People from their mid-40s to their mid-50s are in the
prime investing years. The function

N1t2 ⫽ 34.411 ⫹ 0.32125t2 0.15

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 122

gives the projected number of people in this age group in the
United States (in millions) in year t, where t ⫽ 0 corresponds
to the beginning of 1996.
a. How large was this segment of the population projected

to be at the beginning of 2008?

b. How fast was this segment of the population growing at

7. TV MOBILE PHONES The number of people watching TV on

mobile phones (in millions) is approximated by

N1t2 ⫽ 11.911 ⫹ 0.91t    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to the
beginning of 2007.

the beginning of 2008?

Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

9.7 Differentiation of Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

9.7 DIFFERENTIATION OF EXPONENTIAL AND LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS

645

The Derivative of the Exponential Function
To study the effects of budget deficit-reduction plans at different income levels, it is
important to know the income distribution of American families. Based on data from
the House Budget Committee, the House Ways and Means Committee, and the U.S.
Census  Bureau,  the  graph  of  f shown  in  Figure  48  gives  the  number  of  American 
families y (in millions) as a function of their annual income x (in thousands of dollars)
in 1990.

y

s
e
i
l
i

m
a
f
 
f
o

 
s
n
o
i
l
l
i

M

2
1.75
1.5
1.25
1
0.75
0.5
0.25

0

20

40

60

80 100 120

140

Thousands of dollars

x

FIGURE 48
The graph of f shows the number of fami-
lies versus their annual income.
Sources: House Budget Committee;
House Ways and Means Committee;
U.S. Census Bureau.

Observe that the graph of f rises very quickly and then tapers off. From the graph
of f, you can see that the bulk of American families earned less than $100,000 per year.
In fact, 95% of U.S. families earned less than $102,358 per year in 1990. (We will refer
to this model again in Using Technology Exercise 8 at the end of this section.)

To analyze mathematical models involving exponential and logarithmic functions in
greater detail, we need to develop rules for computing the derivative of these functions.
We begin by looking at the rule for computing the derivative of the exponential function.

Rule 8: Derivative of the Exponential Function

d

dx   1ex2 ⫽ ex

Thus, the derivative of the exponential function with base e is equal to the function
itself. To demonstrate the validity of this rule, we compute

 
hS0

 f  ¿1x2 ⫽ lim
 ⫽ lim
 
hS0

 ⫽ lim
 
hS0

x

f  1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f  1x2
h
x⫹h ⫺ e 
x1e 
h ⫺ 12
h
h ⫺ 1

e 

h

e 

e 

Write e x⫹h ⫽ e xeh and factor.

 ⫽ e 

x lim
 
hS0

h

Why?

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

646

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

TABLE 5

h

0.1
0.01
0.001

⫺0.1
⫺0.01
⫺0.001

h ⫺ 1
e 
h

1.0517
1.0050
1.0005
0.9516
0.9950
0.9995

To evaluate

   lim
 
hS0

h ⫺ 1
e 

h

let’s refer to Table 5, which is constructed with the aid of a calculator. From the table,
we see that

h ⫺ 1
e 

h

lim
 
hS0

⫽ 1

(Although a rigorous proof of this fact is possible, it is beyond the scope of this book.
Also see Example 1, Using Technology, page 655.) Using this result, we conclude that

as we set out to show.

f ⬘1x2 ⫽ e x ⭈ 1 ⫽ e x

EXAMPLE 1 Find the derivative of each of the following functions:

a. f1x2 ⫽ x 2e x

b. t1t2 ⫽ 1et ⫹ 223/2

Solution

a. The Product Rule gives

 f  ¿1x2 ⫽ d

dx     1x 

2e 

 ⫽ x 

2e 

x ⫹ e 

b. Using the General Power Rule, we find

d

2  

x2 ⫽ x 
dx    1e 
 12 x2 ⫽ xe 

x2 ⫹ e 
 1x ⫹ 22

x

x

x  

d

dx    1x  

22

(x2)

See page 18.

t ¿1t2 ⫽ 3

2    1e 

t ⫹ 22 1/2  

d

dt    1e 

t ⫹ 22 ⫽ 3

2    1e 

t ⫹ 22 1/2e 

t ⫽ 3
2   e 

t 1e 

t ⫹ 22 1/2

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
Consider the exponential function f(x) ⫽ b x (b ⬎ 0, b ⫽ 1).
1. Use the definition of the derivative of a function to show that

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ b 

x # lim

 
hS0

b 

h ⫺ 1
h

2. Use the result of part 1 to show that

 

d

dx    12x2 ⫽ 2 
dx    13 
x2 ⫽ 3 

d

 

 
hS0

x # lim
x # lim

 
hS0

2 

3 

h ⫺ 1
h
h ⫺ 1
h

3. Use the technique in Using Technology, page 655, to show that (to two dec-

imal places)

2 

h ⫺ 1
h

lim
 
hS0

⫽ 0.69  and  lim
 
hS0
4. Conclude from the results of parts 2 and 3 that
x  and  d

d

x2 ⬇ 10.6922 

dx    12 

3 

h ⫺ 1
h

⫽ 1.10

dx    13x2 ⬇ 11.1023 

x

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.7 DIFFERENTIATION OF EXPONENTIAL AND LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS

647

Thus,

d

dx    1b 

x2 ⫽ k # b 

x

where k is an appropriate constant.

5. The results of part 4 suggest that, for convenience, we pick the base b, where 

2 ⬍ b ⬍ 3, so that k ⫽ 1. This value of b is e ⬇ 2.718281828. . . . Thus,

d

dx    1e 

x2 ⫽ e 

x

This is why we prefer to work with the exponential function f(x) ⫽ e x.

Applying the Chain Rule to Exponential Functions
To  enlarge  the  class  of  exponential  functions  to  be  differentiated,  we  appeal  to 
the Chain Rule to obtain the following rule for differentiating composite functions
of  the  form h(x)  ⫽ e f (x).  An  example  of  such  a  function  is  h(x)  ⫽ ex 2⫺2x.  Here, 
f (x) ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 2x.

Rule 9: The Chain Rule for Exponential Functions
If f(x) is a differentiable function, then

d

dx    1e  

f   1x22 ⫽ e  

f   1x2f  ¿1x2

To see this, observe that if h(x) ⫽ t[ f(x)], where t(x) ⫽ e x, then by virtue of the

Chain Rule,

since t⬘(x) ⫽ e x.

h⬘1x2 ⫽ t⬘[ f1x2] f ⬘1x2 ⫽ e f (x)f ⬘1x2

As an aid to remembering the Chain Rule for Exponential Functions, observe that

it has the following form:

d

dx     1e  

f   1x22 ⫽ e  

앖
앖
–– Same ––

f   1x2 # derivative of exponent

EXAMPLE 2 Find the derivative of each of the following functions:

a. f1x2 ⫽ e2x

Solution

b. y ⫽ e⫺3x

c. t1t2 ⫽ e2t 2⫹t

2x # 2 ⫽ 2e 

2x

a.

b.

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ e 

2 x 

dy
dx

⫽ e⫺3x 

d

d

dx     12x2 ⫽ e 
dx     1⫺3x2 ⫽ ⫺3e⫺3x
2⫹t # d

c. t ¿1t2 ⫽ e 

2 t 

dt     12t 

2 ⫹ t2 ⫽ 14t ⫹ 12e 

2

2⫹t
t
 

 

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

648

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

EXAMPLE 3 Differentiate the function y ⫽ xe⫺2x.

Solution Using the Product Rule, followed by the Chain Rule, we find

dy
 
dx

⫽ x 

d

d

dx   1e⫺2x2 ⫹ e⫺2x 

dx     1x2
dx     1⫺2x2 ⫹ e⫺2x

d

 ⫽ xe⫺2x 

Use the Chain Rule on the first term.

 ⫽ ⫺2x e⫺2x ⫹ e⫺2x
 ⫽ e⫺2x11 ⫺ 2x2

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 4 Differentiate the function 

t

t 1t2 ⫽ e 

t ⫹ e⫺t
e 

.

Solution Using the Quotient Rule, followed by the Chain Rule, we find

t 

d
dt

 1e 
t ⫹ e⫺t2
t ⫺ e⫺t2

d
dt

t2 ⫺ e 
 1e 
1e 
t ⫹ e⫺t2 2
t1e 
t ⫺ e 
t ⫹ e⫺t2 2
2t ⫹ 1

e0 ⫽ 1

1e 
t ¿1t2 ⫽
 ⫽ 1e 
 ⫽ e 

 ⫽

1e 

t ⫹ e⫺t2 
t ⫹ e⫺t2e 
1e 
2t ⫹ 1 ⫺ e 
1e 
t ⫹ e⫺t2 2
t ⫹ e⫺t2 2

2

(x2)

See page 11.

EXAMPLE 5 In Section 3.3, we discussed some practical applications of the expo-
nential function

Q(t) ⫽ Q0ekt

where Q0 and k are positive constants and t 僆 [0, ⬁). A quantity Q(t) growing
according to this law experiences exponential growth. Show that for a quantity Q(t)
experiencing exponential growth, the rate of growth of the quantity, Q⬘(t), at any
time t is directly proportional to the amount of the quantity present.

Solution Using the Chain Rule for Exponential Functions, we compute the deriva-
tive Q⬘ of the function Q. Thus,

d

kt 

dt   1kt2
 Q ¿1t2 ⫽ Q0 e 
kt1k2
 ⫽ Q0e 
 ⫽ kQ0e 
 ⫽ kQ1t2

kt

Q(t) ⫽ Q0ekt

which is the desired conclusion.

The Derivative of ln x
Let’s now turn our attention to the differentiation of logarithmic functions.

Rule 10: Derivative of ln x

d

dx     ln0 x 0 ⫽ 1

x

    1x ⫽ 02

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.7 DIFFERENTIATION OF EXPONENTIAL AND LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS

649

To derive Rule 10, suppose x ⬎ 0 and write f(x) ⫽ ln x in the equivalent form

x ⫽ eln x ⫽ e f (x)

Differentiating  both  sides  of  the  equation  with  respect  to  x,  we  find,  using  the

Chain Rule,

from which we see that

or, since e f (x) ⫽ x,

1 ⫽ e f (x) ⭈ f ⬘1x2

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ 1
f  1x2
e  

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ 1

x

as we set out to show. You are asked to prove the rule for the case x ⬍ 0 in Exercise 89,
page 655.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 6 Find the derivative of each function:

a. f1x2 ⫽ x ln x

b.

t 1x2 ⫽ ln x

x

Solution

a. Using the Product Rule, we obtain

 f  ¿1x2 ⫽ d

dx   1x ln x2 ⫽ x 

d

dx   1ln x2 ⫹ 1ln x2 

d

dx   1x2

 ⫽ x  a 1

xb ⫹ ln x ⫽ 1 ⫹ ln x

b. Using the Quotient Rule, we obtain

x  

d

dx   1ln x2 ⫺ 1ln x2 

d
dx

 1x2

2
x 

x  a 1

xb ⫺ ln x

2

x 

⫽

t ¿1x2 ⫽

⫽ 1 ⫺ ln x

2

x 

Explore & Discuss
You can derive the formula for the derivative of f(x) ⫽ ln x directly from the definition of the
derivative, as follows.

1. Show that

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ lim

   
hS0

f  1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f  1x2

h

⫽ lim
hS0  

lna 1 ⫹ h

xb 1/h

2. Put m ⫽ x>h, and note that m 씮 ⬁ as h 씮 0. Then f ⬘(x) can be written in the form

f ⬘1x2 ⫽ lim

mS⬁

 ln a 1 ⫹ 1

mb m/x

3. Finally, use both the fact that the natural logarithmic function is continuous and the def-

inition of the number e to show that

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ 1

x

 ln c lim

mS⬁ a 1 ⫹ 1

mb md ⫽ 1

x

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

650

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

Applying the Chain Rule to Logarithmic Functions
To  enlarge  the  class  of  logarithmic  functions  to  be  differentiated,  we  appeal  once
again to the Chain Rule to obtain the following rule for differentiating composite func-
tions of the form h(x) ⫽ ln f(x), where f(x) is assumed to be a positive differentiable
function.

Rule 11: Derivative of ln f (x)
If f(x) is a differentiable function, then

d

dx   3ln f  1x24 ⫽

f  ¿1x2
f  1x2     1  f  1x2 ⬎ 02

To see this, observe that h(x) ⫽ t[ f(x)], where t(x) ⫽ ln x (x ⬎ 0). Since t⬘(x) ⫽ 1>x,

we have, using the Chain Rule,

 h ¿1x2 ⫽ t ¿3   f  1x24  f  ¿1x2
 ⫽ 1
f  1x2  f  ¿1x2 ⫽

f  ¿1x2
f  1x2

Observe that in the special case f(x)  ⫽ x, h(x)  ⫽ ln x, so the derivative of h is, by 
Rule 10, given by h⬘(x) ⫽ 1>x.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 7 Find the derivative of the function f(x) ⫽ ln(x 2 ⫹ 1).

Solution Using Rule 11, we see immediately that

d

dx     1x 

2 ⫹ 12
2 ⫹ 1

x 

f  ¿1x2 ⫽

⫽ 2x

x 

2 ⫹ 1

In differentiating functions involving logarithms, the rules of logarithms may be

used to advantage, as shown in Examples 8 and 9.

EXAMPLE 8 Differentiate the function y ⫽ ln31x 2 ⫹ 121x 3 ⫹ 2264.

Solution We first rewrite the given function using the properties of logarithms:

y ⫽ ln31x 2 ⫹ 121x 3 ⫹ 2264
⫽ ln1x 2 ⫹ 12 ⫹ ln1x 3 ⫹ 226
⫽ ln1x 2 ⫹ 12 ⫹ 6 ln1x 3 ⫹ 22

ln mn ⫽ ln m ⫹ ln n

ln mn ⫽ n ln m

Differentiating and using Rule 11, we obtain

 y ¿ ⫽

d
dx

2 ⫹ 12
  1x 
2 ⫹ 1

6   

⫹

x 
 ⫽ 2x

x 

2 ⫹ 1

22
613x 
3 ⫹ 2
x 

⫹

d

dx    1x 

3 ⫹ 22
3 ⫹ 2
x 
⫽ 2x

x 

2 ⫹ 1

⫹ 18x 

2

x 

3 ⫹ 2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.7 DIFFERENTIATION OF EXPONENTIAL AND LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS

651

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
Use a graphing utility to plot the graphs of f(x) ⫽ ln x; its first derivative func-
tion, f ⬘(x) ⫽ 1>x; and its second derivative function f ⬙(x) ⫽ ⫺1>x 2, using the
same viewing window [0, 4] ⫻ [⫺3, 3].
1. What can you say about the graph of f ⬘?
2. What can you say about the graph of f ⬙?

EXAMPLE 9 Find the derivative of the function t1t2 ⫽ ln1t 2e⫺t 22.

Solution Here again, to save some work, we first simplify the given expression
using the properties of logarithms. We have

t1t2 ⫽ ln1t 2e⫺t 22

⫽ ln t 2 ⫹ ln e⫺t 2
⫽ 2 ln t ⫺ t 2

ln mn ⫽ ln m ⫹ ln n

ln mn ⫽ n ln m and ln e ⫽ 1

Therefore,

t ¿1t2 ⫽ 2

t

⫺ 2t ⫽

211 ⫺ t 

t

22

Examples 10 and 11 involve finding the rate of change of an exponential function.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 10 Asset Depreciation An industrial asset is being
depreciated at a rate so that its book value t years from now will be

V1t2 ⫽ 50,000e⫺0.4t

dollars. How fast will the book value of the asset be changing 3 years from now?

Solution The rate of change of the book value of the asset t years from now is

V⬘1t2 ⫽ 50,000 

d
dt

e⫺0.4t

⫽ 50,0001⫺0.42e⫺0.4t ⫽ ⫺20,000e⫺0.4t

Therefore, 3 years from now, the book value of the asset will be changing at the 
rate of

V⬘132 ⫽ ⫺20,000e⫺0.41 32 ⫽ ⫺20,000e⫺1.2 ⬇ ⫺6023.88

—that is, decreasing at the rate of approximately $6024 per year.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 11 Internet Usage According to the Internet Society,
Internet connections in the 1990s were proliferating at an ever-increasing 
rate. The number of host computers (in millions) from 1994 to 2000 is approxi-
mated by

N1t2 ⫽ 3.45e0.64t

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 62

in year t (t ⫽ 0 corresponds to the beginning of 1994). How fast were the num-
ber of host computers growing at the beginning of 1996? At the beginning of 1999?
Source: Internet Society.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

652

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

Solution The rate of growth of host computers at time t is given by

N⬘1t2 ⫽ 13.45210.642e0.64t

⫽ 2.208e0.64t

In particular, the rate of growth of host computers at the beginning of 1996 is 
given by

N⬘122 ⫽ 2.208e0.641 22 ⫽ 7.94138

or approximately 7.94 million computers per year. The rate of growth of host
computers at the beginning of 1999 is given by

N⬘152 ⫽ 2.208e0.641 52 ⫽ 54.16783

or approximately 54.17 million computers per year.

9.7 Self-Check Exercises

1. Find the first and second derivatives of f (x) ⫽ xe⫺x.

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 9.7 can be found on page 655.

2. Find an equation of the tangent line to the graph of 

f (x) ⫽ x ln(2x ⫹ 3) at the point (⫺1, 0).

9.7 Concept Questions

1. State the rule for differentiating (a) f (x) ⫽ ex and 
(b) t(x) ⫽ e f (x), where f is a differentiable function.

2. Let f (x) ⫽ e kx.

a. Compute f ⬘(x).

9.7 Exercises

b. Use  the  result  to  deduce  the  sign  of  f ⬘ for  the  case 

k ⬎ 0 and the case k ⬍ 0.

3. State the rule for differentiating (a) f (x) ⫽ ln 兩 x 兩 (x ⫽ 0),
and t(x)  ⫽ ln f (x) [ f (x)  ⬎ 0], where f is a differentiable
function.

11. f x ⫽ 3 e x ⫹ e⫺x

12. f x ⫽

33. Find  an  equation  of  the  tangent  line  to  the  graph  of 

13. f w ⫽

14. f x ⫽

23. f x ⫽

25. f x ⫽ x ⫺ 1 e3x⫹2

27. f x ⫽

e1x
1
2
e x ⫺ 1
e x ⫹ 1

24. f t ⫽

⫺e⫺12t
1

21
2
1
26. f s ⫽ s2 ⫹ 1 e⫺s
28. t t ⫽
21

e⫺t

1 ⫹ t 2

2

2

In Exercises 29–32, find the second derivative of the function.
29. f x ⫽ e⫺4x ⫹ e3x

30. f t ⫽ 3e⫺2t ⫺ 5e⫺t

31. f x ⫽ 2xe3x

32. f t ⫽ t 2e⫺2t

21
21

y ⫽ e2x⫺3 at the point 

2, 12
13

.

34. Find an equation of the tangent line to the graph of y ⫽ e⫺x2

at the point 

a 1, 

1

eb

.

In Exercises 35–62, find the derivative of the function.

35. f x ⫽ 5 ln x
1

37. f x ⫽ ln x ⫹ 1

2

36. f x ⫽ ln 5x
1

38. t x ⫽ ln 2x ⫹ 12

1
1

2
2

1
1
1

1
1

1
1

2
2
2

2
2

2
2

In Exercises 1–28, find the derivative of the function.
1. f x ⫽ e3x
3. t t ⫽ e⫺t
5. f x ⫽ e x ⫹ x 2

6. f x ⫽ 2e x ⫺ x 2

4. f x ⫽ e⫺2x

2. f x ⫽ 3e x

2
1
21
2
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2

7. f x ⫽ x 3e x

9. f x ⫽

ex
x

2

1
ew ⫹ 2

ew

2

15. f x ⫽ 2e3x⫺1

17. h x ⫽ e⫺x

19. f x ⫽ 3e1/x

2
21. f x ⫽ e x ⫹ 1 25

1

2
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
21
2
1
1
2
1
2

8. f u ⫽ u2e⫺u

10. f x ⫽

x
ex
ex ⫹ e⫺x

2
ex

ex ⫹ 1

16. f t ⫽ 4e3t⫹2
2⫺1
2
1
20. f x ⫽ e1/ 2x

18. f x ⫽ ex

22. f x ⫽ 4 ⫺ e⫺3x 32

1

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

39. f x ⫽ ln x 8

41. f x ⫽ ln 

1x

1
x2

43. f x ⫽ ln 
1
1
47. f x ⫽ ln 

45. f x ⫽ ln 4x 2 ⫺ 5x ⫹ 3

46. f x ⫽ ln 3x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫹ 1

2
2

2x

x ⫹ 1

49. f x ⫽ x 2 ln x
2 ln x

51. f x ⫽

x

1

55. f x ⫽

2
53. f u ⫽ ln u ⫺ 2 3

1
2ln x
2
1
57. f x ⫽ ln x 2

59. f x ⫽ ln x 3 ⫹ 1

61. f x ⫽ e x ln x

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

2

2

40. h t ⫽ 2 ln t 5

42. f x ⫽ ln

1
44. f x ⫽ ln 

1x

⫹ 1

2

21
2
1
1
2

1
2x3

x ⫹ 1
x ⫺ 1

48. f x ⫽ ln 

50. f x ⫽ 3x 2 ln 2x

52. f x ⫽

3 ln x

x2

56. f x ⫽

1
2
54. f x ⫽ ln x 3 ⫺ 3 4
2ln x ⫹ x
2
58. f x ⫽ 2(ln x 3/2
2x2 ⫺ 4
2x ⫹ 3

62. f x ⫽ e x ln

60. f x ⫽ ln

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

1
1

9.7 DIFFERENTIATION OF EXPONENTIAL AND LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS

653

where  P(t)  is  measured  in  millions  and  t is  measured  in
decades,  with  t ⫽ 0  corresponding  to  the  beginning  of
2000.
a. What was the population of Americans over age 100 at
the beginning of 2000? What will it be at the beginning
of 2030?

b. How fast was the population of Americans over age 100
changing at the beginning of 2000? How fast will it be
changing at the beginning of 2030?

Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

72. WORLD POPULATION GROWTH After its fastest rate of growth
ever  during  the  1980s  and  1990s,  the  rate  of  growth  of
world  population  is  expected  to  slow  dramatically  in  the
21st century. The function

21
G t ⫽ 1.58e⫺0.213t

gives  the  projected  annual  average  percentage  of  popula-
tion  growth/decade  in  the  tth  decade,  with  t ⫽ 1  corre-
sponding to 2000.
a. What  will  the  projected  annual  average  population

growth rate be in 2020 (t ⫽ 3)?

b. How fast will the projected annual average population

growth rate be changing in 2020?

Source: U.S. Census Bureau

73. DEATH DUE TO STROKES Before  1950  little  was  known
about  strokes.  By  1960,  however,  risk  factors  such  as
hypertension were identified. In recent years, CAT scans
used as a diagnostic tool have helped prevent strokes. As
a  result,  death  due  to  strokes  have  fallen  dramatically.
The function

21
N t ⫽ 130.7e⫺0.1155t 2 ⫹ 50

1

0 ⱕ t ⱕ 6

2

gives the number of deaths per 100,000 people from 1950
through 2010, where t is measured in decades, with t ⫽ 0
corresponding to 1950.
a. How  many  deaths  due  to  strokes  per  100,000  people

were there in 1950?

b. How fast was the number of deaths due to strokes per
100,000 people changing in 1950? In 1960? In 1970? In
1980? 

c. How  many  deaths  due  to  strokes  per  100,000  people

were there in 2010?

Sources: American Heart Association, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, and National Institutes of Health.

74. AIR TRAVEL Air  travel  has  been  rising  dramatically  in  the
past 30 years. In a study conducted in 2000, the FAA pro-
jected  further  exponential  growth  for  air  travel  through
2010. The function

21
f t ⫽ 666e0.0413t

1

0 ⱕ t ⱕ 11

2

gives the number of passengers (in millions) in year t, with 
t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 2000.
a. How  many  air  passengers  were  there  in  2000?  What

was the projected number of air passengers for 2005?

b. What was the rate of change of the number of air pas-

sengers in 2005?

Source: Federal Aviation Administration.

In Exercises 63–66, find the second derivative of the function.
63. f x ⫽ ln 2x
1

2
66. f x ⫽ ln x 2

65. f x ⫽ ln x 2 ⫹ 2

64. f x ⫽ ln x ⫹ 5

2
2

1
1

2
2

1

1

2

67. Find an equation of the tangent line to the graph of 

y ⫽ x ln x at the point (1, 0).

68. Find an equation of the tangent line to the graph of 

y ⫽ ln x 2 at the point (2, ln 4).

69. PERCENTAGE OF POPULATION RELOCATING Based  on  data
obtained  from  the  Census  Bureau,  the  manager  of  Ply-
mouth Van Lines estimates that the percentage of the total
population  relocating  in  year  t  (t ⫽ 0  corresponds  to  the
year 1960) may be approximated by the formula

21
P t ⫽ 20.6e⫺0.009t

1

0 ⱕ t ⱕ 35

2

Compute  P⬘(10),  P⬘(20),  and  P⬘(30),  and  interpret  your
results.

70. PHARMACEUTICAL THEFT Pharmaceutical theft has been ris-
ing  rapidly  in  recent  years.  Experts  believe  that  pharma-
ceuticals  are  the  new  “street  gold.”  The  value  of  stolen
drugs (in millions of dollars per year) from 2007 through
2009 is approximated by the function

21
f t ⫽ 20.5e0.74t

1

1 ⱕ t ⱕ 3

2

where t is the number of years since 2007. Find the rate of
change of the value of stolen drugs at t ⫽ 2, and interpret
your result.
Source: New York Times.

71. OVER-100  POPULATION Based  on  data  obtained  from  the
Census Bureau, the number of Americans over age 100 is
expected to be

21
P t ⫽ 0.07e0.54t

1

0 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

654

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

75. RATE OF BUSINESS FAILURES The  rate  of  business  failure  is
highest in the first few years of the businesses’ existence.
According to a study of businesses that started in the sec-
ond quarter of 1998, the percentage of companies still in
business t years after the start of business is approximated
by the function

f1t2 ⫽ 93.1e⫺0.1626t

11 ⱕ t ⱕ 72
Find  the  rate  at  which  the  percent  of  businesses  in  exis-
tence is dropping at t ⫽ 1, 2, 3, and 4 years.
Source: Monthly Labor Review.

76. BLOOD ALCOHOL LEVEL The percentage of alcohol in a per-
son’s bloodstream t hr after drinking 8 fluid oz of whiskey
is given by

A1t2 ⫽ 0.23te⫺0.4t

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 122

a. What is the percentage of alcohol in a person’s blood-

stream after  hr? After 8 hr?

1
2

b. How  fast  is  the  percentage  of  alcohol  in  a  person’s

bloodstream changing after  hr? After 8 hr?

1
2

Source: Encyclopedia Britannica.

77. THERMOMETER READINGS A  thermometer  is  moved  from
inside a house out to the deck. Its temperature t min after it
has been moved is given by

T1t2 ⫽ 30 ⫹ 40e⫺0.98t

a. What is the temperature inside the house?
b. How  fast  is  the  reading  on  the  thermometer  changing 

1 min after it has been taken out of the house?

c. What is the outdoor temperature?

Hint: Evaluate 

lim
tS⬁

T(t).

78. SALES PROMOTION The  Lady  Bug,  a  women’s  clothing
chain store, found that t days after the end of a sales pro-
motion the volume of sales was given by

S1t2 ⫽ 20,00011 ⫹ e⫺0.5t2

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 52

dollars.
a. Find the rate of change of The Lady Bug’s sales volume

when t ⫽ 1, t ⫽ 2, t ⫽ 3, and t ⫽ 4.

b. After how many days will the sales volume drop below

$27,400?

79. PRICE OF PERFUME The monthly demand for a certain brand

of perfume is given by the demand equation

p ⫽ 100e⫺0.0002x ⫹ 150

where  p denotes  the  retail  unit  price  (in  dollars)  and  x
denotes the quantity (in 1-oz bottles) demanded.
a. Find  the  rate  of  change  of  the  price  per  bottle  when 

x ⫽ 1000 and when x ⫽ 2000.

b. What  is  the  price  per  bottle  when  x ⫽ 1000?  When 

x ⫽ 2000?

80. PRICE OF WINE The monthly demand for a certain brand of

table wine is given by the demand equation

p ⫽ 240a 1 ⫺

3

3 ⫹ e⫺0.0005xb

where p denotes the wholesale price per case (in dollars)
and x denotes the number of cases demanded.
a. Find  the  rate  of  change  of  the  price  per  case  when 

x ⫽ 1000.

b. What is the price per case when x ⫽ 1000?

81. OIL USED TO FUEL PRODUCTIVITY A study on worldwide oil
use was prepared for a major oil company. The study pre-
dicted that the amount of oil used to fuel productivity in a
certain country is given by

f1t2 ⫽ 1.5 ⫹ 1.8te⫺1.2t

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

where f(t) denotes the number of barrels per $1000 of eco-
nomic  output  and  t is  measured  in  decades  (t ⫽ 0  corre-
sponds to 1965). Compute f ⬘(0), f ⬘(1), f ⬘(2), and f ⬘(3), and
interpret your results.

82. CHEMICAL REACTION Two  chemicals,  A and  B,  interact  to
form  a  Chemical  C.  Suppose  the  amount  (in  grams)  of
Chemical C formed t min after the interaction begins is

A1t2 ⫽

15011 ⫺ e0.022662t2
1 ⫺ 2.5e0.022662t

a. How fast is Chemical C being formed 1 min after the

interaction first began?

b. How much Chemical C will there be eventually?

Hint: Evaluate 

lim
tS⬁

A(t).

83. STRAIN ON VERTEBRAE The  strain  (percentage  of  compres-
sion) on the lumbar vertebral disks in an adult human as a
function of the load x (in kilograms) is given by 

f1x2 ⫽ 7.2956 ln10.0645012x 0.95 ⫹ 12

What is the rate of change of the strain with respect to the
load when the load is 100 kg? When the load is 500 kg?
Source: Benedek and Villars, Physics with Illustrative Examples
from Medicine and Biology.

84. YAHOO!  IN EUROPE Yahoo!  is  putting  more  emphasis  on
Western Europe, where the number of online households is
expected to grow steadily. In a study conducted in 2004,
the number of online households (in millions) in Western
Europe was projected to be 

N1t2 ⫽ 34.68 ⫹ 23.88 ln11.05t ⫹ 5.32
where t ⫽ 0 corresponds to the beginning of 2004.
a. What was the projected number of online households in

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 22

Western Europe at the beginning of 2005?

b. How  fast  was  the  projected  number  of  online  house-
holds in Western Europe increasing at the beginning of
2005?

Source: Jupiter Research.

85. ONLINE BUYERS The  number  of  online  buyers  in  Western

Europe grew steadily over the past decade. The function

P1t2 ⫽ 28.5 ⫹ 14.42 ln t

11 ⱕ t ⱕ 72

gives the number of online buyers as a percentage of the
total population, where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 1
corresponding to 2001.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.7 DIFFERENTIATION OF EXPONENTIAL AND LOGARITHMIC FUNCTIONS

655

a. What  was  the  percentage  of  online  buyers  in  2001 

(t ⫽ 1)? How fast was it changing in 2001?

b. What  was  the  percentage  of  online  buyers  in  2006 

(t ⫽ 6)? How fast was it changing in 2006?

87. If f (x) ⫽ e␲, then f ⬘(x) ⫽ e␲.
1
88. If f(x) ⫽ ln 5, then f ⬘(x) ⫽ .
5

Source: Jupiter Research.

In Exercises 86–88, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
86. If f(x) ⫽ 3x, then f ⬘(x) ⫽ x ⭈ 3x⫺1.

9.7 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. Using the Product Rule and the Chain Rule, we obtain

f ⬘ x ⫽ x 

1

2

d
dx

e⫺x ⫹ e⫺x 

d
dx

x

⫽ ⫺xe⫺x ⫹ e⫺x ⫽ 1 ⫺ x e⫺x

1

2

Using the Product Rule and the Chain Rule once again, we
obtain

1
f ⬙ x ⫽ 1 ⫺ x

2

d
dx

2
12

1d
1
1 ⫺ x
dx
1
2
⫽ 1 ⫺ x ⫺e⫺x ⫹ e⫺x ⫺1
1
⫽ ⫺e⫺x ⫹ xe⫺x ⫺ e⫺x ⫽ x ⫺ 2 e⫺x

e⫺x ⫹ e⫺x 
2
1

2

2

2. The slope of the tangent line to the graph of f at any point 
(x, f(x)) lying on the graph of f is given by f ⬘(x). Using the
Product Rule, we find

89. Prove that 

d
dx

ln 兩 x 兩 ⫽ (x ⫽ 0) for the case x ⬍ 0.

1
x

90. Use the definition of the derivative to show that

ln1x ⫹ 12

x

lim
x씮0

⫽ 1

2
1
f ⬘ x ⫽ [x ln 2x ⫹ 3 ]

2

d
dx
d
dx

⫽ x 

⫽ x

a

1
2
2
1
ln 2x ⫹ 3 ⫹ ln 2x ⫹ 3 ⭈
2x ⫹ 3b
⫹ ln 2x ⫹ 3 ⭈ 1

1

2

2

1
⫹ ln 2x ⫹ 3

⫽

2x

2x ⫹ 3

1

2

1d

dx

x

2

In particular, the slope of the tangent line to the graph of f
at the point (⫺1, 0) is

1
f ⬘ ⫺1 ⫽

2

⫺2

⫺2 ⫹ 3

⫹ ln 1 ⫽ ⫺2

Therefore, using the point-slope form of the equation of a
line, we see that a required equation is

y ⫺ 0 ⫽ ⫺2 x ⫹ 1
y ⫽ ⫺2x ⫺ 2

1

2

USING

TECHNOLOGY

EXAMPLE 1 At the beginning of Section 9.7, we demonstrated via a table of values

of (eh ⫺ 1)>h for selected values of h the plausibility of the result

e 

h ⫺ 1

 
lim
hS0

h

⫽ 1

2

0

1

_1

FIGURE T1
The graph of f in the viewing window 
[⫺1, 1] ⫻ [0, 2]

To obtain a visual confirmation of this result, we plot the graph of

f  1x2 ⫽

e 

x ⫺ 1

x

in the viewing window [⫺1, 1] ⫻ [0, 2] (Figure T1). From the graph of f, we see
that f(x) appears to approach 1 as x approaches 0.

The numerical derivative function of a graphing utility will yield the derivative of
an exponential or logarithmic function for any value of x, just as it did for algebraic
functions.

(continued)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

656

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

1x ln x

1. f1x2 ⫽ x 3e⫺1/x; x ⫽ ⫺1
f  1x2 ⫽ 11x ⫹ 12 3/2e⫺x; x ⫽ 0.5
f  1x2 ⫽ x32ln x;  x ⫽ 2
f  1x2 ⫽
5. f1x2 ⫽ e⫺x ln12x ⫹ 12 ; x ⫽ 0.5
f  1x2 ⫽ e⫺1x
ln1x 

2 ⫹ 12 ; x ⫽ 1

; x ⫽ 3.2

x ⫹ 1

2.

3.

4.

6.

In Exercises 1–6, use the numerical derivative operation to find
the rate of change of f(x) at the given value of x. Give your answer
accurate to four decimal places.

7. WORLD POPULATION GROWTH On the basis of data obtained
in  a  study,  the  world  population  (in  billions)  is  approxi-
mated by the function

f  1t2 ⫽

12

1 ⫹ 3.74914e⫺1.42804t

    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

where  t is  measured  in  half  centuries,  with  t ⫽ 0  corre-
sponding to the beginning of 1950.
a. Plot  the  graph  of  f in  the  viewing  window  [0,  5]  ⫻

[0, 14].

b. How fast was the world population expected to increase

at the beginning of 2000?

Source: United Nations Population Division.

8. INCOME OF AMERICAN FAMILIES On  the  basis  of  government
data, it is estimated that the number of American families y (in
millions) who earned x thousand dollars in 1990 is given by
the equation
y ⫽ 0.1584xe⫺0.0000016x3⫹0.00011x 2⫺0.04491x

1x ⬎ 02

where t(t) is measured in thousands and t ⫽ 0 corresponds
to 1989.
a. Compute f(11) and t(11), and interpret your results.
b. Compute f ⬘(11) and t⬘(11), and interpret your results.
Source: National Council on Crime and Delinquency.

10. LOAN AMORTIZATION The  Sotos  plan  to  secure  a  loan  of
$160,000 to purchase a house. They are obtaining a 30-year
home mortgage at 9%/year compounded monthly. It can be
shown that their outstanding principal will be

B 1x2 ⫽

160,00011.0075 

1.0075 

360 ⫺ 1.0075 
360 ⫺ 1

x2

dollars after making x monthly payments of $1287.40.
a. Plot  the  graph  of  B(x),  using  the  viewing  window 

[0, 360] ⫻ [0, 160,000].

b. Compute  B(0)  and  B⬘(0),  and  interpret  your  results;
compute B(180) and B⬘(180), and interpret your results.

11. WOMEN IN THE LABOR FORCE On the basis of data from the
U.S.  Census  Bureau,  the  chief  economist  of  Manpower,
Inc., constructed the following model giving the percent-
age  of  the  total  female  population  in  the  civilian  labor
force, P(t), at the beginning of the tth decade (t ⫽ 0 corre-
sponds to the year 1900):

P 1t2 ⫽

74

1 ⫹ 2.6e⫺0.166t⫹0.04536t 

2⫺0.0066t 

3

    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 112

Assume that this trend continued through 2010.
a. What percentage of the total female population was in

the civilian labor force at the beginning of 2000?

b. What was the growth rate of the percentage of the total
female  population  in  the  civilian  labor  force  at  the
beginning of 2000?

a. Plot  the  graph  of  the  equation  in  the  viewing  window 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

[0, 150] ⫻ [0, 2].

b. How fast is y changing with respect to x when x ⫽ 10?

When x ⫽ 50? Interpret your results.

Source: House Budget Committee, House Ways and Means Commit-
tee, and U.S. Census Bureau.

9. INCREASE IN JUVENILE OFFENDERS The number of youths aged
15 to 19 increased by 21% between 1994 and 2005, push-
ing up the crime rate. According to the National Council on
Crime  and  Delinquency,  the  number  of  violent  crime
arrests of juveniles under age 18 in year t is given by

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 132

f1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.438t 2 ⫹ 9.002t ⫹ 107
where  f (t)  is  measured  in  thousands  with  t ⫽ 0  corre-
sponding  to  1989.  According  to  the  same  source,  if
trends like inner-city drug use and wider availability of
guns continue, then the number of violent crime arrests
of juveniles under age 18 in year t is given by

t 1t2 ⫽ e ⫺0.438t 

99.456e0.07824t

2 ⫹ 9.002t ⫹ 107

if 0 ⱕ t ⬍ 4
if 4 ⱕ t ⱕ 13

12. INCREASING CROP YIELDS If  left  untreated  on  bean  stems,
aphids (small insects that suck plant juices) will multiply at
an increasing rate during the summer months and reduce
productivity and crop yield of cultivated crops. But if the
aphids  are  treated  in  mid-June,  the  numbers  decrease
sharply to less than 100/bean stem, allowing for steep rises
in crop yield. The function

F 1t2 ⫽ e 62e1.152t

349e⫺1.3241t⫺1.52

if 0 ⱕ t ⬍ 1.5
if 1.5 ⱕ t ⱕ 3

gives  the  number  of  aphids  after  treatment  on  a  typical
bean stem at time t, where t is measured in months, with 
t ⫽ 0 corresponding to the beginning of May.
a. How many aphids are there on a typical bean stem at the
beginning  of  June  (t ⫽ 1)?  At  the  beginning  of  July 
(t ⫽ 2)?

b. How  fast  is  the  population  of  aphids  changing  at  the

beginning of June? At the beginning of July?

Source: The Random House Encyclopedia.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.8 Marginal Functions in Economics

9.8 MARGINAL FUNCTIONS IN ECONOMICS

657

Marginal analysis is the study of the rate of change of economic quantities. For exam-
ple,  an  economist  is  not  merely  concerned  with  the  value  of  an  economy’s  gross
domestic  product  (GDP)  at  a  given  time  but  is  equally  concerned  with  the  rate  at
which it is growing or declining. In the same vein, a manufacturer is not only inter-
ested in the total cost corresponding to a certain level of production of a commodity
but also is interested in the rate of change of the total cost with respect to the level of
production,  and  so  on.  Let’s  begin  with  an  example  to  explain  the  meaning  of  the
adjective marginal, as used by economists.

Cost Functions

APPLIED EXAMPLE 1 Rate of Change of Cost Functions Suppose the 
total cost in dollars incurred each week by Polaraire for manufacturing 

x refrigerators is given by the total cost function

C1x2 ⫽ 8000 ⫹ 200x ⫺ 0.2x2

10 ⱕ x ⱕ 4002

a. What is the actual cost incurred for manufacturing the 251st refrigerator?
b. Find the rate of change of the total cost function with respect to x when 

x ⫽ 250.

c. Compare the results obtained in parts (a) and (b).

Solution

a. The actual cost incurred in producing the 251st refrigerator is the difference

between the total cost incurred in producing the first 251 refrigerators and the
total cost of producing the first 250 refrigerators:

 C12512 ⫺ C12502 ⫽ 38000 ⫹ 20012512 ⫺ 0.212512 24

   ⫺ 38000 ⫹ 20012502 ⫺ 0.212502 24
 ⫽ 45,599.8 ⫺ 45,500
 ⫽ 99.8

or $99.80.

b. The rate of change of the total cost function C with respect to x is given by the
derivative of C—that is, C⬘(x) ⫽ 200 ⫺ 0.4x. Thus, when the level of produc-
tion is 250 refrigerators, the rate of change of the total cost with respect to x is
given by

 C ¿12502 ⫽ 200 ⫺ 0.412502

 ⫽ 100

or $100.

c. From the solution to part (a), we know that the actual cost for producing the
251st refrigerator is $99.80. This answer is very closely approximated by the
answer to part (b), $100. To see why this is so, observe that the difference
C(251) ⫺ C(250) may be written in the form
C 12512 ⫺ C 12502
C 1250 ⫹ 12 ⫺ C 12502

C 1250 ⫹ h2 ⫺ C 12502

⫽

⫽

1

1

h

where h ⫽ 1. In other words, the difference C(251) ⫺ C(250) is precisely the
average rate of change of the total cost function C over the interval [250, 251]
or, equivalently, the slope of the secant line through the points (250, 45,500)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

658

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

and (251, 45,599.8). However, the number C⬘(250) ⫽ 100 is the instantaneous
rate of change of the total cost function C at x ⫽ 250 or, equivalently, the
slope of the tangent line to the graph of C at x ⫽ 250.

Now when h is small, the average rate of change of the function C is a

good approximation to the instantaneous rate of change of the function C, or,
equivalently, the slope of the secant line through the points in question is a
good approximation to the slope of the tangent line through the point in ques-
tion. Therefore, we may expect

 C 12512 ⫺ C 12502 ⫽

C 12512 ⫺ C 12502

⬇ C 1250 ⫹ h2 ⫺ C 12502

 1h small2

1

C 1250 ⫹ h2 ⫺ C 12502

h

h

⫽ C ¿12502

 ⬇ lim
hS0

 

which is precisely the case in this example.

The  actual  cost  incurred  in  producing  an  additional  unit  of  a  certain  com-
modity  given  that  a  plant  is  already  at  a  certain  level  of  operation  is  called  the 
marginal cost. Knowing this cost is very important to management. As we saw in
Example 1, the marginal cost is approximated by the rate of change of the total cost
function evaluated at the appropriate point. For this reason, economists have defined
the marginal cost function to be the derivative of the corresponding total cost func-
tion. In other words, if C is a total cost function, then the marginal cost function is
defined  to  be  its  derivative  C⬘.  Thus,  the  adjective  marginal is  synonymous  with
derivative of.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 2 Marginal Cost Functions A subsidiary of Elektra
Electronics manufactures a portable DVD player. Management deter-
mined that the daily total cost of producing these DVD players (in dollars) is
given by

C1x2 ⫽ 0.0001x 3 ⫺ 0.08x 2 ⫹ 40x ⫹ 5000

where x stands for the number of DVD players produced.
a. Find the marginal cost function.
b. What is the marginal cost when x ⫽ 200, 300, 400, and 600?
c. Interpret your results.

Solution
a. The marginal cost function C⬘ is given by the derivative of the total cost 

function C. Thus,

C⬘1x2 ⫽ 0.0003x 2 ⫺ 0.16x ⫹ 40

b. The marginal cost when x ⫽ 200, 300, 400, and 600 is given by
 C ¿12002 ⫽ 0.000312002 2 ⫺ 0.1612002 ⫹ 40 ⫽ 20
 C ¿13002 ⫽ 0.000313002 2 ⫺ 0.1613002 ⫹ 40 ⫽ 19
 C ¿14002 ⫽ 0.000314002 2 ⫺ 0.1614002 ⫹ 40 ⫽ 24
 C ¿16002 ⫽ 0.000316002 2 ⫺ 0.1616002 ⫹ 40 ⫽ 52

or $20/unit, $19/unit, $24/unit, and $52/unit, respectively.

c. From the results of part (b), we see that Elektra’s actual cost for producing the
201st DVD player is approximately $20. The actual cost incurred for produc-
ing one additional DVD player when the level of production is already 300

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

y ($)

30,000

20,000

10,000

y = C(x)

9.8 MARGINAL FUNCTIONS IN ECONOMICS

659

players is approximately $19, and so on. Observe that when the level of pro-
duction is already 600 units, the actual cost of producing one additional unit is
approximately $52. The higher cost for producing this additional unit when the
level of production is 600 units may be the result of several factors, among
them excessive costs incurred because of overtime or higher maintenance, pro-
duction breakdown caused by greater stress and strain on the equipment, and
so on. The graph of the total cost function appears in Figure 49.

100  300  500  700

FIGURE 49
The cost of producing x DVD players is
given by C(x).

x

Average Cost Functions
Let’s now introduce another marginal concept that is closely related to the marginal
cost.  Let  C(x)  denote  the  total  cost  incurred  in  producing  x units  of  a  certain  com-
modity. Then the average cost of producing x units of the commodity is obtained by
dividing the total production cost by the number of units produced. This leads to the
following definition:

Average Cost Function
Suppose C(x) is a total cost function. Then the average cost function, denoted
by C苶(x) (read “C bar of x”), is

C 1x2

x

(13)

C¿

(x) of the average cost function, called the marginal average cost
The derivative 
function, measures the rate of change of the average cost function with respect to the
number of units produced.

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 3 Marginal Average Cost Functions The total cost of
producing x units of a certain commodity is given by

C1x2 ⫽ 400 ⫹ 20x

dollars.
a. Find the average cost function 
b. Find the marginal average cost function 
c. What are the economic implications of your results?

C¿

.

C

.

Solution

a. The average cost function is given by

 C 1x2 ⫽

C1x2

x

⫽ 400 ⫹ 20x

x

 ⫽ 20 ⫹ 400
x

b. The marginal average cost function is

C ¿1x2 ⫽ ⫺400

x2

c. Since the marginal average cost function is negative for all admissible values
of x, the rate of change of the average cost function is negative for all x ⬎ 0;

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

660

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

y ($)

100

60

20

y = C(x) = 20 + 400
x

y = 20

x

20 

60

100

FIGURE 50
As the level of production increases, the
average cost approaches $20.

y ($)

y = C(x)

(500, 35)

100

80

60

40

20

x

200  400  600  800

1000

FIGURE 51
The average cost reaches a minimum 
of $35 when 500 DVD players are 
produced.

that is, C苶(x) decreases as x increases. However, the graph of C苶 always lies
above the horizontal line y ⫽ 20, but it approaches the line, since

 C 1x2 ⫽ lim

xS⬁

lim
xS⬁

 a20 ⫹ 400

x b ⫽ 20

A sketch of the graph of the function C苶(x) appears in Figure 50. This result is
fully expected if we consider the economic implications. Note that as the level
of production increases, the fixed cost per unit of production, represented by

the term (400>x), drops steadily. The average cost approaches the constant unit

cost of production, which is $20 in this case.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 4 Marginal Average Cost Functions Once again con-
sider the subsidiary of Elektra Electronics. The daily total cost for 

producing its portable DVD players is given by

C1x2 ⫽ 0.0001x 3 ⫺ 0.08x 2 ⫹ 40x ⫹ 5000

dollars, where x stands for the number of DVD players produced (see Example 2).
a. Find the average cost function 
b. Find the marginal average cost function 
c. Sketch the graph of the function 

, and interpret the results obtained in parts

. Compute C (500).

C¿

C¿

.
C

C

(a) and (b).

Solution

a. The average cost function is given by

C 1x2 ⫽

C 1x2

x

⫽ 0.0001x2 ⫺ 0.08x ⫹ 40 ⫹ 5000
x

b. The marginal average cost function is given by

C ¿1x2 ⫽ 0.0002x ⫺ 0.08 ⫺ 5000

x2

Also,

C ¿15002 ⫽ 0.000215002 ⫺ 0.08 ⫺ 5000
15002 2

⫽ 0

c. To sketch the graph of the function 

C

, observe that if x is a small positive 
C

C

C¿

number, then C(x) ⬎ 0. Furthermore, C(x) becomes arbitrarily large as x
approaches zero from the right, since the term (5000>x) becomes arbitrarily
large as x approaches zero. Next, the result C (500) ⫽ 0 obtained in part (b)
tells us that the tangent line to the graph of the function C is horizontal at the
point (500, 35) on the graph. Finally, plotting the points on the graph corre-
sponding to, say, x ⫽ 100, 200, 300, . . . , 900, we obtain the sketch in 
Figure 51. As expected, the average cost drops as the level of production
increases. But in this case, in contrast to the case in Example 3, the average
cost reaches a minimum value of $35, corresponding to a production level of
500, and increases thereafter.

C

This phenomenon is typical in situations in which the marginal cost in-

creases from some point on as production increases, as in Example 2. This sit-
uation is in contrast to that of Example 3, in which the marginal cost remains
constant at any level of production.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

9.8 MARGINAL FUNCTIONS IN ECONOMICS

661

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
Refer to Example 4.
1. Use a graphing utility to plot the graph of the average cost function

C 1x2 ⫽ 0.0001x2 ⫺ 0.08x ⫹ 40 ⫹ 5000

x

using  the  viewing  window  [0,  1000]  ⫻ [0,  100].  Then,  using  ZOOM and
TRACE, show that the lowest point on the graph of 

is (500, 35).

C

2. Draw the tangent line to the graph of 

C

(500, 35). What is its slope? Is this

expected?

3. Plot the graph of the marginal average cost function

C ¿1x2 ⫽ 0.0002x ⫺ 0.08 ⫺ 5000

x2

using the viewing window [0, 2000] ⫻ [⫺1, 1]. Then use ZOOM and TRACE
occurs at x ⫽ 500. Verify this result
to show that the zero of the function 
using the root-finding capability of your graphing utility. Is this result com-
patible with that obtained in part 2? Explain your answer.

C¿

Revenue Functions
Recall that a revenue function R(x) gives the revenue realized by a company from
the sale of x units of a certain commodity. If the company charges  p dollars per
unit, then

R1x2 ⫽ px

(14)

However, the price that a company can command for the product depends on the
market in which the company operates. If the company is one of many—none of
which is able to dictate the price of the commodity—then in this competitive mar-
ket environment, the price is determined by market equilibrium (see Section 2.6).
On the other hand, if the company is the sole supplier of the product, then under
this monopolistic situation, it can manipulate the price of the commodity by con-
trolling the supply. The unit selling price p of the commodity is related to the quan-
tity x of the commodity demanded. This relationship between p and x is called a
demand equation (see Section 2.6). Solving the demand equation for p in terms of
x, we obtain the unit price function f. Thus,

and the revenue function R is given by

p ⫽ f1x2

R1x2 ⫽ px ⫽ xf1x2

The marginal revenue gives the actual revenue realized from the sale of an
additional unit of the commodity given that sales are already at a certain level. Fol-
lowing an argument parallel to that applied to the cost function in Example 1, you
can convince yourself that the marginal revenue is approximated by R⬘(x). Thus,
we define the marginal revenue function to be R⬘(x), where R is the revenue func-
tion. The derivative R⬘ of the function R measures the rate of change of the revenue
function.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

662

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 5 Marginal Revenue Functions Suppose the relation-
ship between the unit price p in dollars and the quantity demanded x of 

the Acrosonic model F loudspeaker system is given by the equation

p ⫽ ⫺0.02x ⫹ 400

10 ⱕ x ⱕ 20,0002

a. Find the revenue function R.
b. Find the marginal revenue function R⬘.
c. Compute R⬘(2000), and interpret your result.

Solution

a. The revenue function R is given by

 R 1x2 ⫽ px

b. The marginal revenue function R⬘ is given by

 ⫽ x 1⫺0.02x ⫹ 4002
 ⫽ ⫺0.02x2 ⫹ 400x    10 ⱕ x ⱕ 20,0002

R⬘1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.04x ⫹ 400

R⬘120002 ⫽ ⫺0.04120002 ⫹ 400 ⫽ 320

c.

Thus, the actual revenue to be realized from the sale of the 2001st loud-
speaker system is approximately $320.

Profit Functions
Our final example of a marginal function involves the profit function. The profit func-
tion P is given by

P1x2 ⫽ R1x2 ⫺ C1x2

(15)

where R and C are the revenue and cost functions and x is the number of units of a
commodity produced and sold. The marginal profit function P⬘(x) measures the rate
of change of the profit function P and provides us with a good approximation of the
actual  profit  or  loss  realized  from  the  sale  of  the  (x ⫹ 1)st  unit  of  the  commodity
(assuming that the xth unit has been sold).

APPLIED EXAMPLE 6 Marginal Profit Functions Refer to Example 5. Sup-
pose the cost of producing x units of the Acrosonic model F loudspeaker is

C1x2 ⫽ 100x ⫹ 200,000

dollars.
a. Find the profit function P.
b. Find the marginal profit function P⬘.
c. Compute P⬘(2000), and interpret your result.
d. Sketch the graph of the profit function P.

Solution

a. From the solution to Example 5a, we have

R1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.02x 2 ⫹ 400x

Thus, the required profit function P is given by

 P 1x2 ⫽ R 1x2 ⫺ C 1x2

 ⫽ 1⫺0.02x2 ⫹ 400x2 ⫺ 1100x ⫹ 200,0002
 ⫽ ⫺0.02x2 ⫹ 300x ⫺ 200,000

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.8 MARGINAL FUNCTIONS IN ECONOMICS

663

Thus, the actual profit realized from the sale of the 2001st loudspeaker system
is approximately $220.

d. The graph of the profit function P appears in Figure 52.

b. The marginal profit function P⬘ is given by
P ¿1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.04x ⫹ 300

 P ¿120002 ⫽ ⫺0.04120002 ⫹ 300 ⫽ 220

c.

y

s
r
a
l
l
o
d
f
o
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
T

1000

800

600

400

200

y = P(x)

– 200

2 4 6 8

10  12  14  16

Units of a thousand

x

FIGURE 52
The total profit made when x loudspeakers
are produced and sold is given by P(x).

9.8 Self-Check Exercise

The  weekly  demand  for  Pulsar  DVD  recorders  is  given  by  the
demand equation

p ⫽ ⫺0.02x ⫹ 300

10 ⱕ x ⱕ 15,0002

where p denotes the wholesale unit price in dollars and x denotes
the quantity demanded. The weekly total cost function associated
with manufacturing these recorders is

C1x2 ⫽ 0.000003x 3 ⫺ 0.04x 2 ⫹ 200x ⫹ 70,000 

dollars.

a. Find the revenue function R and the profit function P.
b. Find the marginal cost function C⬘, the marginal revenue

function R⬘, and the marginal profit function P⬘.

c. Find the marginal average cost function C苶⬘.
d. Compute C⬘(3000), R⬘(3000), and P⬘(3000), and interpret

your results.

The solutions to Self-Check Exercise 9.8 can be found on 
page 665.

9.8 Concept Question

Explain each term in your own words:
a. Marginal cost function
b. Average cost function

9.8 Exercises

c. Marginal average cost function
d. Marginal revenue function
e. Marginal profit function

1. PRODUCTION COSTS The graph of a typical total cost func-
tion C(x) associated with the manufacture of x units of a
certain commodity is shown in the following figure.

y ($)

y = C(x)

b. As the level of production  x increases, the cost per unit
drops so that  C(x) increases but at a slower pace. How-
ever, a level of production is soon reached at which the
cost per unit begins to increase dramatically (owing to a
shortage of raw material, overtime, breakdown of machin-
ery due to excessive stress and strain), so C(x) continues
to increase at a faster pace. Use the graph of C to find the
approximate level of production x0 where this occurs.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

x (thousands)

2. PRODUCTION COSTS The  graph  of  a  typical  average  cost

function A(x) ⫽ C(x)>x, where C(x) is a total cost function

associated with the manufacture of x units of a certain com-
modity, is shown in the following figure.
a. Explain  in  economic  terms  why  A(x)  is  large  if  x is

a. Explain why the function C is always increasing.

small and why A(x) is large if x is large.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

664

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

b. What is the significance of the numbers x0 and y0, the 
x- and y-coordinates of the lowest point on the graph of
the function A?

y ($)

y = A(x)

y0

(x0, y0)

x0

x

3. MARGINAL COST The total weekly cost (in dollars) incurred

by Lincoln Records in pressing x compact discs is

C1x2 ⫽ 2000 ⫹ 2x ⫺ 0.0001x 2

10 ⱕ x ⱕ 60002

a. What is the actual cost incurred in producing the 1001st

disc and the 2001st disc?

b. What is the marginal cost when x ⫽ 1000 and 2000?

4. MARGINAL COST A  division  of  Ditton  Industries  manufac-
tures the Futura model microwave oven. The daily cost (in
dollars) of producing these microwave ovens is

C1x2 ⫽ 0.0002x 3 ⫺ 0.06x 2 ⫹ 120x ⫹ 5000

where x stands for the number of units produced.
a. What  is  the  actual  cost  incurred  in  manufacturing  the

101st oven? The 201st oven? The 301st oven?

b. What is the marginal cost when x ⫽ 100, 200, and 300?

5. MARGINAL AVERAGE COST Custom  Office  makes  a  line  of
executive desks. It is estimated that the total cost for mak-
ing x units of their Senior Executive model is

C1x2 ⫽ 100x ⫹ 200,000

dollars/year.
a. Find the average cost function C.
C
C¿
b. Find the marginal average cost function C .
c. What  happens  to  C(x)  when  x is  very  large?  Interpret

C

your results.

6. MARGINAL AVERAGE COST The management of ThermoMaster
Company,  whose  Mexican  subsidiary  manufactures  an
indoor–outdoor  thermometer,  has  estimated  that  the  total
weekly cost (in dollars) for producing x thermometers is

C1x2 ⫽ 5000 ⫹ 2x

a. Find the average cost function C.
C
C¿
b. Find the marginal average cost function C .
c. Interpret your results.

7. Find the average cost function 

and the marginal average
cost function C associated with the total cost function C of
Exercise 3.

C¿

C

8. Find the average cost function C and the marginal average
cost function C associated with the total cost function C of
Exercise 4.

C¿

C

9. MARGINAL REVENUE Williams Commuter Air Service real-

izes a monthly revenue of

R1x2 ⫽ 8000x ⫺ 100x 2

dollars when the price charged per passenger is x dollars.
a. Find the marginal revenue R⬘.
b. Compute R⬘(39), R⬘(40), and R⬘(41).
c. Based on the results of part (b), what price should the

airline charge to maximize their revenue?

10. MARGINAL REVENUE The management of Acrosonic plans to
market  the  ElectroStat,  an  electrostatic  speaker  system.
The marketing department has determined that the demand
function for these speakers is

p ⫽ ⫺0.04x ⫹ 800

10 ⱕ x ⱕ 20,0002

where p denotes the speaker’s unit price (in dollars) and x
denotes the quantity demanded.
a. Find the revenue function R.
b. Find the marginal revenue function R⬘.
c. Compute R⬘(5000), and interpret your results.

11. MARGINAL PROFIT Refer  to  Exercise  10.  Acrosonic’s  pro-
duction department estimates that the total cost (in dollars)
incurred in manufacturing x ElectroStat speaker systems in
the first year of production will be

C1x2 ⫽ 200x ⫹ 300,000

a. Find the profit function P.
b. Find the marginal profit function P⬘.
c. Compute P⬘(5000) and P⬘(8000).
d. Sketch  the  graph  of  the  profit  function,  and  interpret

your results.

12. MARGINAL PROFIT Lynbrook West, an apartment complex,
has 100 two-bedroom units. The monthly profit (in dollars)
realized from renting x apartments is

P1x2 ⫽ ⫺10x 2 ⫹ 1760x ⫺ 50,000

a. What is the actual profit realized from renting the 51st
unit, assuming that 50 units have already been rented?
b. Compute the marginal profit when x ⫽ 50, and compare

your results with that obtained in part (a).

13. MARGINAL COST,  REVENUE,  AND PROFIT The  weekly  demand

for the Pulsar 25 color LED television is

p ⫽ 600 ⫺ 0.05x

10 ⱕ x ⱕ 12,0002

where  p denotes  the  wholesale  unit  price  in  dollars  and  x
denotes the quantity demanded. The weekly total cost func-
tion associated with manufacturing the Pulsar 25 is given by

C1x2 ⫽ 0.000002x 3 ⫺ 0.03x 2 ⫹ 400x ⫹ 80,000

where C(x) denotes the total cost incurred in producing x
sets.
a. Find the revenue function R and the profit function P.
b. Find  the  marginal  cost  function  C⬘,  the  marginal  rev-

enue function R⬘, and the marginal profit function P⬘.

c. Compute C⬘(2000), R⬘(2000), and P⬘(2000), and inter-

pret your results.

d. Sketch  the  graphs  of  the  functions  C,  R,  and  P,  and

interpret parts (b) and (c), using the graphs obtained.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14. MARGINAL COST, REVENUE, AND PROFIT Pulsar manufactures
a series of 20-in. flat-tube digital televisions. The quantity
x of these sets demanded each week is related to the whole-
sale unit price p by the equation

p ⫽ ⫺0.006x ⫹ 180

10 ⱕ x ⱕ 30,0002

The weekly total cost incurred by Pulsar for producing  x
sets is

C1x2 ⫽ 0.000002x 3 ⫺ 0.02x 2 ⫹ 120x ⫹ 60,000

dollars. Answer the questions in Exercise 13 for these data.

15. MARGINAL AVERAGE COST Refer to Exercise 13.

a. Find  the  average  cost  function 

C

associated  with  the

total cost function C of Exercise 13.

C¿
b. What is the marginal average cost function C ?
c. Compute 

(5000)  and 

(10,000),  and  interpret  your

C¿

C¿

results.

d. Sketch the graph of C.
C

16. MARGINAL AVERAGE COST Refer to Exercise 14.

a. Find  the  average  cost  function 

C

associated  with  the

total cost function C of Exercise 14.

C¿

b. What is the marginal average cost function 
c. Compute  C (5000)  and  C (10,000),  and  interpret  your

C¿

C¿

?

results.

d. Sketch the graph of C.
C

17. MARGINAL REVENUE The quantity of Sicard sports watches
demanded  each  month  is  related  to  the  unit  price  by  the
equation

p ⫽

50

0.01x2 ⫹ 1

    10 ⱕ x ⱕ 202

where p is measured in thousands of dollars and x in units
of a thousand.
a. Find the revenue function R.
b. Find the marginal revenue function R⬘.
c. Compute R⬘(2), and interpret your result.

18. MARGINAL PROPENSITY TO CONSUME The consumption func-

tion of the U.S. economy from 1929 to 1941 is

C1x2 ⫽ 0.712x ⫹ 95.05

where C(x) is the personal consumption expenditure and x
is the personal income, both measured in billions of dol-
lars. Find the rate of change of consumption with respect 

to  income,  dC>dx.  This  quantity  is  called  the  marginal

propensity to consume.

9.8 Solutions to Self-Check Exercise
 R 1x2 ⫽ px

a.

 ⫽ x1⫺0.02x ⫹ 3002
 ⫽ ⫺0.02x2 ⫹ 300x    10 ⱕ x ⱕ 15,0002

 P 1x2 ⫽ R 1x2 ⫺ C 1x2

 ⫽ ⫺0.02x2 ⫹ 300x
    ⫺ 10.000003x3 ⫺ 0.04x2 ⫹ 200x ⫹ 70,0002
 ⫽ ⫺0.000003x3 ⫹ 0.02x2 ⫹ 100x ⫺ 70,000

9.8 MARGINAL FUNCTIONS IN ECONOMICS

665

19. MARGINAL PROPENSITY TO CONSUME Refer  to  Exercise  18.

Suppose a certain economy’s consumption function is

C1x2 ⫽ 0.873x1.1 ⫹ 20.34

where C(x) and x are measured in billions of dollars. Find
the marginal propensity to consume when x ⫽ 10.

20. MARGINAL PROPENSITY TO SAVE Suppose  C(x)  measures  an
economy’s personal consumption expenditure and x mea-
sures the personal income, both in billions of dollars. Then

S1x2 ⫽ x ⫺ C1x2

Income ⴚ consumption

measures  the  economy’s  savings  corresponding  to  an
income of x billion dollars. Show that

dS
dx

⫽ 1 ⫺ dC
dx

The  quantity  dS>dx is  called  the  marginal  propensity  to

save.

21. Refer  to  Exercise  20.  For  the  consumption  function  of

Exercise 18, find the marginal propensity to save.

22. Refer  to  Exercise  20.  For  the  consumption  function  of
Exercise  19,  find  the  marginal  propensity  to  save  when 
x ⫽ 10.

23. MARGINAL REVENUE The relationship between the unit sell-
ing  price  p (in  dollars)  and  the  quantity  demanded  x (in
pairs) of a certain brand of women’s gloves are given by
the demand equation

p ⫽ 100e⫺0.0001x

10 ⱕ x ⱕ 20,0002

a. Find the revenue function R.

Hint: R(x) ⫽ px

b. Find the marginal revenue function R⬘.
c. What is the marginal revenue when x ⫽ 10,000?

In Exercises 24 and 25, determine whether the statement is true
or  false.  If  it  is  true,  explain  why  it  is  true.  If  it  is  false,  give  an
example to show why it is false.
24. If C is a differentiable total cost function, then the marginal

average cost function is 

C ¿1x2 ⫽

xC ¿1x2 ⫺ C 1x2

x2

25. If the marginal profit function is positive at x ⫽ a, then it

makes sense to decrease the level of production.

b.

 C¿1x2 ⫽ 0.000009x2 ⫺ 0.08x ⫹ 200
 R¿1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.04x ⫹ 300
 P¿1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.000009x2 ⫹ 0.04x ⫹ 100

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

666

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

c. The average cost function is

 C 1x2 ⫽
 ⫽

C 1x2

x

0.000003x3 ⫺ 0.04x2 ⫹ 200x ⫹ 70,000

x

 ⫽ 0.000003x2 ⫺ 0.04x ⫹ 200 ⫹

70,000

x

Therefore, the marginal average cost function is

C ¿1x2 ⫽ 0.000006x ⫺ 0.04 ⫺

70,000

x2

d. Using the results from part (b), we find

 C ¿130002 ⫽ 0.000009130002 2 ⫺ 0.08130002 ⫹ 200

 ⫽ 41

That  is,  when  the  level  of  production  is  already  3000
recorders,  the  actual  cost  of  producing  one  additional
recorder is approximately $41. Next,

R⬘130002 ⫽ ⫺0.04130002 ⫹ 300 ⫽ 180

That  is,  the  actual  revenue  to  be  realized  from  selling  the
3001st recorder is approximately $180. Finally,

 P¿130002 ⫽ ⫺0.000009130002 2 ⫹ 0.04130002 ⫹ 100

 ⫽ 139

That  is,  the  actual  profit  realized  from  selling  the  3001st
DVD recorder is approximately $139.

CHAPTER 9

Summary of Principal Formulas and Terms

FORMULAS

1. Average rate of change of f over

[x, x ⫹ h]
or
Slope of the secant line to the
graph of f through (x, f(x)) and
(x ⫹ h, f(x ⫹ h))
or
Difference quotient

2. Instantaneous rate of change of f at

(x, f(x))
or
Slope of tangent line to the graph
of f at (x, f(x)) at x
or
Derivative of f

3. Derivative of a constant

4. Power Rule

5. Constant Multiple Rule

6. Sum Rule

7. Product Rule

8. Quotient Rule

9. Chain Rule

f1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f1x2

h

f1x ⫹ h2 ⫺ f1x2

h

lim
h씮0

d
dx

d
dx

d
dx

d
dx

d
dx

d
dx

d
dx

1c, a constant2

1c2 ⫽ 0
1x n2 ⫽ nx n⫺1
[cf1x2 ] ⫽ cf ⬘1x2
[ f1x2 ⫾ t1x2 ] ⫽ f ⬘1x2 ⫾ t⬘1x2
[ f1x2t1x2 ] ⫽ f1x2t⬘1x2 ⫹ t1x2 f ⬘1x2
c f1x2
t1x2 d ⫽
3t1x24 2
t1 f1x22 ⫽ t⬘1 f1x22 f ⬘1x2

t1x2 f ¿1x2 ⫺ f1x2t¿1x2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CONCEPT REVIEW QUESTIONS

667

10. General Power Rule

11. Derivative of the exponential function

12. Chain Rule for Exponential Functions

13. Derivative of the logarithmic function

14. Chain Rule for Logarithmic Functions

15. Average cost function

16. Revenue function
17. Profit function

TERMS
limit of a function (551)
indeterminate form (554)
limit of a function at infinity (557)
right-hand limit of a function (569)
left-hand limit of a function (569)
continuity of a function at a number 

(570)

d
dx

d
dx

d
dx

d
dx

d
dx

du
dx
1
x

[ f1x2 ]n ⫽ n[ f1x2 ]n⫺1f ⬘1x2
1ex2 ⫽ ex
1eu2 ⫽ eu 
ln 兩 x 兩 ⫽
1ln u2 ⫽
C1x2
C苶1x2 ⫽
R1x2 ⫽ px
P1x2 ⫽ R1x) ⫺ C1x2

du
dx

1
u

x

zero of a function (574)
secant line (586)
tangent line to the graph of f (586)
differentiable function (594)
second derivative of f (621)
marginal cost (658)

marginal cost function (658)
average cost (659)
marginal average cost function (659)
marginal revenue (661)
marginal revenue function (661)
marginal profit function (662)

CHAPTER 9

Concept Review Questions

Fill in the blanks.

1. The statement lim
x씮a

f(x) ⫽ L means that the values of _____ 
can  be  made  as  close  to  _____  as  we  please  by  taking  x
sufficiently close to _____.

t(x) ⫽ M, then

f(x) ⫽ L and lim
x씮a 
[ f(x)]r ⫽ _____, where r is a real number.
[ f(x) ⫾ t(x)] ⫽ _____.
[ f(x)t(x)] ⫽ _____.

⫽ _____ provided that _____.

2. If lim
x씮a
a. lim
x씮a
b. lim
x씮a
c. lim
x씮a

d. lim
x씮a

f1x2t1x2

3. a. The statement lim
x씮⬁

f(x) ⫽ L means that f(x) can be made
arbitrarily close to _____ by taking _____ large enough.
f(x)  ⫽ M means  that  f(x)  can  be
made arbitrarily close to _____ by taking x to be _____
and sufficiently large in _____ value.

b. The  statement  lim
x씮⫺⬁

4. a. The statement lim
x씮a⫹

f(x) ⫽ L is similar to the statement 
f(x) ⫽ L, but here x is required to lie to the _____

lim
x씮a
of a.

b. The statement lim
x씮a⫺

f(x) ⫽ L is similar to the statement 
f(x) ⫽ L, but here x is required to lie to the _____

lim
x씮a
of a.

c. lim
x씮a
lim
x씮a⫹

f(x) ⫽ L if and only if both lim
x씮a⫺
f(x) ⫽ _____.

f(x) ⫽ _____ and

5. a. If  f(a)  is  defined,  lim
x씮a

then f is _____ at a.

f(x)  exists  and  lim
x씮a

f(x)  ⫽ f(a),

b. If f is not continuous at a, then it is _____ at a.
c. f is  continuous  on  an  interval  I if  f is  continuous  at

_____ number in the interval.

6. a. If f and t are continuous at a, then f ⫾ t and ft are con-
is continuous at _____, pro-

tinuous at _____. Also, 

f
t

vided that _____ ⫽ 0.

b. A polynomial function is continuous _____.
c. A rational function R ⫽ is continuous everywhere 

P
Q

except at values of x where _____ ⫽ 0.

7. a. Suppose f is continuous on [a, b] and f(a) ⬍ M ⬍ f(b).
Then  the  Intermediate  Value  Theorem  guarantees  the
existence  of  at  least  one  number  c in  _____ such  that
_____.

b. If f is continuous on [a, b] and f(a) f(b) ⬍ 0, then there
must be at least one solution of the equation _____ in
the interval _____.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

668

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

8. a. The tangent line at P(a, f(a)) to the graph of f is the line

11. a. The Product Rule states that 

b. The Quotient Rule states that 

d
dx
d
dx

[ f (x)t(x)] ⫽ _____.
[ f (x)>t(x)] ⫽ _____.

12. a. The Chain Rule states that if h(x) ⫽ t[ f (x)], then 

h⬘(x) ⫽ _____.

b. The  General  Power  Rule  states  that  if  h(x)  ⫽ [ f (x)]n,

then h⬘(x) ⫽ _____.

13. If C, R, P, and C苶 denote the total cost function, the total
revenue function, the profit function, and the average cost
function,  respectively,  then  C⬘ denotes  the  _____  _____
function, R⬘ denotes the _____ _____ function, P⬘ denotes
the _____ _____ function, and C苶⬘ denotes the _____ _____
_____ function.

14. a. If t(x) ⫽ e f (x), where f is a differentiable function, then
b. If t(x) ⫽ ln f (x), where f (x) ⬎ 0 is differentiable, then

t⬘(x) ⫽ _____.
t⬘(x) ⫽ _____.

and evaluate lim
the limits exist.

x씮a⫹ f(x), lim

x씮a⫺ f(x), and lim

x씮a

f(x) at a ⫽ 2, if 

In Exercises 17–20, determine all values of x for which each func-
tion is discontinuous.

17. t1x2 ⫽ 冦
18. f1x2 ⫽
19. f(x) ⫽冦

x ⫹ 3 if x ⫽ 2
if x ⫽ 2
0

3x ⫹ 4

4x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 2

1

1x ⫹ 12 2

if x ⫽ ⫺1

if x ⫽ ⫺1

2
冨 2x 冨
x

20. f1x2 ⫽
21. Let y ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 2.

passing through P and having slope _____.

b. If the slope of the tangent line at P(a, f(a)) is m, then an

equation of the tangent line at P is _____.

9. a. The slope of the secant line passing through P(a, f(a))
and Q(a ⫹ h, f(a ⫹ h)) and the average rate of change
of f over the interval [a, a ⫹ h] are both given by _____.
b. The slope of the tangent line at P(a, f(a)) and the instan-
taneous rate of change of f at a are both given by _____.

10. a. If c is a constant, then 

d
dx

(c) ⫽ _____.

b. The Power Rule states that if n is any real number, then 

d
dx

(xn) ⫽ _____.

c. The Constant Multiple Rule states that if c is a constant, 

then 

d
dx

[cf(x)] ⫽ _____.

d. The Sum Rule states that 

[ f (x) ⫾ t(x)] ⫽ _____.

d
dx

CHAPTER 9

Review Exercises

In Exercises 1–14, find the indicated limits, if they exist.
1. lim
x씮0
3. lim
x씮⫺1

3x 2 ⫹ 4 2x ⫺ 1

2. lim
x씮1

x 2 ⫹ 1

2

1

12

2

2

1

5x ⫺ 3
1
x ⫺ 3
x ⫹ 4

4. lim
x씮3

x ⫹ 3
x 2 ⫺ 9

22x 3 ⫺ 5

5. lim
x씮2

7. lim
x씮3

9. lim
x씮1⫹

x ⫺ 1
x1x ⫺ 12

11. lim
x씮⬁

x 2

x 2 ⫺ 1

13. lim
x씮⬁

3x 2 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 4
2x 2 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 1

6. lim
x씮⫺2

x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 3
x 2 ⫹ 5x ⫹ 6

8. lim
x씮3

10. lim
x씮1⫺

12. lim
x씮⫺⬁

14. lim
x씮⫺⬁

4x ⫺ 32x ⫹ 1
2x ⫺ 1

x ⫺ 1

x ⫹ 1

x

x 2

x ⫹ 1

15. Sketch the graph of the function

2x ⫺ 3 if x ⱕ 2

f1x2 ⫽ 冦⫺x ⫹ 3 if x ⬎ 2
x씮a⫺ f(x), and lim
x씮a⫹ f(x), lim

x씮a

and evaluate lim
the limits exist.

16. Sketch the graph of the function

f1x2 ⫽ 冦

if x ⱕ 2
4 ⫺ x
x ⫹ 2 if x ⬎ 2

f(x) at a ⫽ 2, if 

a. Find the average rate of change of y with respect to x in

the intervals [1, 2], [1, 1.5], and [1, 1.1].

b. Find the (instantaneous) rate of change of y at x ⫽ 1.

22. Use the definition of the derivative to find the slope of the
tangent line to the graph of the function f(x) ⫽ 4x ⫹ 5 at
any point P(x, f(x)) on the graph.

23. Use the definition of the derivative to find the slope of the 

tangent line to the graph of the function f(x) ⫽ ⫺ at any

1
x

point P(x, f(x)) on the graph.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
1
1
1

2
2
2
2

2
1
1
2
21
2
1
1
2
1
2

2
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
21

24. Use the definition of the derivative to find the slope of the 
tangent line to the graph of the function f (x) ⫽ x ⫹ 5 at
the point (⫺2, 2) and determine an equation of the tangent
line.

3
2

25. Use the definition of the derivative to find the slope of the
tangent line to the graph of the function f (x) ⫽ ⫺x 2 at the
point (2, ⫺4) and determine an equation of the tangent line.

26. The graph of the function f is shown in the accompanying

figure.
a. Is f continuous at x ⫽ a? Why?
b. Is f differentiable at x ⫽ a? Justify your answers.

y

a

x

In Exercises 27–74, find the derivative of the given function.
27. f x ⫽ 3x 5 ⫺ 2x 4 ⫹ 3x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫹ 1

2
x

4
s

36. f x ⫽

⫹ 21s

x ⫹ 1
2x ⫺ 1

32. h x ⫽ x 2 ⫹

34. t s ⫽ 2s2 ⫺

28. f x ⫽ 4x6 ⫹ 2x 4 ⫹ 3x 2 ⫺ 2
29. t x ⫽ ⫺2x⫺3 ⫹ 3x⫺1 ⫹ 2
30. f t ⫽ 2t 2 ⫺ 3t 3 ⫺ t⫺1/2
31. t t ⫽ 2t⫺1/2 ⫹ 4t⫺3/2 ⫹ 2

2
1
1
2
1
2
21
21
1
2
1
2
1
2
21
21
2t 2 ⫹ 1
1
2
1
2
42. f x ⫽ 2x 2 ⫹ x 3
1x
1
2
2
44. h x ⫽ (
⫹ 2 5
23 1 ⫺ 2t 3
46. t t ⫽
21
1
2
1
48. f x ⫽ 2x 3 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫹ 1 ⫺3/2
1
2
1t
21

49. f x ⫽ xe2x
51. t t ⫽ e⫺2t

1t1t ⫹ 1

38. h t ⫽

40. f t ⫽

2

t

53. y ⫽

e2x

1 ⫹ e⫺2x

t 2

2
x 3/2

2t 2 ⫹ 1

33. f t ⫽

39. f x ⫽

35. h x ⫽ x 2 ⫺

t ⫹ 2
t

⫹ 3
t 2

21
1
2
37. t t ⫽
21
2
1
1
2
1
2
21
21

1x ⫺ 1
1x ⫹ 1
x 21x 2 ⫹ 12
x 2 ⫺ 1
1
2
43. f x ⫽ 3x 3 ⫺ 2 8
22t 2 ⫹ 1
1
1t
50. f t ⫽ et ⫹ t
52. t x ⫽ e x

41. f x ⫽

45. f t ⫽

21 ⫹ x 2

54. f x ⫽ e2x 2⫺1

21
2
1
1
2

2
47. s t ⫽ 3t 2 ⫺ 2t ⫹ 5 ⫺2

55. f x ⫽ xe⫺x 2

57. f x ⫽ x 2ex ⫹ ex

59. f x ⫽ ln e x 2 ⫹ 1

1

REVIEW EXERCISES

669

1

56. t x ⫽ 1 ⫹ e2x 3/2
2
58. t t ⫽ t ln t
x
ln x

2
1
21
2
1

60. f x ⫽

2

61. f x ⫽

ln x
x ⫹ 1

2
62. y ⫽ x ⫹ 1 ex

1

63. y ⫽ ln e4x ⫹ 3

1

2

65. f x ⫽

ln x

1 ⫹ e x

64. f r ⫽

66. t x ⫽

67. h x ⫽

68. h x ⫽

2

69. h t ⫽ t 2 ⫹ t 4 2t 2
1
2
x2 ⫺ 1 3

2
70. f x ⫽ 2x ⫹ 1 3 x 2 ⫹ x 2
71. t x ⫽

2

xb 2
a x ⫹ 1
1
2

1
1
11x
23x ⫹ 2

4x ⫺ 3

73. h x ⫽

74. f t ⫽

72. f x ⫽

1
1
1

2
2
2

2
1
21

rer

1 ⫹ r 2

ex 2

1 ⫹ ln x

1 ⫹ x
12x 2 ⫹ 12 2

x2x 3 ⫹ 2
22t ⫹ 1
1t ⫹ 12 3

In Exercises 75–84, find the second derivative of the given func-
tion.
75. f x ⫽ 2x 4 ⫺ 3x 3 ⫹ 2x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 4
76. t x ⫽
21
2
1

78. f x ⫽ xe⫺2 x

79. h x ⫽

77. h t ⫽

1x

11x

t 2 ⫹ 4

e x

⫹

t

1 ⫹ e x
2
81. y ⫽ ln 3x ⫹ 1

1

22x2 ⫹ 1

80. f x ⫽ x ln x

1
1

2
82. f x ⫽ x 3 ⫹ x ⫹ 1 2

83. f x ⫽

1

2

2
84. f t ⫽ t t 2 ⫹ 1 3
85. Find h⬘(0) if h(x) ⫽ t( f(x)), t(x) ⫽ x ⫹ , and f(x) ⫽ e x.

1
x
x ⫹ 1
x ⫺ 1

, and f(x) ⫽ ln x.

86. Find h⬘(1) if h(x) ⫽ t( f(x)), t(x) ⫽

87. Let f(x) ⫽ 2x 3 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫺ 16x ⫹ 3.

a. Find the point(s) on the graph of f at which the slope of

the tangent line is equal to ⫺4.

b. Find the equation(s) of the tangent line(s) of part (a).

88. Let f(x) ⫽ x 3 ⫹ x 2 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 1.

1
3

1
2

a. Find the point(s) on the graph of f at which the slope of

the tangent line is equal to ⫺2.

b. Find the equation(s) of the tangent line(s) of part (a).

89. Find an equation of the tangent line to the graph of

24 ⫺ x 2

y ⫽

at the point (1, 

23

).

90. Find an equation of the tangent line to the graph of 

y ⫽ x(x ⫹ 1)5 at the point (1, 32).

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

670

CHAPTER 9 THE DERIVATIVE

91. Find an equation of the tangent line to the graph of 

y ⫽ e⫺2x at the point (1, e⫺2).

92. Find an equation of the tangent line to the graph of 

y ⫽ xe⫺x at the point (1, e⫺1).

93. Find the third derivative of the function

f x ⫽

1

2

1

2x ⫺ 1

What is the domain of f ⵮?

94. AVERAGE PRICE OF A COMMODITY The  average  cost  (in 
dollars) of producing x units of a certain commodity is given
by

1
C苶 x ⫽ 20 ⫹

2

400
x

Evaluate lim
x씮⬁

C苶(x), and interpret your results.

95. MANUFACTURING COSTS Suppose that the total cost of man-

ufacturing x units of a certain product is C(x) dollars.
a. What does C⬘(x) measure? Give units.
b. What can you say about the sign of C⬘?
c. Given that C⬘(1000) ⫽ 20, estimate the additional cost
to be incurred by the company in producing the 1001st
unit of the product.

96. SALES OF CAMERAS The  shipments  of  Lica  digital  single-

lens reflex cameras (SLRs) are projected to be 

N1t2 ⫽ 6t2 ⫹ 200t ⫹ 41t ⫹ 20,000        10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

units t years from now.
a. How many Lica SLRs will be shipped after 2 years?
b. At what rate will the number of Lica SLRs shipped be

changing after 2 years?

97. ADULT OBESITY In the United States, the percentage of adults
(age  20–74)  classified  as  obese  held  steady  through  the
1960s  and  1970s  at  around  14%  but  began  to  rise  rapidly
during the 1980s and 1990s. This rise in adult obesity coin-
cided with the period when an increasing number of Ameri-
cans began eating more sugar and fats. The function

21
P t ⫽ 0.01484t 2 ⫹ 0.446t ⫹ 15

1

0 ⱕ t ⱕ 22

2

gives  the  percentage  of  obese  adults  from  1978  (t ⫽ 0)
through the year 2000 (t ⫽ 22).
a. What  percentage  of  adults  were  obese  in  1978?  In

2000?

b. How fast was the percent of obese adults increasing in

1980 (t ⫽ 2)? In 1998 (t ⫽ 20)?

Source: Journal of the American Medical Association.

98. CABLE TV SUBSCRIBERS The number of subscribers to CNC
Cable Television in the town of Randolph is approximated
by the function

2
1
N x ⫽ 1000 1 ⫹ 2x 1/2

1

2

1

1 ⱕ x ⱕ 302

where N(x) denotes the number of subscribers to the ser-
vice in the xth week. Find the rate of increase in the num-
ber of subscribers at the end of the 12th week.

99. MALE LIFE EXPECTANCY Suppose  the  life  expectancy  of  a
male  at  birth  in  a  certain  country  is  described  by  the 
function

2
21
f t ⫽ 46.9 1 ⫹ 1.09t 0.1

1

1

0 ⱕ t ⱕ 150

2

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
the beginning of 1900. How long can a male born at the
beginning of 2000 in that country expect to live? What is
the rate of change of the life expectancy of a male born in
that country at the beginning of 2000?

100. DEMAND FOR SMARTPHONES The marketing department of
Telecon has determined that the demand for their smart-
phones obeys the relationship

p ⫽ ⫺0.02x ⫹ 600

1

0 ⱕ x ⱕ 30,000

2

where p denotes the phone’s unit price (in dollars) and x
denotes the quantity demanded.
a. Find the revenue function R.
b. Find the marginal revenue function R⬘.
c. Compute R⬘(10,000), and interpret your result.

101. COST OF PRODUCING DVDS The total weekly cost in dollars
incurred by Herald Media Corp. in producing x DVDs is
given by the total cost function

1
C x ⫽ 2500 ⫹ 2.2x

2

1

0 ⱕ x ⱕ 8000

2

a. What is the marginal cost when x ⫽ 1000 and 2000?
b. Find  the  average  cost  function  C苶 and  the  marginal

average cost function C苶⬘.

102. DEMAND FOR PHOTOCOPYING MACHINES The weekly demand
for the LectroCopy photocopying machine is given by the
demand equation

p ⫽ 2000 ⫺ 0.04x

1

0 ⱕ x ⱕ 50,000

2

where p denotes the wholesale unit price in dollars and x
denotes  the  quantity  demanded.  The  weekly  total  cost
function for manufacturing these copiers is given by

1
C x ⫽ 0.000002x 3 ⫺ 0.02x 2 ⫹ 1000x ⫹ 120,000

2

where C(x) denotes the total cost incurred in producing x
units.
a. Find the revenue function R, the profit function P, and

the average cost function C苶.

b. Find the marginal cost function C⬘, the marginal rev-
enue function R⬘, the marginal profit function P⬘, and
the marginal average cost function C苶⬘.

c. Compute C⬘(3000), R⬘(3000), and P⬘(3000).
d. Compute  C苶⬘(5000)  and  C苶⬘(8000),  and  interpret  your

results.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

BEFORE MOVING ON . . .

671

103. DEMAND FOR DVD  PLAYERS VCA  Television  found  that
the  monthly  demand  for  its  new  line  of  DVD  players  t
months after placing the players on the market is given by

D1t2 ⫽ 4000 ⫺ 3000e⫺0.06t

1t ⱖ 02

a. What  was  the  demand  after  1  month?  After  1  year?

After 2 years?

b. At what level is the demand expected to stabilize?

104. PRICE OF A COMMODITY The price of a certain commodity
in dollars per unit at time t (measured in weeks) is given
by p ⫽ 18 ⫺ 3e⫺2t ⫺ 6e⫺t/3.
a. What is the price of the commodity at t ⫽ 0?
b. How  fast  is  the  price  of  the  commodity  changing  at 

t ⫽ 0?

c. Find the equilibrium price of the commodity.

Hint: It is given by 

p

.

lim
tS⬁  

CHAPTER 9

Before Moving On . . .

1. Find  lim
x씮⫺1

x 2 ⫹ 4x ⫹ 3
x 2 ⫹ 3x ⫹ 2

.

2. Let

x 2 ⫺ 1
x3

f1x2 ⫽ 冦
x씮1⫺ f(x)  and  (b)  lim

if ⫺2 ⱕ x ⬍ 1
if 1 ⱕ x ⱕ 2

Find  (a)  lim

x씮1⫹ f(x).  Is  f continuous  at 

x ⫽ 1? Explain.

3. Use  the  definition  of  the  derivative  to  find  the  slope  of 
the tangent line to the graph of x 2 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 1 at the point 
(1, ⫺1). What is an equation of the tangent line?

4. Find the derivative of f(x) ⫽ 2x3 ⫺ 3x1/3 ⫹ 5x⫺2/3.
5. Differentiate t(x) ⫽ x

22x 2 ⫺ 1

.

6. Find 

dy
dx

if y ⫽

2x ⫹ 1

x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 1

.

7. Find the first three derivatives of f(x) ⫽

12x ⫹ 1

.

8. Find the slope of the tangent line to the graph of 

e1x
f (x) ⫽ .

9. Find the rate at which y ⫽ x ln(x2 ⫹ 1) is changing at 

x ⫽ 1.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10

APPLICATIONS 
OF THE DERIVATIVE

rakenrolll/Shutterstock.com

THIS CHAPTER FURTHER EXPLORES the power of the

derivative as a tool to help analyze the properties of

functions. The information obtained can then be used to

accurately sketch graphs of functions. We also see how the

derivative is used in solving a large class of optimization problems,

including finding what level of production will yield a maximum

profit for a company, finding what level of production will result in

minimal cost to a company, finding the maximum velocity at

which air is expelled when a person coughs, and a host of other

problems.

How many loudspeaker systems should

the Acrosonic company produce to

maximize its profit? In Example 4, 

page 729, you will see how the

techniques of calculus can be used to

help answer this question.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

673

674

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

10.1 Applications of the First Derivative

FIGURE 1
A typical car’s fuel economy improves as
the speed at which it is driven increases
from 0 mph to 42 mph and drops at
speeds greater than 42 mph.

Determining the Intervals Where a Function Is 
Increasing or Decreasing
According to a study by the U.S. Department of Energy and the Shell Development Com-
pany, a typical car’s fuel economy as a function of its speed is described by the graph
shown in Figure 1. Observe that the fuel economy f(x) in miles per gallon (mpg) improves
as x, the vehicle’s speed in miles per hour (mph), increases from 0 to 42 and then drops
as the speed increases beyond 42 mph. We use the terms increasing and decreasing to
describe the behavior of a function as we move from left to right along its graph.

f (x)

n
o
l
l
a
g
 
r
e
p
 
s
e
l
i

M

35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

0

10 

20 

30 

40 

50 

60 

70 

80

x

Speed, mph

Source: U.S. Department of Energy and Shell Development Co.

More precisely, we have the following definitions:

Increasing and Decreasing Functions
A function f is increasing on an interval (a, b) if for every two numbers x1 and
x2 in (a, b), f(x1) ⬍ f(x2) whenever x1 ⬍ x2 (Figure 2a).
A function f is decreasing on an interval (a, b) if for every two numbers x1 and
x2 in (a, b), f(x1) ⬎ f(x2) whenever x1 ⬍ x2 (Figure 2b).

y

f (x2)

f (x1)

y

f (x1)
f (x2)

a

x1

x2

b

x

(a) f is increasing on (a, b).
FIGURE 2

a

x1

x2

b

(b) f is decreasing on (a, b).

x

We say that f is increasing at a number c if there exists an interval (a, b) con-
taining c such that f is increasing on (a, b). Similarly, we say that f is decreasing at 
a number c if there exists an interval (a, b) containing c such that f is decreasing on
(a, b).

Since the rate of change of a function at x ⫽ c is given by the derivative of the
function at that number, the derivative lends itself naturally to being a tool for deter-
mining  the  intervals  where  a  differentiable  function  is  increasing  or  decreasing.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

10.1 APPLICATIONS OF THE FIRST DERIVATIVE

675

Indeed, as we saw in Chapter 9, the derivative of a function at a number measures both
the slope of the tangent line to the graph of the function at the point on the graph of f
corresponding to that number and the rate of change of the function at that number. In
fact, at a number where the derivative is positive, the slope of the tangent line to the
graph is positive, and the function is increasing. At a number where the derivative is
negative,  the  slope  of  the  tangent  line  to  the  graph  is  negative,  and  the  function  is
decreasing (Figure 3).

y

y = f (x)

y

y = f (x)

FIGURE 3

(a) f is increasing at x ⫽ c.

(b) f is decreasing at x ⫽ c.

c

f '(c ) > 0

x

c

f '(c) < 0

x

These observations lead to the following important theorem, which we state with-

out proof.

y

4

2

y = x2

x

– 2

2

FIGURE 4
The graph of f falls on (⫺⬁, 0) where 
f ⬘(x) ⬍ 0 and rises on (0, ⬁) where 
f ⬘(x) ⬎ 0.

THEOREM 1
a. If f ⬘(x) ⬎ 0 for every value of x in an interval (a, b), then f is increasing on (a, b).
b. If f ⬘(x) ⬍ 0 for every value of x in an interval (a, b), then f is decreasing on 

(a, b).

c. If f ⬘(x) ⫽ 0 for every value of x in an interval (a, b), then f is constant on (a, b).

EXAMPLE 1 Find the interval where the function f(x) ⫽ x 2 is increasing and the
interval where it is decreasing.

Solution The derivative of f(x) ⫽ x 2 is f ⬘(x) ⫽ 2x. Since

and

f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 2x ⬎ 0 if x ⬎ 0

f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 2x ⬍ 0 if x ⬍ 0
f is increasing on the interval (0, ⬁) and decreasing on the interval (⫺⬁, 0) 
(Figure 4).

Recall that the graph of a continuous function cannot have any breaks. As a con-
sequence,  a  continuous  function  cannot  change  sign  unless  it  equals  zero  for  some
value of x. (See Theorem 5, page 575.) This observation suggests the following pro-
cedure for determining the sign of the derivative f ⬘ of a function f and hence the inter-
vals where the function f is increasing and where it is decreasing.

Determining the Intervals Where a Function Is Increasing or Decreasing
1. Find all values of x for which f ⬘(x) ⫽ 0 or f ⬘ is discontinuous, and identify

the open intervals determined by these numbers.

2. Select a test number c in each interval found in Step 1, and determine the sign

of f ⬘(c) in that interval.
a. If f ⬘(c) ⬎ 0, f is increasing on that interval.
b. If f ⬘(c) ⬍ 0, f is decreasing on that interval.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

676

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

Explore & Discuss
True or false? If f is continuous
at c and f is increasing at c, then
f ⬘(c) ⬎ 0. Explain your answer.
Hint: Consider f (x) ⫽ x 3 and 
c ⫽ 0.

EXAMPLE 2 Determine the intervals where the function f(x) ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫺
24x ⫹ 32 is increasing and where it is decreasing.

Solution

1. The derivative of f is 

f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 3x 2 ⫺ 6x ⫺ 24 ⫽ 31x ⫹ 221x ⫺ 42

(x2)

See page 16.

and it is continuous everywhere. The zeros of f ⬘(x) are x ⫽ ⫺2 and x ⫽ 4, and
these numbers divide the real line into the intervals (⫺⬁, ⫺2), (⫺2, 4), and (4, ⬁).

2. To determine the sign of f ⬘(x) in the intervals (⫺⬁, ⫺2), (⫺2, 4), and (4, ⬁),

compute f ⬘(x) at a convenient test point in each interval. The results are shown in
the following table:

Interval

Test Point c

(⫺⬁, ⫺2)
(⫺2, 4)
(4, ⬁)

(x2)

See page 57.

⫺3
0
5

f ⴕ(c)

21
⫺24
21

Sign of f ⴕ(x)

⫹
⫺
⫹

Using these results, we obtain the sign diagram shown in Figure 5. We conclude
that f is increasing on the intervals (⫺⬁, ⫺2) and (4, ⬁) and is decreasing on the
interval (⫺2, 4). Figure 6 shows the graph of f.

y

60

40

20

y = x3 – 3x2 – 24x + 32

– 5

– 3 – 1

1

3

5

7

x

– 20

– 40

FIGURE 6
The graph of f rises on (⫺⬁, ⫺2), falls on (⫺2, 4), 
and rises again on (4, ⬁).

+ + + 0

– – – – – 0

+ + + +

0

– 2
FIGURE 5
Sign diagram for f ⬘

4

x

Note We will learn how to sketch these graphs later. However, if you are familiar
with the use of a graphing utility, you may go ahead and verify each graph.

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
Refer to Example 2.
1. Use a graphing utility to plot the graphs of 

f(x) ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫺ 24x ⫹ 32 and its derivative
function f ⬘(x) ⫽ 3x 2 ⫺ 6x ⫺ 24 using the viewing
window [⫺10, 10] ⫻ [⫺50, 70].

2. By looking at the graph of f ⬘, determine the 

intervals where f ⬘(x) ⬎ 0 and the intervals where
f ⬘(x) ⬍ 0. Next, look at the graph of f and deter-
mine the intervals where it is increasing and the
intervals where it is decreasing. Describe the rela-
tionship. Is it what you expected?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

10.1 APPLICATIONS OF THE FIRST DERIVATIVE

677

EXAMPLE 3 Find the interval where the function f(x) ⫽ x2/3 is increasing and the
interval where it is decreasing.

Solution

1. The derivative of f is

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ 2

3  x ⫺1/3 ⫽ 2

3x 1/3

The function f ⬘ is not defined at x ⫽ 0, so f ⬘ is discontinuous there. It is continu-
ous everywhere else. Furthermore, f ⬘ is not equal to zero anywhere. The number
0 divides the real line (the domain of f ) into the intervals (⫺⬁, 0) and (0, ⬁).

2. Pick a test point (say, x ⫽ ⫺1) in the interval (⫺⬁, 0), and compute

f  ¿1⫺12 ⫽ ⫺2

3

Since f ⬘(⫺1) ⬍ 0, we know that f ⬘(x) ⬍ 0 on (⫺⬁, 0). Next, we pick a test point
(say, x ⫽ 1) in the interval (0, ⬁) and compute

f  ¿112 ⫽ 2

3

Since f ⬘(1) ⬎ 0, we know that f ⬘(x) ⬎ 0 on (0, ⬁). Figure 7 shows these results
in the form of a sign diagram.

f ' is not defined at x = 0

– – – – – – –

+ + + + + + +

–1

0

1

FIGURE 7
Sign diagram for f ⬘

x

y

4

2

y = x2/3

x

2

– 4  
– 2
FIGURE 8
f decreases on (⫺⬁, 0) and increases on
(0, ⬁).

4

We conclude that f is decreasing on the interval (⫺⬁, 0) and increasing on the

interval (0, ⬁). The graph of f, shown in Figure 8, confirms these results.

EXAMPLE 4 Find the intervals where the function 
and where it is decreasing.

f  1x2 ⫽ x ⫹ 1

x

is increasing 

Solution

1. The derivative of f is

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ 1 ⫺ 1

x 

2

⫽ x 

2 ⫺ 1
2
x 

(x2)

See page 22.

Since f ⬘ is not defined at x ⫽ 0, it is discontinuous there. Furthermore, f ⬘(x) is
equal to zero when x 2 ⫺ 1 ⫽ 0 or x ⫽ ⫾1. Note that the sign of f ⬘ is different
from zero in the open intervals (⫺⬁, ⫺1), (⫺1, 0), (0, 1), and (1, ⬁).
f  ¿1⫺1

2. To determine the sign of f ⬘ in each of these intervals, we compute f ⬘(x) at the test 
22 ⫽ ⫺3,

and 2, respectively, obtaining 

f  ¿1⫺22 ⫽ 3
4,

points x ⫽ ⫺2, 

⫺1

2,  1
2,

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

678

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

f  ¿11
22 ⫽ ⫺3,
From the sign diagram for f ⬘ (Figure 9), we conclude 
that f is increasing on (⫺⬁, ⫺1) and (1, ⬁) and decreasing on (⫺1, 0) and (0, 1).

f  ¿122 ⫽ 3
4.

and 

y

4

2

y = x + 

f ' is not defined at x = 0

– 4  

– 2

2

1
x

4

x

+ + + +

0

– –

– –

0

+ + + +

–1

0

1

FIGURE 9
f ⬘ does not change sign as we move
across x ⫽ 0.

x

– 2

– 4

FIGURE 10
The graph of f rises on (⫺⬁, ⫺1), falls on 
(⫺1, 0) and (0, 1), and rises again on (1, ⬁).

The graph of f appears in Figure 10. Note that f ⬘ does not change sign as we

move across x ⫽ 0. (Compare this with Example 3.)

Example 4 reminds us that we must not automatically conclude that the deriva-
tive f ⬘ must change sign when we move across a number where f ⬘ is discontinous
or a zero of f ⬘.

Explore & Discuss
Consider the profit function P associated with a certain commodity defined by

P1x2 ⫽ R1x2 ⫺ C1x2

1x ⱖ 02

where R is the revenue function, C is the total cost function, and x is the number of units of
the product produced and sold.

1. Find an expression for P⬘(x).
2. Find relationships in terms of the derivatives of R and C such that

a. P is increasing at x ⫽ a.
b. P is decreasing at x ⫽ a.
c. P is neither increasing nor decreasing at x ⫽ a.
Hint: Recall that the derivative of a function at x ⫽ a measures the rate of change of the func-
tion at that number.

3. Explain the results of part 2 in economic terms.

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
1. Use a graphing utility to sketch the graphs of f (x) ⫽ x 3 ⫺ ax for a ⫽ ⫺2, ⫺1,

0, 1, and 2, using the viewing window [⫺2, 2] ⫻ [⫺2, 2].

2. Use the results of part 1 to guess at the values of a such that f is increasing

on (⫺⬁, ⬁).

3. Prove your conjecture analytically.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

10.1 APPLICATIONS OF THE FIRST DERIVATIVE

679

Relative Extrema
Besides helping us determine where the graph of a function is increasing and decreasing,
the first derivative may be used to help us locate certain “high points” and “low points”
on the graph of f. Knowing these points is invaluable in sketching the graphs of functions
and solving optimization problems. These “high points” and “low points” correspond to
the relative (local) maxima and relative minima of a function. They are so called because
they are the highest or the lowest points when compared with points nearby.

The graph shown in Figure 11 gives the U.S. budget surplus (deficit) from 1996
(t ⫽ 0) to 2008 (t ⫽ 12). The relative maxima and the relative minima of the function
f are indicated on the graph.

y

Relative maximum

0

1

3

4

5

6

7

8

t (years)

10 11 12

9
Relative maximum

Relative minimum

s
r
a
l
l
o
d

 
f
o

 
s
n
o
i
l
l
i

B

200

100

– 100

– 200

– 300

– 400

– 500

– 600

Source: Office of Management and Budget.

More generally, we have the following definition:

Relative Maximum
A function f has a relative maximum at x ⫽ c if there exists an open interval 
(a, b) containing c such that f(x) ⱕ f(c) for all x in (a, b).

Geometrically, this means that there is some interval containing x ⫽ c such that no
point on the graph of f with its x-coordinate in that interval can lie above the point (c, f(c));
that is, f(c) is the largest value of f(x) in some interval around x ⫽ c. Figure 12 depicts
the graph of a function f that has a relative maximum at x ⫽ x1 and another at x ⫽ x3.

y

(x3, f (x3))

(x1, f (x1))

y=f (x)

FIGURE 11
U.S. budget surplus (deficit) from 1996 to
2008

FIGURE 12
f has a relative maximum at x ⫽ x1 and at
x ⫽ x3.

I1

x1

x2

I3

x3

x4

x

Observe that all the points on the graph of f with x-coordinates in the interval I1
containing x1 (shown in blue) lie on or below the point 1x1, f1x122. This is also true for

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

680

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

the point 1x3, f1x322 and the interval I3. Thus, even though there are points on the graph
of f that are “higher” than the points 1x1, f1x122 and 1x3, f1x322, the latter points are

“highest” relative to points in their respective neighborhoods (intervals). Points on the
graph of a function f that are “highest” and “lowest” with respect to all points in the
domain of f will be studied in Section 10.4.

The definition of the relative minimum of a function parallels that of the relative

maximum of a function.

Relative Minimum
A function f has a relative minimum at x ⫽ c if there exists an open interval 
(a, b) containing c such that f(x) ⱖ f(c) for all x in (a, b).

The graph of the function f depicted in Figure 12 has a relative minimum at x ⫽ x2 and
another at x ⫽ x4.

Finding the Relative Extrema
We  refer  to  the  relative  maxima  and  relative  minima  of  a  function  as  the  relative
extrema of that function. As a first step in our quest to find the relative extrema of a
function, we consider functions that have derivatives at such points. Suppose that f is
a function that is differentiable on some interval (a, b) that contains a number c and
that f has a relative maximum at x ⫽ c (Figure 13a).

y

f '(x) > 0

f '(c) = 0

y

f '(x ) > 0

f '(x) < 0

f '(x) < 0

x

a

c

b

f '(c) = 0

x

a

c

b

FIGURE 13

(a) f has a relative maximum at x ⫽ c.

(b) f has a relative minimum at x ⫽ c.

y

y = x3

x

2

6

4

2

– 2

– 4

– 6

– 2

FIGURE 14
f ⬘(0) ⫽ 0, but f does not have a relative
extremum at (0, 0).

Observe that the slope of the tangent line to the graph of f must change from pos-
itive to negative as we move across x ⫽ c from left to right. Therefore, the tangent line
to the graph of f at the point (c, f(c)) must be horizontal; that is, f ⬘(c) ⫽ 0 (Figure 13a).
Using a similar argument, it may be shown that the derivative f ⬘ of a differen-
tiable function f must also be equal to zero at x ⫽ c if f has a relative minimum at 
x ⫽ c (Figure 13b).

This analysis reveals an important characteristic of the relative extrema of a dif-

ferentiable function f: At any number c where f has a relative extremum, f ⬘(c) ⫽ 0.

Before we develop a procedure for finding such numbers, a few words of caution
are in order. First, this result tells us that if a differentiable function f has a rela-
tive  extremum  at  a  number  x ⫽ c,  then  f ⬘(c)  ⫽ 0.  The  converse  of  this  state-
ment—if f ⬘(c) ⫽ 0 at x ⫽ c, then f must have a relative extremum at that num-
ber—is not true. Consider, for example, the function f(x) ⫽ x 3. Here, f ⬘(x) ⫽ 3x 2,
so f ⬘(0) ⫽ 0. However, f has neither a relative maximum nor a relative minimum
at x ⫽ 0 (Figure 14).

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

10.1 APPLICATIONS OF THE FIRST DERIVATIVE

681

Second, our result assumes that the function is differentiable and therefore
has a derivative at a number that gives rise to a relative extremum. The func-
tions f(x) ⫽ 兩 x兩 and t(x) ⫽ x 2/3 demonstrate that a relative extremum of a func-
tion may exist at a number at which the derivative does not exist. Both these
functions  fail  to  be  differentiable  at  x ⫽ 0,  but  each  has  a  relative  minimum
there. Figure 15 shows the graphs of these functions. Note that the slopes of the
tangent lines change from negative to positive as we move across x ⫽ 0, just as
in the case of a function that is differentiable at a value of x that gives rise to a
relative minimum.

y

4

2

y = 冷 x 冷

y

4

2

y = x 2/3

FIGURE 15
Each of these functions has a relative
extremum at (0, 0), but the derivative
does not exist there.

– 2

2

4

– 4  

(a)

x

– 4  

(b)

– 2

2

4

x

We refer to a number in the domain of f that may give rise to a relative extremum

as a critical number.

Critical Number of f
A critical number of a function f is any number x in the domain of f such that
f ⬘(x) ⫽ 0 or f ⬘(x) does not exist.

Figure 16 depicts the graph of a function that has critical numbers at x ⫽ a, b, c,
d, and e. Observe that f ⬘(x) ⫽ 0 at x ⫽ a, b, and c. Next, since there is a corner at 
x ⫽ d, f ⬘(x) does not exist there. Finally, f ⬘(x) does not exist at x ⫽ e because the 
tangent line there is vertical. Also, observe that the critical numbers x ⫽ a, b, and d
give rise to relative extrema of f, whereas the critical numbers x ⫽ c and x ⫽ e do not.

y

Horizontal
tangents

Corner

Vertical tangent

FIGURE 16
Critical numbers of f

a

b

c

d

e

x

Having defined what a critical number is, we can now state a formal procedure for
finding the relative extrema of a continuous function that is differentiable everywhere
except at isolated values of x. Incorporated into the procedure is the so-called First
Derivative Test, which helps us determine whether a number gives rise to a relative
maximum or a relative minimum of the function f.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

682

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

The First Derivative Test 

Procedure for Finding the Relative Extrema of a Continuous Function f
1. Determine the critical numbers of f.
2. Determine the sign of f ⬘(x) to the left and right of each critical number.

a. If f ⬘(x) changes sign from positive to negative as we move across a criti-

cal number c, then f has a relative maximum at x ⫽ c.

b. If f ⬘(x) changes sign from negative to positive as we move across a criti-

cal number c, then f has a relative minimum at x ⫽ c.

c. If f ⬘(x) does not change sign as we move across a critical number c, then

f does not have a relative extremum at x ⫽ c.

y = x2

EXAMPLE 5 Find the relative maxima and relative minima of the function 
f(x) ⫽ x 2.

y

4

2

– 2

2

FIGURE 17
f has a relative minimum at x ⫽ 0.

f ' is not deﬁned at x = 0 

– – – – – – –

+ + + + + + +

0

–1
FIGURE 18
Sign diagram for f ⬘

1

y

4

2

y = x2/3

– 4  
– 2
FIGURE 19
f has a relative minimum at x ⫽ 0.

2

4

x

x

x

Solution The derivative of f(x) ⫽ x 2 is given by f ⬘(x) ⫽ 2x. Setting f ⬘(x) ⫽ 0
yields x ⫽ 0 as the only critical number of f. Since

f ⬘1x2 ⬍ 0 if x ⬍ 0

and

we see that f ⬘(x) changes sign from negative to positive as we move across the
critical number 0. Thus, we conclude that f (0) ⫽ 0 is a relative minimum of f
(Figure 17).

f ⬘1x2 ⬎ 0 if x ⬎ 0

EXAMPLE 6 Find the relative maxima and relative minima of the function 
f(x) ⫽ x 2/3 (see Example 3).

. As was noted in Example 3, f ⬘ is 
Solution The derivative of f is 
not defined at x ⫽ 0, is continuous everywhere else, and is not equal to zero in its
domain. Thus, x ⫽ 0 is the only critical number of the function f.

3  x ⫺1/3

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ 2

The sign diagram obtained in Example 3 is reproduced in Figure 18. We can see

that the sign of f ⬘(x) changes from negative to positive as we move across x ⫽ 0
from left to right. Thus, an application of the First Derivative Test tells us that 
f(0) ⫽ 0 is a relative minimum of f (Figure 19).

Explore & Discuss
Recall that the average cost function 

C

is defined by 

C 1x2

x

C ⫽

where C(x) is the total cost function and x is the number of units of a commodity manufac-
tured (see Section 9.8).

1. Show that

C¿1x2 ⫽

C¿1x2 ⫺ C1x2

x

    1x ⬎ 02

2. Use  the  result  of  part  1  to  conclude  that 

C

C⬘(x)  ⬍ (x).  Find  similar  conditions  for  which 
constant.

C

is  decreasing  for  values  of  x at  which 
is 

is  increasing  and  for  which 

C

C

3. Explain the results of part 2 in economic terms.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

10.1 APPLICATIONS OF THE FIRST DERIVATIVE

683

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 7 Find the relative maxima and relative minima of the function

f1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫺ 24x ⫹ 32

Solution The derivative of f is

f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 3x 2 ⫺ 6x ⫺ 24 ⫽ 31x ⫹ 221x ⫺ 42

(x2)

See page 16.

and it is continuous everywhere. The zeros of f ⬘(x), x ⫽ ⫺2 and x ⫽ 4, are the only
critical numbers of the function f. The sign diagram for f ⬘ is shown in Figure 20.
Examine the two critical numbers x ⫽ ⫺2 and x ⫽ 4 for a relative extremum using
the First Derivative Test and the sign diagram for f ⬘.
1. The critical number ⫺2: Since the function f ⬘(x) changes sign from positive to

negative as we move across x ⫽ ⫺2 from left to right, we conclude that a relative
maximum of f occurs at x ⫽ ⫺2. The value of f(x) when x ⫽ ⫺2 is

f1⫺22 ⫽ 1⫺22 3 ⫺ 31⫺22 2 ⫺ 241⫺22 ⫹ 32 ⫽ 60

2. The critical number 4: f ⬘(x) changes sign from negative to positive as we move

across x ⫽ 4 from left to right, so f(4) ⫽ ⫺48 is a relative minimum of f. The
graph of f appears in Figure 21.

y

Relative
maximum

60

40

20

y = x3 – 3x2 – 24x + 32

– 5   – 3   –1

1

3

5

7

x

– 20

– 40

+ + + 0

– – – – – 0

+ + + +

– 2

0

4

FIGURE 20
Sign diagram for f ⬘

x

Relative minimum

FIGURE 21
f has a relative maximum at x ⫽ ⫺2 and a relative
minimum at x ⫽ 4.

EXAMPLE 8 Find the relative maxima and the relative minima of the function

f  1x2 ⫽ x ⫹ 1

x

Solution The derivative of f is

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ 1 ⫺ 1

2
x 

⫽ x 

2 ⫺ 1
x 

2

⫽ 1x ⫹ 121x ⫺ 12

2
x 

Since f ⬘ is equal to zero at x ⫽ ⫺1 and x ⫽ 1, these are critical numbers for the
function f. Next, observe that f ⬘ is discontinuous at x ⫽ 0. However, because f is not
defined at that number, x ⫽ 0 does not qualify as a critical number of f. Figure 22
shows the sign diagram for f ⬘.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

684

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

y

4

2

Relative
minimum

2

4

x

f ' is not deﬁned at x = 0

– 4  

– 2

+ + + +

0

– –

– –

0

+ + + +

0

1

–1
FIGURE 22
x ⫽ 0 is not a critical number because f is 
not defined at x ⫽ 0.

x

– 2

– 4

Relative
maximum

FIGURE 23
The graph of f 1x2 ⫽ x ⫹

1
x

Since f ⬘(x) changes sign from positive to negative as we move across x ⫽ ⫺1
from left to right, the First Derivative Test implies that f(⫺1) ⫽ ⫺2 is a relative 
maximum of the function f. Next, f ⬘(x) changes sign from negative to positive as 
we move across x ⫽ 1 from left to right, so f(1) ⫽ 2 is a relative minimum of the
function f. The graph of f appears in Figure 23. Note that this function has a relative
maximum that lies below its relative minimum.

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
Refer to Example 8.

1. Use a graphing utility to plot the graphs of f (x) ⫽ x ⫹ 1>x and its derivative
function f ⬘(x) ⫽ 1 ⫺ 1>x 2, using the viewing window [⫺4, 4] ⫻ [⫺8, 8].
2. By studying the graph of f ⬘, determine the critical numbers of f. Next, note
the sign of f ⬘(x) immediately to the left and to the right of each critical num-
ber. What can you conclude about each critical number? Are your conclu-
sions borne out by the graph of f ?

EXAMPLE 9 Let f(x) ⫽ xe⫺x and find (a) the intervals where f is increasing or
decreasing and (b) the relative extrema of f.

Solution The derivative f is

f ⬘(x) ⫽

1d

dx

1d

dx

xe⫺x ⫽ x 
1

2
2

2

e⫺x ⫹ e⫺x
1

2

⫽ xe⫺x ⫺1 ⫹ e⫺x ⫽ 1 ⫺ x e⫺x

1d

dx

x

2

Use the Product Rule.

Observe that f ⬘ is continuous everywhere. Next, setting f ⬘(x) ⫽ 0 gives x ⫽ 1
(remember that e⫺x ⫽ 0 for all values of x). Therefore, x ⫽ 1 is the sole critical
number of f . The sign diagram of f ⬘ is shown in Figure 24.

From the sign diagram, we see that f is increasing on (⫺⬁, 1) and 

decreasing on (1, ⬁). Also, using this diagram and the First Derivative Test,
we see that the critical number x ⫽ 1 gives rise to a relative maximum of f
with value f (1) ⫽ e⫺1 ⫽ 1>e. The graph of f shown in Figure 25 confirms 

our results.

______

x

0

1

+ + + + + + + + +

0
FIGURE 24
Sign diagram for f ⬘

y

1

0.5

⫺0.5

⫺1

1

2

3

4

5

x

FIGURE 25
The graph of f(x) ⫽ xe⫺x is increasing on
(⫺⬁, 1) and decreasing on (1, ⬁).

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

y

s
r
a
l
l
o
d

 
f
o

 
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
T

1000
800
600
400
200

– 200

y=P(x)

2 4 6 8
Units of a thousand

10 12

16

FIGURE 26
The profit function is increasing on 
(0, 7500) and decreasing on (7500, ⬁).

y

VIDEO

y = N(t)

150

140

130

120

110

100

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Years

FIGURE 27
The number of crimes, N(t), is increasing
over the 7-year interval.

x

t

10.1 APPLICATIONS OF THE FIRST DERIVATIVE

685

APPLIED EXAMPLE 10 Profit Functions The profit function of Acrosonic
Company is given by

P1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.02x 2 ⫹ 300x ⫺ 200,000

dollars, where x is the number of Acrosonic model F loudspeaker systems 
produced. Find where the function P is increasing and where it is decreasing.

Solution The derivative P⬘ of the function P is

P⬘1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.04x ⫹ 300 ⫽ ⫺0.041x ⫺ 75002

Thus, P⬘(x) ⫽ 0 when x ⫽ 7500. Furthermore, P⬘(x) ⬎ 0 for x in the interval 
(0, 7500), and P⬘(x) ⬍ 0 for x in the interval (7500, ⬁). This means that the profit
function P is increasing on (0, 7500) and decreasing on (7500, ⬁) (Figure 26).

APPLIED EXAMPLE 11 Crime Rates The number of major crimes committed
in the city of Bronxville from 2005 to 2012 is approximated by the function

N1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.1t 3 ⫹ 1.5t 2 ⫹ 100

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 72

where N(t) denotes the number of crimes committed in year t, with t ⫽ 0 corre-
sponding to the beginning of 2005. Find where the function N is increasing and
where it is decreasing.

Solution The derivative N⬘ of the function N is

N⬘1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.3t 2 ⫹ 3t ⫽ ⫺0.3t1t ⫺ 102

Since N⬘(t) ⬎ 0 for t in the interval (0, 7), the function N is increasing throughout
that interval (Figure 27).

10.1 Self-Check Exercises

1. Find the intervals where the function 

2. Find the relative extrema of 

2

f  1x2 ⫽ x 

1 ⫺ x 
2

.

f  1x2 ⫽ 2
3  

 x 

3 ⫺ x 

2 ⫺ 12x ⫹ 3

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 10.1 can be found on 
page 691.

is increasing and the intervals where it is decreasing.

10.1 Concept Questions

1. Explain each of the following:

a. f is increasing on an interval I.
b. f is decreasing on an interval I.

4. a. What is a critical number of a function f ?

b. Explain the role of critical numbers in determining the

relative extrema of a function.

2. Describe a procedure for determining where a function is

5. Describe  the  First  Derivative  Test,  and  describe  a  proce-

increasing and where it is decreasing.

dure for finding the relative extrema of a function.

3. Explain each term: (a) relative maximum and (b) relative

minimum.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

686

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

10.1 Exercises

In Exercises 1–8, you are given the graph of a function f. Deter-
mine the intervals where f is increasing, constant, or decreasing.
1.

2.

y

y

–5

x

5

–1

1

x

10. AIRCRAFT STRUCTURAL INTEGRITY Among  the  important  fac-
tors in determining the structural integrity of an aircraft is
its age. Advancing age makes planes more likely to crack.
The graph of the function f, shown in the accompanying fig-
ure, is referred to as a “bathtub curve” in the airline indus-
try. It gives the fleet damage rate (damage due to corrosion,
accident, and metal fatigue) of a typical fleet of commercial
aircraft as a function of the number of years of service.

y

2

1

x

2

–2

–1

1
–1

–2

y

e
t
a
r
 
e
g
a
m
a
d

 
t
e
e
l
F

2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24

Economic life objective

t (years in service)

3.

y

4.

1

–2

–1

1

2

5.

7.

y

1

–1

1

2

y

1

–1

1

–1

x

x

x

6.

y

1

–1

1

8.

y

–1

1

–1

x

x

a. Determine the interval where f is decreasing. This cor-
responds to the time period when the fleet damage rate
is dropping as problems are found and corrected during
the initial “shakedown” period.

b. Determine the interval where f is constant. After the ini-
tial shakedown period, planes have few structural prob-
lems, and this is reflected by the fact that the function is
constant on this interval.

c. Determine the interval where f is increasing. Beyond the
time  period  mentioned  in  part  (b),  the  function  is
increasing—reflecting an increase in structural defects
due mainly to metal fatigue.

11. Refer to the following figure:

y

6
5
4
3
2
1
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12

x

What is the sign of the following?
a. f ⬘(2)
b. f ⬘(x) in the interval (1, 3)
c. f ⬘(4)
d. f ⬘(x) in the interval (3, 6)
e. f ⬘(7)
f. f ⬘(x) in the interval (6, 9)
g. f ⬘(x) in the interval (9, 12)

9. THE BOSTON MARATHON The graph of the function f shown in
the accompanying figure gives the elevation of the part of
the  Boston  Marathon  course  that  includes  the  notorious
Heartbreak  Hill.  Determine  the  intervals  (stretches  of  the
course)  where  the  function  f is  increasing  (the  runner  is
laboring),  where  it  is  constant  (the  runner  is  taking  a
breather), and where it is decreasing (the runner is coasting).

y (ft)

n
o
i
t
a
v
e
l
E

300

200

100

0

19.6

20.2

20.6

21.1

21.7 21.8

22.7

x (miles)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

10.1 APPLICATIONS OF THE FIRST DERIVATIVE

687

43.

45.

47.

48.

12. Refer to the following figure:

y

6
5
4
3
2
1
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12

x

a. What  are  the  critical  numbers  of  f ?  Give  reasons  for

your answers.

b. Draw the sign diagram for f ⬘.
c. Find the relative extrema of f.

In  Exercises  13–40,  find  the  interval(s)  where  the  function  is
increasing and the interval(s) where it is decreasing.

13. f1x2 ⫽ 3x ⫹ 5
15. f1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 3x
17. t1x2 ⫽ x ⫺ x 3
19. t1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫹ 3x 2 ⫹ 1

14. f1x2 ⫽ 4 ⫺ 5x
16. f1x2 ⫽ 2x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 1
18. f1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 3x 2
20. f1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 4

21.

22.

f  1x2 ⫽ 1
3   x 
f  1x2 ⫽ 2
3   x 

3 ⫺ 3x 

2 ⫹ 9x ⫹ 20

3 ⫺ 2x 

2 ⫺ 6x ⫺ 2

23. h1x2 ⫽ x 4 ⫺ 4x 3 ⫹ 10

24. t1x2 ⫽ x 4 ⫺ 2x 2 ⫹ 4

27.

25.

x ⫺ 2

f  1x2 ⫽ 1
h1t2 ⫽ t
t ⫺ 1
29. f1x2 ⫽ ⫺x 3/5
f  1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 1
f  1x2 ⫽ 216 ⫺ x 
35. f1x2 ⫽ x 2e⫺x
37. f1x2 ⫽

31.
33.

ln x
x

2

39.

f  1x2 ⫽ 1 ⫺ x 2

x

26.

28.

2x ⫹ 3

h 1x2 ⫽ 1
t1t2 ⫽ 2t

t 

34.

2 ⫹ 1
30. f1x2 ⫽ x 2/3 ⫹ 5
32. f1x2 ⫽ (x ⫺ 5)2/3
t 1x2 ⫽ x1x ⫹ 1
36. f1x2 ⫽ e⫺x2/ 2
38. f1x2 ⫽ ln x 2
h 1x2 ⫽ x 

x ⫺ 1

40.

2

44.

y

–3

4

y

2

1

x

2

4

6

– 32

46.

y

2

1

–1

1

–6

–4

–2

–1

– 2

y

3
2
1

–1

1

2

–2

y

x

4

3

2

1

– 3

– 2

– 1

1

2

3

y

–2

5
4
3
2
1

–1
–2
–3
–4
–5

(3,  9)2

1

2

3

– 3   – 2   – 1

(–3, – 9)2

x

x

x

x

In Exercises 41–48, you are given the graph of a function f. Deter-
mine the relative maxima and relative minima, if any.
41.

42.

y

y

In  Exercises  49–52,  match  the  graph  of  the  function  with  the
graph of its derivative in (a)–(d).
(a)

(b)

y′

y′

1

1

–1

1

x

–1

1

x

x

x

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

688

(c)

49.

51.

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

y′

(d)

y′

y

y

x

x

x

50.

y

52.

y

x

x

x

In Exercises 53–76, find the relative maxima and relative minima,
if any, of each function.

53. f1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 4x
55. h1t2 ⫽ ⫺t 2 ⫹ 6t ⫹ 6
57. f1x2 ⫽ x 5/3
59. t1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫹ 5

4 ⫺ x 

2

54. t1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 3x ⫹ 8
2  x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫹ 4

f  1x2 ⫽ 1

56.

58. f1x2 ⫽ x 2/3 ⫹ 2
60. f1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 6

61.

62.

63.

f  1x2 ⫽ 1
2  x 
h 1x2 ⫽ 1
2  x 
F 1x2 ⫽ 1
3   x 

4 ⫺ 3x 

2 ⫹ 4x ⫺ 8

3 ⫺ x 

2 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 4

64. F1t2 ⫽ 3t 5 ⫺ 20t 3 ⫹ 20
65. t1x2 ⫽ x 4 ⫺ 4x 3 ⫹ 20
66. f1x2 ⫽ 3x 4 ⫺ 2x 3 ⫹ 4

67.

69.

x

t1x2 ⫽ x ⫹ 1
f  1x2 ⫽ x ⫹ 9

x

68.

h 1x2 ⫽ x

x ⫹ 1

⫹ 2

70. t1x2 ⫽ 2x 

2 ⫹ 4000
x

⫹ 10

2

x  

2
2

72.

71.

f  1x2 ⫽ x
1 ⫹ x 
1
73. f x ⫽ 2xe⫺x
1
75. f x ⫽ x ⫺ ln x
77. A  stone  is  thrown  straight  up  from  the  roof  of  an  80-ft
building.  The  distance  (in  feet)  of  the  stone  from  the
ground at any time t (in seconds) is given by

2 ⫺ 1
74. f x ⫽ x 2e⫺2x
76. f x ⫽ x2 ln x

t1x2 ⫽ x
1
1

2
2

h1t2 ⫽ ⫺16t 2 ⫹ 64t ⫹ 80

When is the stone rising, and when is it falling? If the stone
were to miss the building, when would it hit the ground?
Sketch the graph of h.
Hint: The stone is on the ground when h(t) ⫽ 0.

78. PROFIT FUNCTIONS The Mexican subsidiary of ThermoMas-
ter  manufactures  an  indoor–outdoor  thermometer.  Man-
agement estimates that the profit (in dollars) realizable by
the  company  for  the  manufacture  and  sale  of  x units  of
thermometers each week is

P1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.001x 2⫹ 8x ⫺ 5000

Find the intervals where the profit function P is increasing
and the intervals where P is decreasing.

79. U.S.  CELL PHONE SUBSCRIBERS The  number  of  U.S.  cell
phone  subscribers  (in  millions)  t years  after  1989  is
approximated by

N1t2 ⫽ 0.63t 2 ⫹ 1.02t ⫹ 2.7

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 202

Show that N is an increasing function of t on the interval 
(0, 20). What does your result tell you about the number of
phone subscribers during the period under consideration?
80. GROWTH OF MANAGED SERVICES Almost half of companies let
other firms manage some of their Web operations—a prac-
tice  called  Web  hosting.  Managed  services—monitoring  a
customer’s technology services—is the fastest-growing part
of Web hosting. Managed services sales are approximated
by the function

f1t2 ⫽ 0.469t 2 ⫹ 0.758t ⫹ 0.44

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

where f(t) is measured in billions of dollars and t is mea-
sured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 1999.
a. Find the interval where f is increasing and the interval

where f is decreasing.

b. What does your result tell you about sales in managed

services from 1999 through 2009?

Source: International Data Corp.

81. FLIGHT OF A ROCKET The height (in feet) attained by a rocket

t sec into flight is given by the function

h 1t2 ⫽ ⫺ 

1
3  t 

3 ⫹ 16t 

2 ⫹ 33t ⫹ 10    1t ⱖ 02

When is the rocket rising, and when is it descending?

82. ENVIRONMENT OF FORESTS Following the lead of the National
Wildlife  Federation,  the  Department  of  the  Interior  of  a
South American country began to record an index of envi-
ronmental quality that measured progress and decline in the

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

environmental quality of its forests. The index for the years
2000 through 2010 is approximated by the function

I 1t2 ⫽ 1
3  t 

3 ⫺ 5
2  t 

2 ⫹ 80    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

where t ⫽ 0 corresponds to 2000. Find the intervals where
the  function  I is  increasing  and  the  intervals  where  it  is
decreasing. Interpret your results.

83. AVERAGE SPEED OF A HIGHWAY VEHICLE The average speed
of a vehicle on a stretch of Route 134 between 6 A.M. and 
10  A.M.  on  a  typical  weekday  is  approximated  by  the
function

f1t2 ⫽ 20t ⫺ 40 ⫹ 50

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

1t

where f(t) is measured in miles per hour and t is measured
in hours, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 6 A.M. Find the inter-
val where f is increasing and the interval where f is decreas-
ing, and interpret your results.

84. AVERAGE COST The  average  cost  (in  dollars)  incurred  by
Lincoln Records each week in pressing x compact discs is
given by 

C 1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.0001x ⫹ 2 ⫹ 2000
Show  that  C苶(x)  is  always  decreasing  over  the  interval 
(0, 6000).

    10 ⬍ x ⱕ 60002

x

85. WEB HOSTING Refer  to  Exercise  80.  Sales  in  the  Web-
hosting industry are projected to grow in accordance with
the function

f1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.05t 3 ⫹ 0.56t 2 ⫹ 5.47t ⫹ 7.5

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

where f(t) is measured in billions of dollars and t is mea-
sured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 1999.
a. Find the interval where f is increasing and the interval

where f is decreasing.
Hint: Use the quadratic formula.

b. What does your result tell you about sales in the Web-

hosting industry from 1999 through 2009?

Source: International Data Corp.

86. MEDICAL SCHOOL APPLICANTS According to a study from the
American  Medical  Association,  the  number  of  medical
school applicants from academic year 1997–1998 (t ⫽ 0)
through the academic year 2008–2009 is approximated by
the function

N1t2 ⫽ e 0.36t2 ⫺ 3.10t ⫹ 41.2

42.46

if 0 ⱕ t ⬍ 9
if 9 ⱕ t ⱕ 11

Find the years when the number of medical school appli-
cants was increasing, when it was decreasing, and when it
was approximately constant.
Source: Journal of the American Medical Association.

87. PROJECTED RETIREMENT FUNDS Based on data from the Cen-
tral  Provident  Fund  of  a  certain  country  (a  government
agency similar to the Social Security Administration), the

10.1 APPLICATIONS OF THE FIRST DERIVATIVE

689

estimated cash in the fund in 2005 is given by

A1t2 ⫽ ⫺96.6t 4 ⫹ 403.6t 3
⫹ 660.9t 2 ⫹ 250

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 52

where A(t) is measured in billions of dollars and t is mea-
sured in decades, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 2005. Find
the interval where A is increasing and the interval where A
is decreasing, and interpret your results.
Hint: Use the quadratic formula.

88. DRUG CONCENTRATION IN THE BLOOD The  concentration  (in
milligrams  per  cubic  centimeter)  of  a  certain  drug  in  a
patient’s body t hr after injection is given by

2

C 1t2 ⫽ t 

2t 

3 ⫹ 1

    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

When is the concentration of the drug increasing, and when
is it decreasing?

89. SMALL CAR MARKET SHARE Owing in part to an aging popu-
lation and the squeeze from carbon-cutting regulations, the
percentage of small and lower-midsize vehicles is expected
to increase in the near future. The function

f1t2 ⫽ 5.32t ⫺ 300
2t ⫺ 10

          10 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

gives the projected percentage of small and lower-midsize
vehicles t years after 2005.
a. What  was  the  percentage  of  small  and  lower-midsize
vehicles in 2005? What is the projected percentage of
small and lower-midsize vehicles in 2015?

b. Show  that  f is  increasing  on  the  interval  (0,  10),  and

interpret your results.

Source: J.D. Power Automotive.

90. AGE OF DRIVERS IN CRASH FATALITIES The  number  of  crash
fatalities  per  100,000  vehicle  miles  of  travel  in  a  certain
year is approximated by the model

15

0.08333x 

2 ⫹ 1.91667x ⫹ 1

    10 ⱕ x ⱕ 112

f  1x2 ⫽
where x is the age of the driver in years, with x ⫽ 0 corre-
sponding to age 16. Show that f is decreasing on (0, 11),
and interpret your result.
Source: National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.

91. AIR POLLUTION The  amount  of  nitrogen  dioxide,  a  brown
gas  that  impairs  breathing,  present  in  the  atmosphere  on 
a  certain  May  day  in  the  city  of  Long  Beach  is  approxi-
mated by

A 1t2 ⫽

136

1 ⫹ 0.251t ⫺ 4.52  

⫹ 28    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 112

2

where  A(t)  is  measured  in  pollutant  standard  index  (PSI)
and  t is  measured  in  hours,  with  t ⫽ 0  corresponding  to 
7 A.M. Find the intervals where A is increasing and where
A is decreasing, and interpret your results.
Source: Los Angeles Times.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

690

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

92. ENERGY CONSUMPTION OF APPLIANCES The  average  energy
consumption  of  the  typical  refrigerator/freezer  manufac-
tured by York Industries is approximately

C1t2 ⫽ 1486e⫺0.073t ⫹ 500

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 202

kilowatt-hours  (kWh)  per  year,  where  t is  measured  in
years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 1972.
a. What was the average energy consumption of the York

refrigerator/freezer at the beginning of 1972?

b. Prove that the average energy consumption of the York
refrigerator/freezer  is  decreasing  over  the  years  in
question.

c. All refrigerator/freezers manufactured as of January 1,
1990, must meet the 950-kWh/year maximum energy-
consumption  standard  set  by  the  National  Appliance
Conservation  Act.  Show  that  the  York  refrigerator/
freezer satisfies this requirement.

93. POLIO IMMUNIZATION Polio,  a  once-feared  killer,  declined
markedly in the United States in the 1950s after Jonas Salk
developed  the  inactivated  polio  vaccine  and  mass  immu-
nization of children took place. The number of polio cases
in  the  United  States  from  the  beginning  of  1959  to  the
beginning of 1963 is approximated by the function

N1t2 ⫽ 5.3e0.095t2⫺0.85t

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

where N(t) gives the number of polio cases (in thousands)
and t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to the
beginning of 1959.
a. Show  that  the  function  N is  decreasing  over  the  time

interval under consideration.

b. How fast was the number of polio cases decreasing at the
beginning  of  1959?  At  the  beginning  of  1962?  (Com-
ment: Since the introduction of the oral vaccine devel-
oped by Dr. Albert B. Sabin in 1963, polio in the United
States has, for all practical purposes, been eliminated.)

94. PRISON OVERCROWDING The 1980s saw a trend toward old-
fashioned punitive deterrence as opposed to the more lib-
eral penal policies and community-based corrections pop-
ular  in  the  1960s  and  early  1970s.  As  a  result,  prisons
became more crowded, and the gap between the number of
people  in  prison  and  the  prison  capacity  widened.  The
number  of  prisoners  (in  thousands)  in  federal  and  state
prisons is approximated by the function

N1t2 ⫽ 3.5t 2 ⫹ 26.7t ⫹ 436.2

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
1984.  The  number  of  inmates  for  which  prisons  were
designed is given by

C1t2 ⫽ 24.3t ⫹ 365

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

where  C(t)  is  measured  in  thousands  and  t has  the  same
meaning as before. Show that the gap between the number of
prisoners  and  the  number  for  which  the  prisons  were
designed widened throughout the decade from 1984 to 1994.
Hint: First, write a function G that gives the gap between the num-
ber  of  prisoners  and  the  number  for  which  the  prisons  were
designed at any time t. Then show that G⬘(t) ⬎ 0 for all values of
t in the interval (0, 10).
Source: U.S. Department of Justice.

95. U.S.  NURSING SHORTAGE The  demand  for  nurses  between

2000 and 2015 is estimated to be

D1t2 ⫽ 0.0007t 2 ⫹ 0.0265t ⫹ 2
where D(t) is measured in millions and t ⫽ 0 corresponds
to the year 2000. The supply of nurses over the same time 
period is estimated to be

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 152

S1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.0014t 2 ⫹ 0.0326t ⫹ 1.9

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 152

where S(t) is also measured in millions.
a. Find  an  expression  G(t)  giving  the  gap  between  the
demand and supply of nurses over the period in ques-
tion.

b. Find the interval where G is decreasing and where it is

increasing. Interpret your result.

c. Find the relative extrema of G. Interpret your result.
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

In Exercises 96–101, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
96. If f is decreasing on (a, b), then f ⬘(x) ⬍ 0 for each x in 

(a, b).

97. If  f and  t are  both  increasing  on  (a,  b),  then  f ⫹ t is

increasing on (a, b).

98. If  f and  t are  both  decreasing  on  (a,  b),  then  f ⫺ t is

decreasing on (a, b).

99. If f(x) and t(x) are positive on (a, b) and both f and t are

increasing on (a, b), then ft is increasing on (a, b).

100. If f ⬘(c) ⫽ 0, then f has a relative maximum or a relative

minimum at x ⫽ c.

101. If f has a relative minimum at x ⫽ c, then f ⬘(c) ⫽ 0.

102. Using Theorem 1, verify that the linear function f(x) ⫽ mx ⫹
b is (a) increasing everywhere if  m ⬎ 0, (b) decreasing
everywhere if m ⬍ 0, and (c) constant if m ⫽ 0.

103. Show that the function f(x) ⫽ x 3 ⫹ x ⫹ 1 has no relative

extrema on (⫺⬁, ⬁).

104. Let f(x) ⫽ ⫺x 2 ⫹ ax ⫹ b. Determine the constants a and
b such that f has a relative maximum at x ⫽ 2 and the rel-
ative maximum value is 7.

105. Let f(x) ⫽ ax 3 ⫹ 6x 2 ⫹ bx ⫹ 4. Determine the constants
a and b such that f has a relative minimum at x ⫽ ⫺1 and
a relative maximum at x ⫽ 2.

106. Let

f  1x2 ⫽ e ⫺3x

2x ⫹ 4

if x ⬍ 0
if x ⱖ 0

a. Compute  f ⬘(x),  and  show  that  it  changes  sign  from

negative to positive as we move across x ⫽ 0.

b. Show  that  f does  not  have  a  relative  minimum  at 
x ⫽ 0. Does this contradict the First Derivative Test?
Explain your answer.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

107. Let

f  1x2 ⫽ e ⫺x 

2

2 ⫹ 3

if x ⫽ 0
if x ⫽ 0

a. Compute  f ⬘(x),  and  show  that  it  changes  sign  from

positive to negative as we move across x ⫽ 0.

b. Show  that  f does  not  have  a  relative  maximum  at 
x ⫽ 0. Does this contradict the First Derivative Test?
Explain your answer.

108. Let

f  1x2 ⫽ •  

1
2
x 
2
x 

if x ⬎ 0

if x ⱕ 0

a. Compute f ⬘(x), and show that it does not change sign

as we move across x ⫽ 0.

b. Show that f has a relative minimum at x ⫽ 0. Does this
contradict  the  First  Derivative  Test?  Explain  your
answer.

109. Show that the quadratic function

f1x2 ⫽ ax 2 ⫹ bx ⫹ c

1a ⫽ 02

10.1 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. The derivative of f is

f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 2x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 12 ⫽ 21x ⫹ 221x ⫺ 32

and  it  is  continuous  everywhere.  The  zeros  of  f ⬘(x)  are 
x ⫽ ⫺2 and x ⫽ 3. The sign diagram of f ⬘ is shown in the
accompanying figure. We conclude that f is increasing on
the  intervals  (⫺⬁,  ⫺2)  and  (3,  ⬁)  and  decreasing  on  the
interval (⫺2, 3).

10.1 APPLICATIONS OF THE FIRST DERIVATIVE

691

has a relative extremum when x ⫽ ⫺b>2a. Also, show that
the relative extremum is a relative maximum if a ⬍ 0 and
a relative minimum if a ⬎ 0.

110. Show that the cubic function

f1x2 ⫽ ax 3 ⫹ bx 2 ⫹ cx ⫹ d

1a ⫽ 02

has no relative extremum if and only if b2 ⫺ 3ac ⱕ 0.

111. Refer to Example 6, page 575.

a. Show that f is increasing on the interval (0, 1).
b. Show that f(0) ⫽ ⫺1 and f(1) ⫽ 1, and use the result 
of part (a) together with the Intermediate Value Theo-
rem to conclude that there is exactly one root of f(x) ⫽
0 in (0, 1).

112. Show that the function

f  1x2 ⫽ ax ⫹ b

cx ⫹ d

does not have a relative extremum if ad ⫺ bc ⫽ 0. What
can you say about f if ad ⫺ bc ⫽ 0?

and it is continuous everywhere except at x ⫽ ⫾1. Since
f ⬘(x) is equal to zero at x ⫽ 0, x ⫽ 0 is a critical number of
f. Next, observe that f ⬘(x) is discontinuous at x ⫽ ⫾1, but
since these numbers are not in the domain of f, they do not
qualify as critical numbers of f. Finally, from the sign dia-
gram of f ⬘ shown in the accompanying figure, we conclude
that f(0) ⫽ 0 is a relative minimum of f.

f ' is not deﬁned at x = ± 1

+ + + + +

0

– – – – – – – – – – – –

0

+ + + +

–2

0

3

2. The derivative of f is

x

– – – – –   – – –

0

+ + + + + + + +

–1

0

1

x

f  ¿1x2 ⫽

11 ⫺ x 
 ⫽ 11 ⫺ x 

d

2 
 

22  

22 ⫺ x 
dx  1x 
11 ⫺ x 
22  
21⫺2x2
2212x2 ⫺ x 
11 ⫺ x 
22 2

2

d

dx   11 ⫺ x 

22

⫽

2x

11 ⫺ x 

22 2

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Using the First Derivative to Analyze a Function
A graphing utility is an effective tool for analyzing the properties of functions. This is
especially true when we also bring into play the power of calculus, as the following
examples show.

(continued)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

692

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

_2

10

_10

FIGURE T1
The graph of f in the viewing window
[⫺2, 4] ⫻ [⫺10, 10]

EXAMPLE 1 Let f(x) ⫽ 2.4x 4 ⫺ 8.2x 3 ⫹ 2.7x 2 ⫹ 4x ⫹ 1.
a. Use a graphing utility to plot the graph of f.
b. Find the intervals where f is increasing and the intervals where f is decreasing.
c. Find the relative extrema of f.

4

Solution
a. The graph of f in the viewing window [⫺2, 4] ⫻ [⫺10, 10] is shown in Figure T1.
b. We compute

f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 9.6x 3 ⫺ 24.6x 2 ⫹ 5.4x ⫹ 4

and observe that f ⬘ is continuous everywhere, so the critical numbers of f occur at
values of x where f ⬘(x) ⫽ 0. To solve this last equation, observe that f ⬘(x) is 
a polynomial function of degree 3. The easiest way to solve the polynomial
equation

9.6x3 ⫺ 24.6x 2 ⫹ 5.4x ⫹ 4 ⫽ 0

is to use the function on a graphing utility for solving polynomial equations. (Not
all graphing utilities have this function.) You can also use TRACE and ZOOM, but
this will not give the same accuracy without a much greater effort.

We find

x2 ⬇ 0.63272944121

x1 ⬇ 2.22564943249
Referring to Figure T1, we conclude that f is decreasing on (⫺⬁, ⫺0.2959) and
(0.6327, 2.2256) (correct to four decimal places) and f is increasing on (⫺0.2959,
0.6327) and (2.2256, ⬁).

x3 ⬇ ⫺0.295878873696

c. Using the evaluation function of a graphing utility, we find the value of f at each
of the critical numbers found in part (b). Upon referring to Figure T1 once again,
we see that f(x3) ⬇ 0.2836 and f(x1) ⬇ ⫺8.2366 are relative minimum values of f
and f(x2) ⬇ 2.9194 is a relative maximum value of f.

Note The  equation  f ⬘(x)  ⫽ 0  in  Example  1  is  a  polynomial  equation,  so  it  is  easily
solved by using the function for solving polynomial equations. We could also solve the
equation using the function for finding the roots of equations, but that would require
much more work. For equations that are not polynomial equations, however, our only
choice is to use the function for finding the roots of equations.

If the derivative of a function is difficult to compute or simplify and we do not
require great precision in the solution, we can find the relative extrema of the function
using a combination of ZOOM and TRACE. This technique, which does not require the
use of the derivative of f, is illustrated in the following example.

EXAMPLE 2 Let f1x2 ⫽ x 1/31x 2 ⫹ 12⫺3/23⫺x.

a. Use a graphing utility to plot the graph of f.
b. Find the relative extrema of f.

2

Solution
a. The graph of f in the viewing window [⫺4, 2] ⫻ [⫺2, 1] is shown in Figure T2.
b. From the graph of f in Figure T2, we see that f has relative maxima when x ⬇ ⫺2
and x ⬇ 0.25 and a relative minimum when x ⬇ ⫺0.75. To obtain a better approx-
imation of the first relative maximum, we zoom in with the cursor at approxi-
mately the point on the graph corresponding to x ⬇ ⫺2. Then, using TRACE, we
see that a relative maximum occurs when x ⬇ ⫺1.76 with value y ⬇ ⫺1.01. Simi-
larly, we find the other relative maximum where x ⬇ 0.20 with value y ⬇ 0.44.

_4

1

_2

FIGURE T2
The graph of f in the viewing window
[⫺4, 2] ⫻ [⫺2, 1]

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

10.1 APPLICATIONS OF THE FIRST DERIVATIVE

693

Repeating the procedure, we find the relative minimum at x ⬇ ⫺0.86 and 
y ⬇ ⫺1.07.

You can also use the “minimum” and “maximum” functions of a graphing utility

to find the relative extrema of the function. See the text Website for the procedure.

Finally,  we  comment  that  if  you  have  access  to  a  computer  and  software  such 
as Derive, Maple, or Mathematica, then symbolic differentiation will yield the deriv-
ative  f ⬘(x)  of  a  differentiable  function.  This  software  will  also  solve  the  equation 
f ⬘(x) ⫽ 0 with ease. Thus, the use of a computer will simplify even more greatly the
analysis of functions.

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

In Exercises 1–4, find (a) the intervals where f is increasing and
the intervals where f is decreasing and (b) the relative extrema of
f. Express your answers accurate to four decimal places.

1. f1x2 ⫽ 3.4x 4 ⫺ 6.2x 3 ⫹ 1.8x 2 ⫹ 3x ⫺ 2
2. f1x2 ⫽ 1.8x 4 ⫺ 9.1x 3 ⫹ 5x ⫺ 4
3. f1x2 ⫽ 2x 5 ⫺ 5x 3 ⫹ 8x 2 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 2
4. f1x2 ⫽ 3x 5 ⫺ 4x 2 ⫹ 3x ⫺ 1

In Exercises 5–8, use the  ZOOM and  TRACE features to find (a) the
intervals  where  f is  increasing  and  the  intervals  where  f is
decreasing  and  (b)  the  relative  extrema  of  f.  Express  your
answers accurate to two decimal places.

5. f1x2 ⫽ 12x ⫹ 12 1/31x 2 ⫹ 12 ⫺2/3

6.

f  1x2 ⫽ 3x 

3 ⫺ 124 1/3 ⫹ 1
2 1x 
e⫺x2x 2 ⫹ 1 ⫹ x 3

x

7. f(x) ⫽

8. f(x) ⫽

xe⫺x 2 ⫹ x 3/2

x 2 ⫹ 1

9. MANUFACTURING CAPACITY Data  show  that  the  annual
increase in manufacturing capacity between 1994 and 2000
is given by

f1t2 ⫽ 0.009417t 3 ⫺ 0.426571t 2 ⫹ 2.74894t ⫹ 5.54
10 ⱕ t ⱕ 62

percent  where  t is  measured  in  years,  with  t ⫽ 0  corre-
sponding to the beginning of 1994.
a. Plot  the  graph  of  f in  the  viewing  window  [0,  6]  ⫻

[0, 11].

b. Determine  the  interval  where  f is  increasing  and  the
interval where f is decreasing, and interpret your result.

Source: Federal Reserve.

10. SURGERIES IN PHYSICIANS’  OFFICES Driven  by  technological
advances and financial pressures, the number of surgeries
performed  in  physicians’  offices  nationwide  has  been
increasing over the years. The function

f1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.00447t 3 ⫹ 0.09864t 2 ⫹ 0.05192t ⫹ 0.8
10 ⱕ t ⱕ 152

gives  the  number  of  surgeries  (in  millions)  performed  in
physicians’ offices in year t, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
the beginning of 1986.
a. Plot  the  graph  of  f in  the  viewing  window  [0,  15]  ⫻

[0, 10].

b. Prove that f is increasing on the interval [0, 15].

Hint: Show that f ⬘ is positive on the interval.

Source: SMG Marketing Group.

11. AIR POLLUTION The amount of nitrogen dioxide, a brown gas
that impairs breathing, present in the atmosphere on a certain
May day in the city of Long Beach, is approximated by

A1t2 ⫽

136

1 ⫹ 0.251t ⫺ 4.52 2

⫹ 28    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 112

where  A(t)  is  measured  in  pollutant  standard  index  (PSI)
and  t is  measured  in  hours,  with  t ⫽ 0  corresponding  to 
7 A.M. When is the PSI increasing, and when is it decreas-
ing? At what time is the PSI highest, and what is its value
at that time?

12. MODELING WITH DATA The following data give the median
age of women in the United States at first marriage from
1960 through 2000.

Decade
Median Age

1960
20.1

1970
21.0

1980
22.0

1990
24.0

2000
25.1

a. Use CubicReg to find a third-degree polynomial regres-
sion model for these data. Let t be measured in decades,
with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 1960.

b. Plot the graph of the polynomial function f found in part

(a) using the viewing window 

c. Where is f increasing? What does this tell us?
d. Verify the result of part (c) analytically.
Source: The National Marriage Project, Rutgers University.

30, 44 ⫻ 318, 284

.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

694

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

10.2 Applications of the Second Derivative

Determining the Intervals of Concavity
Consider the graphs shown in Figure 28, which give the estimated population of the
world and of the United States through the year 2000. Both graphs are rising, indicat-
ing  that  both  the  U.S.  population  and  the  world  population  continued  to  increase
through  the  year  2000.  But  observe  that  the  graph  in  Figure  28a  opens  upward,
whereas the graph in Figure 28b opens downward. What is the significance of this?
To answer this question, let’s look at the slopes of the tangent lines to various points
on each graph (Figure 29).

y

7

6

5

4

3

2

y

400

300

250

200

150

100

FIGURE 28

1950

’60 

’70 

’80 

’90

2000

x

1950

’60 

’70 

’80 

’90

2000

x

(a) World population in billions
Source: U.S. Department of Commerce and Worldwatch Institute.

(b) U.S. population in millions

In Figure 29a, we see that the slopes of the tangent lines to the graph are increas-
ing as we move from left to right. Since the slope of the tangent line to the graph at a
point on the graph measures the rate of change of the function at that point, we con-
clude that the world population not only was increasing through the year 2000 but also
was increasing at an increasing pace. A similar analysis of Figure 29b reveals that the
U.S. population was increasing, but at a decreasing pace.

FIGURE 29

(a) Slopes of tangent lines are 
increasing.

(b) Slopes of tangent lines are decreasing.

The shape of a curve can be described by using the notion of concavity.

Concavity of a Function f
Let the function f be differentiable on an interval (a, b). Then,
1. The graph of f is concave upward on (a, b) if f ⬘ is increasing on (a, b).
2. The graph of f is concave downward on (a, b) if f ⬘ is decreasing on (a, b).

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

10.2 APPLICATIONS OF THE SECOND DERIVATIVE

695

y

y

FIGURE 30

(a) The graph of f is concave upward on (a, b).

(b) The graph of f is concave downward on (a, b).

a

b

x

a

b

x

Geometrically,  a  curve  is  concave  upward  if  it  lies  above  its  tangent  lines 
(Figure 30a). Similarly, a curve is concave downward if it lies below its tangent lines
(Figure 30b).

We also say that the graph of f is concave upward at a number c if there exists an
interval (a, b) containing c on which the graph of f is concave upward. Similarly, we
say that the graph of f is concave downward at a number c if there exists an interval
(a, b) containing c on which the graph of f is concave downward.

If a function f has a second derivative f ⬙, we can use f ⬙ to determine the intervals
of concavity of the graph of the function. Recall that f ⬙(x) measures the rate of change
of the slope f ⬘(x) of the tangent line to the graph of f at the point (x, f(x)). Thus, if 
f ⬙(x) ⬎ 0 on an interval (a, b), then the slopes of the tangent lines to the graph of f
are increasing on (a, b), so the graph of f is concave upward on (a, b). Similarly, if
f ⬙(x) ⬍ 0 on (a, b), then the graph of f is concave downward on (a, b). These obser-
vations suggest the following theorem.

THEOREM 2
a. If  f ⬙(x)  ⬎ 0  for  every  value  of  x in  (a,  b),  then  the  graph  of  f is  concave

upward on (a, b).

b. If f ⬙(x) ⬍ 0 for every value of x in (a, b), then the graph of f is concave down-

ward on (a, b).

The following procedure, based on the conclusions of Theorem 2, may be used to

determine the intervals of concavity of the graph of a function.

Determining the Intervals of Concavity of the Graph of f
1. Determine the values of x for which f ⬙ is zero or where f ⬙ is not defined, and

identify the open intervals determined by these numbers.

2. Determine the sign of f ⬙ in each interval found in Step 1. To do this, compute

f ⬙(c), where c is any conveniently chosen test number in the interval.
a. If f ⬙(c) ⬎ 0, then the graph of f is concave upward on that interval.
b. If f ⬙(c) ⬍ 0, then the graph of f is concave downward on that interval.

EXAMPLE 1 Determine the intervals where the graph of the function f(x) ⫽ x 3 ⫺
3x 2 ⫺ 24x ⫹ 32 is concave upward and where it is concave downward.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

696

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

Solution Here,

f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 3x 2 ⫺ 6x ⫺ 24
f ⬙1x2 ⫽ 6x ⫺ 6 ⫽ 61x ⫺ 12

and f ⬙ is defined everywhere. Setting f ⬙(x) ⫽ 0 gives x ⫽ 1. The sign diagram of f ⬙
appears in Figure 31. We conclude that the graph of f is concave downward on the
interval (⫺⬁, 1) and is concave upward on the interval (1, ⬁). Figure 32 shows the
graph of f.

y

y = x3 – 3x2 – 24x + 32

32

–5

–3

–1

1

3

5

7

x

– – – – – – – – –

0

+ + + + +

0

1

FIGURE 31
Sign diagram for f ⬙

x

FIGURE 32
The graph of f is concave downward on 
(⫺⬁, 1) and concave upward on (1, ⬁).

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
Refer to Example 1.
1. Use a graphing utility to plot the graph of f(x) ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫺ 24x ⫹ 32 and
its second derivative f ⬙(x) ⫽ 6x ⫺ 6 using the viewing window [⫺10, 10] ⫻
[⫺80, 90].

2. By studying the graph of f ⬙, determine the intervals where f ⬙(x) ⬎ 0 and the
intervals  where  f ⬙(x)  ⬍ 0.  Next,  look  at  the  graph  of  f,  and  determine  the
intervals where the graph of f is concave upward and the intervals where it is
concave downward. Are these observations what you might have expected?

EXAMPLE 2 Determine the intervals where the graph of the function 
is concave upward and where it is concave downward.

f  1x2 ⫽ x ⫹ 1

x

Solution We have

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ 1 ⫺ 1
 f  –1x2 ⫽ 2

x 

2

x 3

We deduce from the sign diagram for f ⬙ (Figure 33) that the graph of the function f
is concave downward on the interval (⫺⬁, 0) and concave upward on the interval 
(0, ⬁). The graph of f is sketched in Figure 34.

x

x

f " is not deﬁned at x = 0

– – – – – – –

+ + + + + + +

0

FIGURE 33
The sign diagram for f ⬙

y

4

2

y = x + 

– 4  

– 2

2

– 2

– 4

1
x

4

FIGURE 34
The graph of f is concave downward on
(⫺⬁, 0) and concave upward on (0, ⬁).

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

10.2 APPLICATIONS OF THE SECOND DERIVATIVE

697

Inflection Points
Figure 35 shows the total sales S of a manufacturer of automobile air conditioners ver-
sus the amount of money x that the company spends on advertising its product.

y

s
r
a
l
l
o
d
 
f
o
 
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
T

5000

3000

1000

y = S(x)

(50, 2700)

FIGURE 35
The graph of S has a point of inflection at
(50, 2700).

20 

40 

60 

80

100

Thousands  of  dollars

x

Notice that the graph of the continuous function y ⫽ S(x) changes concavity—from
upward to downward—at the point (50, 2700). This point is called an inflection point
of S. To understand the significance of this inflection point, observe that the total sales
increase  rather  slowly  at  first,  but  as  more  money  is  spent  on  advertising,  the  total
sales increase rapidly. This rapid increase reflects the effectiveness of the company’s
ads. However, a point is reached after which any additional advertising expenditure
results in increased sales but at a slower rate of increase. This point, commonly known
as the point of diminishing returns, is the point of inflection of the function S. We will
return to this example later.

Let’s now state formally the definition of an inflection point.

Inflection Point
A point on the graph of a continuous function f where the tangent line exists and
where the concavity changes is called a point of inflection or an inflection point.

Observe that the graph of a function crosses its tangent line at a point of inflection
(Figure 36).

y

y

Concave
upward

Concave
downward

x

Concave
upward

Concave
downward

x

y

Concave
downward

Concave
upward

x

The following procedure may be used to find inflection points:

Finding Inflection Points
1. Compute f ⬙(x).
2. Determine the numbers in the domain of f for which f ⬙(x) ⫽ 0 or f ⬙(x) does

not exist.

3. Determine the sign of f ⬙(x) to the left and right of each number c found in
Step 2. If there is a change in the sign of f ⬙(x) as we move across x ⫽ c, then
(c, f(c)) is an inflection point of f.

FIGURE 36
At each point of inflection, the graph of a
function crosses its tangent line.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

698

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

The numbers determined in Step 2 are only candidates for the inflection points
of f. For example, you can easily verify that f ⬙(0) ⫽ 0 if f(x) ⫽ x 4, but a sketch
of the graph of f will show that (0, 0) is not an inflection point.

EXAMPLE 3 Find the point of inflection of the function f(x) ⫽ x 3.

Solution

f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 3x 2
f ⬙1x2 ⫽ 6x

Observe that f ⬙ is continuous everywhere and is zero if x ⫽ 0. The sign diagram of f ⬙ is
shown in Figure 37. From this diagram, we see that f ⬙(x) changes sign as we move
across x ⫽ 0. Thus, the point (0, 0) is an inflection point (Figure 38).

y

y = x3

x

2

4

2

– 2

– 4

– 2

FIGURE 38
f has an inflection point at (0, 0).

– – – – – – – 0

+ + + + + + +

0

FIGURE 37
Sign diagram for f ⬙

x

EXAMPLE 4 Determine the intervals where the graph of the function f1x2 ⫽1x ⫺ 12 5/3

is concave upward and where it is concave downward, and find the inflection points of f.

Solution The first derivative of f is

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ 5

3  1x ⫺ 12 2/3

and the second derivative of f is

f  –1x2 ⫽ 10

9  1x ⫺ 12 ⫺1/3 ⫽

10

91x ⫺ 12 1/3

We see that f ⬙ is not defined at x ⫽ 1. Furthermore, f ⬙(x) is not equal to zero any-
where. The sign diagram of f ⬙ is shown in Figure 39. From the sign diagram, we see
that the graph of f is concave downward on (⫺⬁, 1) and concave upward on (1, ⬁).
Next, since x ⫽ 1 does lie in the domain of f, our computations also reveal that the
point (1, 0) is an inflection point (Figure 40).

y

3

2

1

f " not deﬁned here

– – – – – – – – –

+ + + + +

0

1

FIGURE 39
Sign diagram for f ⬙

x

– 3   – 2   –1

1

2

3

x

– 2

–3

FIGURE 40
f has an inflection point at (1, 0).

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXAMPLE 5 Find the inflection points of the function f(x) ⫽ e⫺x

2

.

10.2 APPLICATIONS OF THE SECOND DERIVATIVE

699

Solution The first derivative of f is

Differentiating f ⬘ x with respect to x yields

1

2

2

1
f ⬘ x ⫽ ⫺2xe⫺x

2
12
2
1
2 ⫺ 2e⫺x
f ⬙ x ⫽ ⫺2x ⫺2xe⫺x
2
1
2x 2 ⫺ 1

1
⫽ 2e⫺x

2

2

2

Setting f ⬙(x) ⫽ 0 gives

2e⫺x

2x 2 ⫺ 1 ⫽ 0

2

1

2

22

2

never equals zero for any real value of x, we see that x ⫽ ⫾1>

Since e⫺x
are the
only candidates for inflection points of f. The sign diagram of f ⬙, shown in Figure 41,
tells us that both x ⫽ ⫺1>

give rise to inflection points of f.

and x ⫽ 1>

22

22

Next,

and the inflection points of f are  ⫺1>

appears in Figure 42.

1

f a⫺ 122b ⫽ f a 122b

⫽ e⫺1/2
2
1
, e⫺1/2 and  1>

22

22

, e⫺1/2 . The graph of f

2

+ + + +

0

– – – – – 0

+ + + +

0

1
⫺冑2
FIGURE 41
Sign diagram for f ⬙

1
冑2

x

y

1

冢
1
冑2

e –1/2冣

,

冢
1
,⫺冑2

e –1/2冣

x

– 2  

–1

1

2

FIGURE 42
The graph of y ⫽ e⫺x2 has two inflection
points.

Explore & Discuss
1. Suppose  (c,  f(c))  is  an  inflection  point  of  f.  Can  you  conclude  that  f has  no  relative

extremum at x ⫽ c? Explain your answer.

2. True or false: A polynomial function of degree 3 has exactly one inflection point.

Hint: Study the function f(x) ⫽ ax3 ⫹ bx 2 ⫹ cx ⫹ d (a ⫽ 0).

The next example uses an interpretation of the first and second derivatives to help

us sketch the graph of a function.

EXAMPLE 6 Sketch the graph of a function having the following properties:

f1⫺12 ⫽ 4
f102 ⫽ 2
f112 ⫽ 0
f ⬘1⫺12 ⫽ 0
f ⬘(1) ⫽ 0
on 1⫺⬁, ⫺12 and 11, ⬁2
on 1⫺1, 12
on 1⫺⬁, 02
on 10, ⬁2

f ⬘1x2 ⬎ 0
f ⬘1x2 ⬍ 0
f ⬙1x2 ⬍ 0
f ⬙1x2 ⬎ 0

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

700

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

Solution First, we plot the points (⫺1, 4), (0, 2), and (1, 0) that lie on the graph of f.
Since f ⬘(⫺1) ⫽ 0 and f ⬘(1) ⫽ 0, the tangent lines at the points (⫺1, 4) and (1, 0) are
horizontal. Since f ⬘(x) ⬎ 0 on (⫺⬁, ⫺1) and f ⬘(x) ⬍ 0 on (⫺1, 1), we see that f has a
relative maximum at the point (⫺1, 4). Also, f ⬘(x) ⬍ 0 on (⫺1, 1) and f ⬘(x) ⬎ 0 on 
(1, ⬁) implies that f has a relative minimum at the point (1, 0) (Figure 43a).

Since f ⬙(x) ⬍ 0 on (⫺⬁, 0) and f ⬙(x) ⬎ 0 on (0, ⬁), we see that the point 

(0, 2) is an inflection point. Finally, we complete the graph, making use of the fact
that f is increasing on (⫺⬁, ⫺1) and (1, ⬁), where it is given that f ⬘(x) ⬎ 0, and f is
decreasing on (⫺1, 1), where f ⬘(x) ⬍ 0. Also, make sure that the graph of f is con-
cave downward on (⫺⬁, 0) and concave upward on (0, ⬁) (Figure 43b).

(–1, 4)

y

4
3
2
1

(0, 2)

(1, 0)

– 4   – 3  – 2  – 1  

1  2  3  4

y

4
3
2
1

x

– 4   – 3  – 2  – 1  

1  2  3  4

x

FIGURE 43

(a)

(b)

Examples  7  and  8  illustrate  familiar  interpretations  of  the  significance  of  the

inflection point of a function.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 7 Effect of Advertising on Sales The total sales S (in
thousands of dollars) of Arctic Air Corporation, a manufacturer of 

automobile air conditioners, is related to the amount of money x (in thousands of
dollars) the company spends on advertising its products by the formula

S1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.01x3 ⫹ 1.5x2 ⫹ 200

10 ⱕ x ⱕ 1002

Find the inflection point of the function S.

Solution The first two derivatives of S are given by

FIGURE 44
The graph of S has a point of
inflection at (50, 2700).

the point (50, 2700) is an inflection point of the function S. The graph of S
appears in Figure 44. Notice that this is the same graph as in Figure 35.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 8 Consumer Price Index An economy’s consumer 
price index (CPI) is described by the function

I(t) ⫽ ⫺0.2t 3 ⫹ 3t 2 ⫹ 100

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

where t ⫽ 0 corresponds to the beginning of 2003. Find the point of inflection of
the function I, and discuss its significance.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

y

s
r
a
l
l
o
d
 
f
o
 
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
T

5000

3000

1000

y = S(x)

(50, 2700)

100
20  40  60  80
Thousands of dollars

x

and

Setting S⬙(x) ⫽ 0 gives x ⫽ 50. So (50, S(50)) is the only candidate for an 
inflection point of S. Moreover, since

S⬘1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.03x 2 ⫹ 3x
S ⬙1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.06x ⫹ 3

S ⬙1x2 ⬎ 0 for x ⬍ 50
S ⬙1x2 ⬍ 0 for x ⬎ 50

10.2 APPLICATIONS OF THE SECOND DERIVATIVE

701

Solution The first two derivatives of I are given by

I⬘1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.6t 2 ⫹ 6t
I ⬙1t2 ⫽ ⫺1.2t ⫹ 6 ⫽ ⫺1.21t ⫺ 52

Setting I ⬙(t) ⫽ 0 gives t ⫽ 5. So (5, 150) is the only candidate for an inflection
point of I. Next, we observe that

I ⬙1t2 ⬎ 0 for t ⬍ 5
I ⬙1t2 ⬍ 0 for t ⬎ 5

so the point (5, 150) is an inflection point of I. The graph of I is sketched in 
Figure 45.

Since the second derivative of I measures the rate of change of the rate of
change of the CPI, our computations reveal that the rate of inflation had in fact
peaked at t ⫽ 5. Thus, relief actually began at the beginning of 2008.

I(t)

200

180

160

140

120

100

y = I(t)

(5, 150)

FIGURE 45
The graph of I has a point of inflection at
(5, 150).

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

10

Years

t

The Second Derivative Test
We now show how the second derivative f ⬙ of a function f can be used to help us
determine  whether  a  critical  number  of  f gives  rise  to  a  relative  extremum  of  f. 
Figure  46a  shows  the  graph  of  a  function  that  has  a  relative  maximum  at  x ⫽ c.
Observe that the graph of f is concave downward at that number. Similarly, Figure 46b
shows that at a relative minimum of f, the graph is concave upward. But from our pre-
vious work, we know that the graph of f is concave downward at x ⫽ c if f ⬙(c) ⬍ 0
and the graph of f is concave upward at x ⫽ c if f ⬙(c) ⬎ 0. These observations sug-
gest the following alternative procedure for determining whether a critical number of
f gives rise to a relative extremum of f. This result is called the Second Derivative
Test and is applicable when f ⬙ exists.

y

y

f"(c) > 0

f"(c) < 0

c

x

c

x

FIGURE 46

(a) f has a relative maximum at x ⫽ c.

(b) f has a relative minimum at x ⫽ c.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

702

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

The Second Derivative Test
1. Compute f ⬘(x) and f ⬙(x).
2. Find all the critical numbers of f at which f ⬘(x) ⫽ 0.
3. Compute f ⬙(c) for each such critical number c.

a. If f ⬙(c) ⬍ 0, then f has a relative maximum at c.
b. If f ⬙(c) ⬎ 0, then f has a relative minimum at c.
c. If f ⬙(c) ⫽ 0 or f ⬙(c) does not exist, the test fails; that is, it is inconclusive.

Note The Second Derivative Test does not yield a conclusion if f ⬙(c) ⫽ 0 or if f ⬙(c)
does not exist. In other words, x ⫽ c may or may not give rise to a relative extremum
(see Exercise 112, page 710). In such cases, you should revert to the First Derivative
Test.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 9 Determine the relative extrema of the function

using the Second Derivative Test. (See Example 7, Section 10.1.)

f1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫺ 24x ⫹ 32

Solution We have

f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 3x 2 ⫺ 6x ⫺ 24 ⫽ 31x ⫹ 221x ⫺ 42

so f ⬘(x) ⫽ 0 when x ⫽ ⫺2 and x ⫽ 4, the critical numbers of f, as in Example 7,
Section 10.1. Next, we compute

Since

f ⬙1x2 ⫽ 6x ⫺ 6 ⫽ 61x ⫺ 12

f ⬙(⫺2) ⫽ 61⫺2 ⫺ 12 ⫽ ⫺18 ⬍ 0
f ⬙142 ⫽ 614 ⫺ 12 ⫽ 18 ⬎ 0

the Second Derivative Test implies that f(⫺2) ⫽ 60 is a relative maximum of f. Also,

and the Second Derivative Test implies that f(4) ⫽ ⫺48 is a relative minimum of f,
which confirms the results obtained earlier.

Explore & Discuss
Suppose a function f has the following properties:

1. f ⬙(x) ⬎ 0 for all x in an interval (a, b).
2. There is a number c between a and b such that f ⬘(c) ⫽ 0.

What special property can you ascribe to the point (c, f(c))? Answer the question if Property 1
is replaced by the property that f ⬙(x) ⬍ 0 for all x in (a, b).

Comparing the First and Second Derivative Tests
Notice that both the First Derivative Test and the Second Derivative Test are used to
classify the critical numbers of f. What are the pros and cons of the two tests? Since 
the Second Derivative Test is applicable only when f ⬙ exists, it is less versatile than
the First Derivative Test. For example, it cannot be used to locate the relative mini-
mum f (0) ⫽ 0 of the function f(x) ⫽ x 2/3.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10.2 APPLICATIONS OF THE SECOND DERIVATIVE

703

Furthermore, the Second Derivative Test is inconclusive when f ⬙ is equal to zero
at a critical number of f, whereas the First Derivative Test always yields a conclusion;
that is, it tells us if f has a relative maximum, relative minimum, or neither. The Sec-
ond Derivative Test is also inconvenient to use when f ⬙ is difficult to compute. On the
plus side, if f ⬙ is computed easily, then we use the Second Derivative Test, since it
involves just the evaluation of f ⬙ at the critical number(s) of f. Also, the conclusions
of the Second Derivative Test are important in theoretical work.

We close this section by summarizing the different roles played by the first deriv-
ative f ⬘ and the second derivative f ⬙ of a function f in determining the properties of
the  graph  of  f.  The  first  derivative  f ⬘ tells  us  where  f is  increasing  and  where  f is
decreasing, whereas the second derivative f ⬙ tells us where the graph of f is concave
upward and where it is concave downward. These different properties of f are reflected
by the signs of f ⬘ and f ⬙ in the interval of interest. The following table shows the gen-
eral characteristics of the function f for various possible combinations of the signs of
f ⬘ and f ⬙ in an interval (a, b).

General Shape of

the Graph of f

Signs of
f ⴕ and f ⴖ

f ⬘(x) ⬎ 0
f ⬙(x) ⬎ 0

f ⬘(x) ⬎ 0
f ⬙(x) ⬍ 0

f ⬘(x) ⬍ 0
f ⬙(x) ⬎ 0

f ⬘(x) ⬍ 0
f ⬙(x) ⬍ 0

Properties of f

f is increasing.
The graph of f is concave upward.

f is increasing.
The graph of f is concave downward.

f is decreasing.
The graph of f is concave upward.

f is decreasing.
The graph of f is concave downward.

10.2 Self-Check Exercises

1. Determine where the graph of the function f(x) ⫽

4x 3 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫹ 6 is concave upward and where it is con-
cave downward.

2. Using the Second Derivative Test, if applicable, find the rel-
ative extrema of the function f(x) ⫽ 2x 3 ⫺ x 2 ⫺ 12x ⫺ 10.

1
2

3. A certain country’s gross domestic product (GDP) (in mil-

lions of dollars) in year t is described by the function

10.2 Concept Questions

G1t2 ⫽ ⫺2t 3 ⫹ 45t 2 ⫹ 20t ⫹ 6000
where t ⫽ 0 corresponds to the beginning of 2000. Find the
inflection point of the function G, and discuss its signifi-
cance.

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 112

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 10.2 can be found on 
page 710.

1. Explain what it means for the graph of a function f to be (a)
concave  upward  and  (b)  concave  downward  on  an  open
interval I. Given that f has a second derivative on I (except
at  isolated  numbers),  how  do  you  determine  where  the
graph  of  f is  concave  upward  and  where  it  is  concave
downward?

2. What is an inflection point of a function f ? How do you
find  the  inflection  point(s)  of  a  function  f whose  rule  is
given?

3. State  the  Second  Derivative  Test.  What  are  the  pros  and
cons  of  using  the  First  Derivative  Test  and  the  Second
Derivative Test?

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

704

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

10.2 Exercises

In Exercises 1–8, you are given the graph of a function f. Determine
the intervals where the graph of f is concave upward and where it
is concave downward. Also, find all inflection points of f, if any.
1.

2.

y

y

1

–2

–1

1 2 3

x

3
2
1

–1
– 2

1

2

x

3.

4.

–1

1

1
2

y

–1

x

1

y

2

1

– 3  – 2  –1

1 2 3

x

–1

–2

5.

y

6.

y

2

1

–1

1        2

x

–1

– 2

4
3
2
1

7.

y

3

2

1

– 2 –1

1

2

x

1 2 3 4 5 6

x

8.

y

2

1

x

1

2

9. Refer to the graph of f shown in the following figure:

y

6
5
4
3
2
1
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12

x

a. Find  the  intervals  where  f is  concave  upward  and  the

intervals where f is concave downward.

b. Find the inflection points of f.
10. Refer to the figure for Exercise 9.

a. Explain how the Second Derivative Test can be used to
show that the critical number 3 gives rise to a relative
maximum of f and the critical number 5 gives rise to a
relative minimum of f.

b. Explain why the Second Derivative Test cannot be used
to show that the critical number 7 does not give rise to a
relative extremum of f nor can it be used to show that the
critical number 9 gives rise to a relative maximum of f.

In  Exercises  11–14,  determine  which  graph—(a),  (b),  or  (c)—is
the graph of the function f with the specified properties.
11. f(2) ⫽ 1, f ⬘(2) ⬎ 0, and f ⬙(2) ⬍ 0

(a)

(b)

y

y

2

1

2

1

1

2

1

2

x

x

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

(c)

y

(b)

y

10.2 APPLICATIONS OF THE SECOND DERIVATIVE

705

2

1

1

2

x

12. f(1) ⫽ 2, f ⬘(x) ⬎ 0 on (⫺⬁, 1) and (1, ⬁), and f ⬙(1) ⫽ 0

(a)

(b)

(c)

y

y

y

2

1

2

1

2

1

1

2

1

2

1

2

x

x

x

2

1

–2

–1

1

2

3

(c)

y

1

–2

–1

1

2

3

x

x

14. f is  decreasing  on  (⫺⬁,  2)  and  increasing  on  (2,  ⬁),  the
graph of f is concave upward on (1, ⬁), and f has inflection
points at x ⫽ 0 and x ⫽ 1.
(a)

y

1

–1

1

2

(b)

y

x

x

x

13. f ⬘(0)  is  undefined,  f is  decreasing  on  (⫺⬁,  0),  f is  con-
cave downward on (0, 3), and f has an inflection point at 
x ⫽ 3.
(a)

y

1

–1

1

2

4

2

–2

–1

1

2

3

–1

x

(c)

y

1

–1

–1

1

2

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

706

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

15. EFFECT OF ADVERTISING ON BANK DEPOSITS The  following
graphs  were  used  by  the  CEO  of  the  Madison  Savings
Bank  to  illustrate  what  effect  a  projected  promotional 
campaign  would  have  on  its  deposits  over  the  next  year.
The  functions  D1 and  D2 give  the  projected  amount  of
money on deposit with the bank over the next 12 months
with  and  without  the  proposed  promotional  campaign,
respectively.
a. Determine the signs of D ⬘1(t), D⬘2(t), D⬙1(t), and D⬙2(t) on

the interval (0, 12).

b. What can you conclude about the rate of change of the
growth rate of the money on deposit with the bank with
and without the proposed promotional campaign?

y ($)

y = D1(t)

y = D2(t)

t (months)

12

16. MOTION OF CARS Two cars start out side by side and travel
ft/sec,
ft/sec  over  the  interval
. Furthermore, suppose the graphs of f and t are as

along a straight road. The velocity of Car A is 
and  the  velocity  of  Car  B is 

t1t2

f1t2

30, t24

depicted in the accompanying figure.

y

y=f (t)

y=g (t)

(c)

y

(d)

y

y=f (x)

P

x

P

y=f (x)

x

17. The function f is increasing most rapidly at P.

18. The function f is increasing least rapidly at P.

19. The function f is decreasing most rapidly at P.

20. The function f is decreasing least rapidly at P. 

21. ASSEMBLY TIME OF A WORKER In  the  following  graph,  N(t)
gives the number of smartphones assembled by the average
worker  by  the  tth  hr,  where  t ⫽ 0  corresponds  to 
8 A.M. and 0 ⱕ t ⱕ 4. The point P is an inflection point.
a. What can you say about the rate of change of the rate of
change of the number of smartphones assembled by the
average worker between 8  A.M. and 10  A.M.? Between
10 A.M. and 12 noon?

b. At what time is the rate at which the smartphones are

being assembled by the average worker greatest?

y

P

y = N(t)

1

2

3

4

t (hr)

22. RUMORS OF A RUN ON A BANK The  graph  of  the  function  f
shows  the  total  deposits  with  a  bank  t days  after  rumors
abounded  that  there  was  a  run  on  the  bank  due  to  heavy
loan losses incurred by the bank.

t1

t

t2

y

y=f (t)

a. What can you say about the acceleration of Car A on the
? The acceleration of Car B on the inter-

10,  t12

?

interval 
val 

10, t12

b. What can you say about the acceleration of Car A on the
1t1, t22
?
c. What can you say about the acceleration of Car A at  ?
t1

? The acceleration of Car B over 

1t1, t22

interval 

The acceleration of Car B at  ?
t1

d. At what time do both cars have the same velocity?

In Exercises 17–20, match the graphs (a), (b), (c), and (d) with the
corresponding statement.
(a)

(b)

y

y

t1

t2

t3

t

f ¿1t2

a. Determine the signs of 

on the intervals 

1t2,  t32
10,  t12

, and determine the signs of 
and 

1t1,  t32.

b. Find where the inflection point(s) of f occur.
c. Interpret the results of parts (a) and (b).

10,  t22

and
on the intervals

f –1t2

y=f (x)

P

P

y=f (x)

x

x

23. WATER POLLUTION When  organic  waste  is  dumped  into  a
pond,  the  oxidation  process  that  takes  place  reduces  the
pond’s  oxygen  content.  However,  given  time,  nature  will
restore the oxygen content to its natural level. In the follow-
ing graph, P(t) gives the oxygen content (as a percent of its

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

10.2 APPLICATIONS OF THE SECOND DERIVATIVE

707

normal level)  t days after organic waste has been dumped
into  the  pond.  Explain  the  significance  of  the  inflection 
point Q.

y (%)

100

Q

y = P(t)

t (days)

37.

39.

41.

43.

45.

x ⫺ 3

f 1x2 ⫽ 14 ⫺ x
f 1x2 ⫽ 1
f 1x2 ⫽ 1
h 1t2 ⫽ t 
t1x2 ⫽ x ⫹ 1

2 ⫹ x 

t ⫺ 1

2

2

2

x 

38.

40.

42.

44.

x ⫹ 1

t1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫺ 2
t1x2 ⫽ x
t1x2 ⫽ x
f  1x2 ⫽ x ⫹ 1
h 1r2 ⫽ ⫺ 

1 ⫹ x 
2

x ⫺ 1

1

2

46.

1r ⫺ 22  
48. f1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫺ 22 2/3
50. f(x) ⫽ xex

24. CASE-SHILLER HOME PRICE INDEX The following graph shows
the  change  in  the  S&P/Case-Shiller  Home  Price  Index
based on a 20-city average from June 2001 
through
June 2008 
, adjusted for inflation.

22
1t ⫽ 1

1t ⫽ 7 1
22

y (%)

60

40

20

A

B

C

D

E

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

t (years)

a. What do the points 

tell you about
the change in the Case-Shiller Home Price Index over
the period under consideration?

and 

A11
2, 02

E17 

1

2, 02

b. What does the point 

Shiller Home Price Index?

C15 

1

3, 562

tell you about the Case-

c. Give an interpretation of the inflection points 

and 

D16 

1

2, 362.

Source: New York Times.

B12 

1

2, 242

In Exercises 25–28, show that the graph of the function is con-
cave upward wherever it is defined.

25. f1x2 ⫽ 4x 2 ⫺ 12x ⫹ 7
26. t1x2 ⫽ x 4 ⫹ x 2 ⫹ 6x ⫹ 10

1
2

27.

f  1x2 ⫽ 1

4
x 

t1x2 ⫽ ⫺24 ⫺ x 

2

28.

In Exercises 29–52, determine where the graph of the function is
concave upward and where it is concave downward.

30. t1x2 ⫽ ⫺x 2 ⫹ 3x ⫹ 4
32. t1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ x

29. f1x2 ⫽ 2x 2 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 4
31. f1x2 ⫽ 1 ⫺ x 3
33. f1x2 ⫽ x 4 ⫺ 6x 3 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 8
34. f1x2 ⫽ 3x 4 ⫺ 6x 3 ⫹ x ⫺ 8
35. f1x2 ⫽ x 4/7

36. f 1x2 ⫽ 23 x

47. t1t2 ⫽ 12t ⫺ 52 1/3
e x ⫺ e⫺x

49. f(x) ⫽

2

51. f(x) ⫽ x 2 ⫹ ln x 2

52. f(x) ⫽

ln x
x

In  Exercises  53–66,  find  the  inflection  point(s),  if  any,  of  each
function.

54. t1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 6x

53. f1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 2
55. f1x2 ⫽ 6x 3 ⫺ 18x 2 ⫹ 12x ⫺ 20
56. t1x2 ⫽ 2x 3 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫹ 18x ⫺ 8
57. f1x2 ⫽ 3x 4 ⫺ 4x 3 ⫹ 1
58. f1x2 ⫽ x 4 ⫺ 2x 3 ⫹ 6

59.

t1t2 ⫽ 23 t
61. f1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫺ 12 3 ⫹ 2
63. f1x2 ⫽ 2e⫺x2
65. f1x2 ⫽ x2 ln x

60.

f 1x2 ⫽ 25 x
62. f1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫺ 22 4/3
64. f1x2 ⫽ xe⫺2x
66. f1x2 ⫽ ln1x2 ⫹ 12

In Exercises 67–84, find the relative extrema, if any, of each func-
tion. Use the Second Derivative Test if applicable.

67. f1x2 ⫽ ⫺x 2 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 4
69. f1x2 ⫽ 2x 3 ⫹ 1

68. t1x2 ⫽ 2x 2 ⫹ 3x ⫹ 7
70. t1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 6x

71.

f  1x2 ⫽ 1
3   x 

3 ⫺ 2x 2 ⫺ 5x ⫺ 5
72. f1x2 ⫽ 2x 3 ⫹ 3x 2 ⫺ 12x ⫺ 4

t

75.

73.

77.

1 ⫺ x
2 ⫺ 16
t

t1t2 ⫽ t ⫹ 9
f 1x2 ⫽ x
f 1t2 ⫽ t 
t1s2 ⫽ s
81. t1t2 ⫽ et 2⫺2t
83. f1x2 ⫽ ln(x 2 ⫹ 1)

1 ⫹ s 

79.

2

t

76.

78.

74.

f 1t2 ⫽ 2t ⫹ 3
f 1x2 ⫽ 2x
2 ⫹ 1
x 
t1x2 ⫽ x 
2 ⫹ 2
x
t1x2 ⫽ 1
1 ⫹ x 
2
82. f1x2 ⫽ x2ex
84. t1x2 ⫽ x ⫺ ln x

80.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

88. f(0) ⫽ 0, f ⬘(0) does not exist, f ⬙(x) ⬍ 0 if x ⫽ 0

f (t)

708

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

In  Exercises  85–90,  sketch  the  graph  of  a  function  having  the
given properties.
85. f(2) ⫽ 4, f ⬘(2) ⫽ 0, f ⬙(x) ⬍ 0 on (⫺⬁, ⬁)

86. f(2)  ⫽ 2, f ⬘(2)  ⫽ 0, f ⬘(x)  ⬎ 0 on (⫺⬁, 2), f ⬘(x)  ⬎ 0 on 

(2, ⬁), f ⬙(x) ⬍ 0 on (⫺⬁, 2), f ⬙(x) ⬎ 0 on (2, ⬁)

87. f(⫺2) ⫽ 4, f(3) ⫽ ⫺2, f ⬘(⫺2) ⫽ 0, f ⬘(3) ⫽ 0, f ⬘(x) ⬎ 0 on
(⫺⬁, ⫺2) and (3, ⬁), f ⬘(x) ⬍ 0 on (⫺2, 3), inflection point
at (1, 1)

⫺12>2

12>2
89. f(0)  ⫽ 1,  f ⬘(0)  ⫽ 0,  f (x)  ⬎ 0  on  (⫺⬁,  ⬁),  f ⬙(x)  ⬍ 0  on
, ⬁)
Ô ⫽ 0,

), f ⬙(x) ⬎ 0 on (⫺⬁, 
90. f has domain [⫺1, 1], f(⫺1) ⫽ ⫺1, f(

⫺12>2
) and (
Ô ⫽ ⫺2, f ⬘(

⫺1
2

⫺1
2

(

12>2

, 

f ⬙(x) ⬎ 0 on (⫺1, 1)

91. DEMAND FOR RNS The following graph gives the total num-
ber of help-wanted ads for RNs (registered nurses) in 22
cities over the last 12 months as a function of time t (t mea-
sured in months).
a. Explain why N ⬘(t) is positive on the interval (0, 12).
b. Determine the signs of N ⬙(t) on the interval (0, 6) and

the interval (6, 12).

c. Interpret the results of part (b).

y

y = N(t)

6

12

t (months)

92. EFFECT OF BUDGET CUTS ON DRUG-RELATED CRIMES The
graphs below were used by a police commissioner to illus-
trate what effect a budget cut would have on crime in the
city. The number N1(t) gives the projected number of drug-
related  crimes  in  the  next  12  months.  The  number  N2(t)
gives  the  projected  number  of  drug-related  crimes  in  the
same time frame if next year’s budget is cut.
a. Explain  why  N⬘1(t)  and  N ⬘2(t)  are  both  positive  on  the

interval (0, 12).

b. What  are  the  signs  of  N ⬙1(t)  and  N ⬙2(t)  on  the  interval 

(0, 12)?

c. Interpret the results of part (b).

y

y = N2(t)

y = N1(t)

t (months)

12

93. In the following figure, water is poured into the vase at a
constant  rate  (in  appropriate  units),  and  the  water  level

rises to a height of f(t) units at time t as measured from the
base of the vase. The graph of f follows. Explain the shape
of the curve in terms of its concavity. What is the signifi-
cance of the inflection point?

y

Concave
downward

Concave
upward

Inflection point

t

94. In  the  following  figure,  water  is  poured  into  an  urn  at  a
constant  rate  (in  appropriate  units),  and  the  water  level
rises to a height of f(t) units at time t as measured from the
base of the urn. Sketch the graph of f, and explain its shape,
indicating where it is concave upward and concave down-
ward.  Indicate  the  inflection  point  on  the  graph,  and
explain its significance.
Hint: Refer to Exercise 93.

f (t)

95. STATE CIGARETTE TAXES The average state cigarette tax per
pack (in dollars) from 2001 through 2007 is approximated
by the function

T1t2 ⫽ 0.43t0.43

11 ⱕ t ⱕ 72

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 1 corresponding to
2001.
a. Show that the average state cigarette tax per pack was

increasing throughout the period in question.

b. What can you say about the rate at which the average
state  cigarette  tax  per  pack  was  increasing  over  the
period in question?

Source: Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids.

96. GLOBAL WARMING The increase in carbon dioxide (CO2) in
the atmosphere is a major cause of global warming. Using
data  obtained  by  Charles  David  Keeling,  professor  at
Scripps Institution of Oceanography, the average amount
of  CO2 in  the  atmosphere  from  1958  through  2010  is
approximated by
A1t2 ⫽ 0.012313t 2 ⫹ 0.7545t ⫹ 313.9
11 ⱕ t ⱕ 532

where A(t) is measured in parts per million volume (ppmv)
and t in years, with t ⫽ 1 corresponding to 1958.
a. What can you say about the rate of change of the average

amount of atmospheric CO2 from 1958 through 2010?

b. What can you say about the rate of change of the rate of
change of the average amount of atmospheric CO2 from
1958 through 2010?

Source: Scripps Institution of Oceanography.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

97. EFFECT OF SMOKING BANS The sales (in billions of dollars)
in  restaurants  and  bars  in  California  from  1993  (t ⫽ 0)
through 2000 (t ⫽ 7) are approximated by the function
S1t2 ⫽ 0.195t 2 ⫹ 0.32t ⫹ 23.7

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 72

a. Show that the sales in restaurants and bars continued
to rise after smoking bans were implemented in restau-
rants in 1995 and in bars in 1998.
Hint: Show that S is increasing on the interval (2, 7).

b. What  can  you  say  about  the  rate  at  which  the  sales

were rising after smoking bans were implemented?

Source: California Board of Equalization.

98. ALTERNATIVE MINIMUM TAX Congress  created  the  alterna-
tive minimum tax (AMT) in the late 1970s to ensure that
wealthy people paid their fair share of taxes. But because
of quirks in the law, even middle-income taxpayers have
started  to  get  hit  with  the  tax.  The  AMT  (in  billions  of
dollars) projected to be collected by the IRS from 2001
through 2010 is

f1t2 ⫽ 0.0117t 3 ⫹ 0.0037t 2 ⫹ 0.7563t ⫹ 4.1

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 92
where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
2001.
a. Show that f is increasing on the interval (0, 9). What
does this result tell you about the projected amount of
AMT paid over the years in question?

b. Show that f ⬘ is increasing on the interval (0, 9). What
conclusion can you draw from this result concerning
the rate of growth of the amount of the AMT collected
over the years in question?

Source: U.S. Congress Joint Economic Committee.

99. ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE Alzheimer’s disease can occur at any
age,  even  as  young  as  40  years  old,  but  its  occurrence  is
much more common as the years go by. The frequency of
occurrence of the disease (as a percentage) is given by

f1t2 ⫽ 0.71e0.7t

11 ⱕ t ⱕ 52

where t is measured in 5-year intervals, with t ⫽ 1 corre-
sponding to an age of 70 years.
a. What is the frequency of occurrence of Alzheimer’s dis-

ease for 70-year-old people? For 80-year-old people?

b. Show that f is increasing on the interval (1, 5). Inter-

pret your results.

c. Show that f is concave upward on the interval (1, 5).

Interpret your result.

Source: World Health Organization.

100. AVERAGE LIFE SPAN One reason for the increase in the life
span  over  the  years  has  been  the  advances  in  medical
technology. The average life span for American women
from 1907 through 2007 is given by

W1t2 ⫽ 49.9 ⫹ 17.1 ln t

11 ⱕ t ⱕ 62

where  W(t)  is  measured  in  years  and  t is  measured  in 
20-year intervals, with t ⫽ 1 corresponding to the begin-
ning of 1907.
a. Show that W is increasing on (1, 6).
b. What can you say about the concavity of the graph of

W on the interval (1, 6)?

10.2 APPLICATIONS OF THE SECOND DERIVATIVE

709

101. OUTSOURCING The amount (in billions of dollars) spent by
the top 15 U.S. financial institutions on IT (information
technology) offshore outsourcing is approximated by

A1t2 ⫽ 0.921t ⫹ 12 0.61

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
2004.
a. Show that A is increasing on (0, 4), and interpret your

result.

b. Show  that  the  graph  of  A is  concave  downward  on 

(0, 4). Interpret your result.

Source: Tower Group.

102. PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION BUDGET DEFICIT According  to  the
Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA), the
projected cumulative MBTA budget deficit with the $160
million rescue package (in billions of dollars) is given by

D11t2 ⫽ 0.0275t 2 ⫹ 0.081t ⫹ 0.07         10 ⱕ t ⱕ 32

and the budget deficit without the rescue package is given
by

D21t2 ⫽ 0.035t 2 ⫹ 0.211t ⫹ 0.24    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 32
Here, t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
2011. Let 
a. Show that D is increasing on (0, 3), and interpret your

D ⫽ D2 ⫺ D1
.

result.

b. Show that the graph of D is concave upward on (0, 3),

and interpret your result.

Source: MBTA review.

103. GOOGLE’S REVENUE The revenue for Google from 2004 
(t ⫽ 0)  through  2008  (t ⫽ 4)  is  approximated  by  the
function

R1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.2t 3 ⫹ 1.64t 2 ⫹ 1.31t ⫹ 3.2

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

where R(t) is measured in billions of dollars.
a. Find R⬘(t) and R⬙(t).
b. Show that R⬘(t) ⬎ 0 for all t in the interval (0, 4), and

interpret your result.
Hint: Use the quadratic formula.

c. Find the inflection point of R, and interpret your result.
Source: Google company report.

104. POPULATION GROWTH IN CLARK COUNTY Clark  County  in
Nevada—dominated by greater Las Vegas—is one of the
fastest-growing  metropolitan  areas  in  the  United  States.
The population of the county from 1970 through 2010 is
approximated by the function

P1t2 ⫽ 44,560t 3 ⫺ 89,394t 2 ⫹ 234,633t ⫹ 273,288
10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

where t is measured in decades, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding
to the beginning of 1970.
a. Show that the population of Clark County was always

increasing over the time period in question.
Hint: Show that P⬘(t) ⬎ 0 for all t in the interval (0, 4).

b. Show that the population of Clark County was increas-

ing at the slowest pace some time in August 1976.
Hint: Find the inflection point of P in the interval (0, 4).

Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

710

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

105. MEASLES DEATHS Measles  is  still  a  leading  cause  of 
vaccine-preventable death among children, but because of
improvements  in  immunizations,  measles  deaths  have
dropped globally. The function

N1t2 ⫽ ⫺2.42t3 ⫹ 24.5t2 ⫺ 123.3t ⫹ 506

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 62

gives the number of measles deaths (in thousands) in sub-
Saharan Africa in year t, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to the
beginning of 1999.
a. How many measles deaths were there in 1999? In 2005?
b. Show  that  N ⬘(t)  ⬍ 0  on  (0,  6).  What  does  this  say
about  the  number  of  measles  deaths  from  1999
through 2005?

c. When  was  the  number  of  measles  deaths  decreasing
most rapidly? What was the rate of decline of measles
deaths at that instant of time?

Sources: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and World
Health Organization.

106. WOMEN’S SOCCER Starting with the youth movement that
took hold in the 1970s and buoyed by the success of the
U.S. national women’s team in international competition
in recent years, girls and women have taken to soccer in
ever-growing numbers. The function

N1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.9307t 3 ⫹ 74.04t 2 ⫹ 46.8667t ⫹ 3967
10 ⱕ t ⱕ 162

gives the number of participants in women’s soccer in
year  t,  with  t ⫽ 0  corresponding  to  the  beginning  of
1985.
a. Verify  that  the  number  of  participants  per  year  in
women’s  soccer  had  been  increasing  from  1985
through 2000.
Hint: Use the quadratic formula.

b. Show  that  the  number  of  participants  per  year  in
women’s soccer had been increasing at an increasing
rate from 1985 through 2000.
Hint: Show that the sign of N ⬙ is positive on the interval in
question.

Source: NCCA News.

107. DEPENDENCY RATIO The share of the world population that
is over 60 years of age compared to the rest of the work-
ing population in the world is of concern to economists.

10.2 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. We first compute

f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 12x 2 ⫺ 6x
f ⬙1x2 ⫽ 24x ⫺ 6 ⫽ 614x ⫺ 12

Observe that f ⬙ is continuous everywhere and has a zero at 
x ⫽ ᎏ1
ᎏ. The sign diagram of f ⬙ is shown in the accompany-
4
ing figure.

An increasing dependency ratio means that there will be
fewer workers to support an aging population. The depen-
dency ratio over the next century is forecast to be 

R1t2 ⫽ 0.00731t 4 ⫺ 0.174t 3 ⫹ 1.528t 2 ⫹ 0.48t ⫹ 19.3
10 ⱕ t ⱕ 62

in year t, where t is measured in decades with t ⫽ 0 cor-
responding to 2000.
a. Show that the dependency ratio will be increasing at

the fastest pace around 2052.
Hint: Use the quadratic formula.

b. What will the dependency ratio be at that time?
Source: International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis.

In Exercises 108–111, determine whether the statement is true
or  false.  If  it  is  true,  explain  why  it  is  true.  If  it  is  false,  give  an
example to show why it is false.
108. If  the  graph  of  f is  concave  upward  on  (a,  b),  then  the

graph of ⫺f is concave downward on (a, b).

109. If the graph of f is concave upward on (a, c) and concave
downward on (c, b), where a ⬍ c ⬍ b, then f has an inflec-
tion point at (c, f (c)).

110. If  c is  a  critical  number  of  f where  a ⬍ c ⬍ b and 
f ⬙(x)  ⬍ 0  on  (a,  b),  then  f has  a  relative  maximum  at 
x ⫽ c.

111. A polynomial function of degree n (n ⱖ 3) can have at

most (n ⫺ 2) inflection points.

112. Consider the functions f (x) ⫽ x 3, t(x) ⫽ x 4, and h(x) ⫽ ⫺x 4.
a. Show  that  x ⫽ 0  is  a  critical  number  of  each  of  the

b. Show that the second derivative of each of the func-

functions f, t, and h.
tions f, t, and h equals zero at x ⫽ 0.
c. Show that f has neither a relative maximum nor a rel-
ative minimum at x ⫽ 0, that t has a relative minimum
at x ⫽ 0, and that h has a relative maximum at x ⫽ 0.

– – – – – –

0

+ + + + + +

x

0

1
4

From  the  sign  diagram  for  f ⬙,  we  see  that  the  graph  of 
f is concave upward on Ó ,  ⬁Ô and concave downward on 
Ó⫺⬁,  Ô.1

1
4

4

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

2. First, we find the critical numbers of f by solving the equation

3. We compute the second derivative of G. Thus,

10.3 CURVE SKETCHING

711

f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 6x 2 ⫺ x ⫺ 12 ⫽ 0

That is,

giving x ⫽ ⫺ and x ⫽ . Next, we compute

4
3

3
2

13x ⫹ 4212x ⫺ 32 ⫽ 0

f ⬙1x2 ⫽ 12x ⫺ 1

Since

f  –a ⫺ 

4

3b ⫽ 12a ⫺ 

4

3b ⫺ 1 ⫽ ⫺17 ⬍ 0
32 ⫽ 10

f  1⫺4

27

the Second Derivative Test implies that 
ative maximum of f. Also,

G⬘1t2 ⫽ ⫺6t 2 ⫹ 90t ⫹ 20
G ⬙1t2 ⫽ ⫺12t ⫹ 90
t ⫽ 15
2

, giving 

Now, G⬙ is continuous everywhere, and G ⬙(t) ⫽ 0, when 
t ⫽ 15
as the only candidate for an inflection 
2
point of G. Since G ⬙(t) ⬎ 0 for t ⬍ and G ⬙(t) ⬍ 0 for 
t ⬎ ,  we  see  that Ó
Ô is  an  inflection  point  of  G. 
The results of our computations tell us that the country’s
GDP was increasing most rapidly at the beginning of July
2007.

15
2 , 15,675

15
2

15
2

2

is a rel-

2b ⫺ 1 ⫽ 17 ⬎ 0

f  –a 3

2b ⫽ 12a 3
f  13
22 ⫽ ⫺ 

179
8

and we see that 

is a relative minimum.

10.3 Curve Sketching

A Real-Life Example
As we have seen on numerous occasions, the graph of a function is a useful aid for
visualizing the function’s properties. From a practical point of view, the graph of a
function also gives, at one glance, a complete summary of all the information captured
by the function.

Consider, for example, the graph of the function giving the Dow-Jones Industrial
Average (DJIA) on Black Monday, October 19, 1987 (Figure 47). Here, t ⫽ 0 corre-
sponds to 9:30 A.M., when the market was open for business, and t ⫽ 6.5 corresponds
to 4 P.M., the closing time. The following information may be gleaned from studying
the graph.

y

(2, 2150)

(1, 2047)

(4, 2006)

2200
2164

2100

A
I
J
D

2000

1900

1800

1739
1700

FIGURE 47
The Dow-Jones Industrial Average on
Black Monday

Source: Wall Street Journal.

0

1

2

3

4

Hours

5

6

7

t

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

712

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

The graph is falling rapidly from t ⫽ 0 tot ⫽ 1, reflecting the sharp drop in the
index in the first hour of trading. The point (1, 2047) is a relative minimum point of the
function, and this turning point coincides with the start of an aborted recovery. The
short-lived rally, represented by the portion of the graph that is rising on the interval
(1, 2), quickly fizzled out at t ⫽ 2 (11:30 A.M.). The relative maximum point (2, 2150)
marks the highest point of the recovery. The function is decreasing in the rest of the
interval. The point (4, 2006) is an inflection point of the function; it shows that there
was a temporary respite at t ⫽ 4 (1:30 P.M.). However, selling pressure continued
unabated, and the DJIA continued to fall until the closing bell. Finally, the graph also
shows that the index opened at the high of the day [ f (0) ⫽ 2164 is the absolute max-
imum of the function] and closed at the low of the day [ f Ó
Ô ⫽ 1739 is the absolute
minimum of the function], a drop of 508 points from the previous close!*

13
2

Before we turn our attention to the actual task of sketching the graph of a func-

tion, let’s look at some properties of graphs that will be helpful in this connection.

Vertical Asymptotes
Before going on, you might want to review the material on one-sided limits and the
limit at infinity of a function (Sections 9.1 and 9.2).

Consider the graph of the function

f  1x2 ⫽ x ⫹ 1

x ⫺ 1

shown in Figure 48. Observe that f(x) increases without bound (tends to infinity) as x
approaches x ⫽ 1 from the right; that is,

x ⫹ 1
x ⫺ 1

lim
 
xS1⫹

⫽ ⬁

y

4

2

y =  

x + 1
x – 1

y = 1
x

– 2

2

4

– 2

x = 1

FIGURE 48
The graph of f has a vertical asymptote at
x ⫽ 1.

You can verify this by taking a sequence of values of x approaching x ⫽ 1 from the
right and looking at the corresponding values of f (x).

Here is another way of looking at the situation: Observe that if x is a number that is

a little larger than 1, then both (x ⫹ 1) and (x ⫺ 1) are positive, so (x ⫹ 1)>(x ⫺ 1) is also
positive. As x approaches x ⫽ 1, the numerator (x ⫹ 1) approaches the number 2, but the
denominator (x ⫺ 1) approaches zero, so the quotient (x ⫹ 1)>(x ⫺ 1) approaches infin-
ity, as observed earlier. The line x ⫽ 1 is called a vertical asymptote of the graph of f.

For the function f(x) ⫽ (x ⫹ 1)>(x ⫺ 1), you can show that

x ⫹ 1
x ⫺ 1

lim
 
xS1⫺

⫽ ⫺⬁

and this tells us how f (x) approaches the asymptote x ⫽ 1 from the left.

More generally, we have the following definition:

Vertical Asymptote
The line x ⫽ a is a vertical asymptote of the graph of a function f if 

 f  1x2 ⫽ ⬁  or  ⫺⬁

lim
xSa ⫹

or

 f  1x2 ⫽ ⬁  or  ⫺⬁

lim
xSa⫺

*Absolute maxima and absolute minima of functions are covered in Section 10.4.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Note Although a vertical asymptote of a graph is not part of the graph, it serves as a
useful aid for sketching the graph.

10.3 CURVE SKETCHING

713

For rational functions

f  1x2 ⫽

P1x2
Q1x2

there  is  a  simple  criterion  for  determining  whether  the  graph  of  f has  any  vertical
asymptotes.

Finding Vertical Asymptotes of Rational Functions
Suppose f is a rational function

f  1x2 ⫽

P1x2
Q1x2

where  P and  Q are  polynomial  functions.  Then,  the  line  x ⫽ a is  a  vertical
asymptote of the graph of f if Q(a) ⫽ 0 but P(a) ⫽ 0.

For the function

f  1x2 ⫽ x ⫹ 1

x ⫺ 1

considered  earlier,  P(x)  ⫽ x ⫹ 1  and  Q(x)  ⫽ x ⫺ 1.  Observe  that  Q(1)  ⫽ 0  but 
P(1) ⫽ 2 ⫽ 0, so x ⫽ 1 is a vertical asymptote of the graph of f.

EXAMPLE 1 Find the vertical asymptotes of the graph of the function

2

f  1x2 ⫽ x 

4 ⫺ x 2

x = – 2  

y

4

x = 2  

Solution The function f is a rational function with P(x) ⫽ x 2 and Q(x) ⫽ 4 ⫺ x 2.
The zeros of Q are found by solving

4 ⫺ x 2 ⫽ 0

– 4

—that is,

4

x
y = – 1

12 ⫹ x212 ⫺ x2 ⫽ 0

– 4

FIGURE 49
x ⫽ ⫺2 and x ⫽ 2 are vertical asymptotes
of the graph of f.

giving x ⫽ ⫺2 and x ⫽ 2. These are candidates for the vertical asymptotes of the
graph of f. Examining x ⫽ ⫺2, we compute P(⫺2) ⫽ (⫺2)2 ⫽ 4 ⫽ 0, and we see
that x ⫽ ⫺2 is indeed a vertical asymptote of the graph of f. Similarly, we find 
P(2) ⫽ 22 ⫽ 4 ⫽ 0, so x ⫽ 2 is also a vertical asymptote of the graph of f. The
graph of f sketched in Figure 49 confirms these results.

Recall that in order for the line x ⫽ a to be a vertical asymptote of the graph of
a rational function f, only the denominator of f(x) must be equal to zero at x ⫽ a.
If both P(a) and Q(a) are equal to zero, then x ⫽ a need not be a vertical asymp-
tote. For example, look at the function

f  1x2 ⫽

2 ⫺ 42
41x 
x ⫺ 2

whose graph appears in Figure 7a in Section 9.1 (page 555).

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

714

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

Horizontal Asymptotes
Let’s return to the function f defined by

(Figure 50).

f  1x2 ⫽ x  ⫹ 1

x ⫺ 1

y

4

2

y =  

x + 1
x – 1

y = 1

x

– 2

2

4

– 2

– 4

x = 1

FIGURE 50
The graph of f has a horizontal asymptote
at y ⫽ 1.

Observe that the graph of f approaches the horizontal line y ⫽ 1 as x approaches
infinity, and in this case, the graph of f approaches y ⫽ 1 as x approaches minus infin-
ity as well. The line y ⫽ 1 is called a horizontal asymptote of the graph of f. More gen-
erally, we have the following definition:

Horizontal Asymptote
The line y ⫽ b is a horizontal asymptote of the graph of a function f if 

 f  1x2 ⫽ b  or  lim

xS⫺⬁

lim
xS⬁

 f  1x2 ⫽ b

For the function

we see that

f  1x2 ⫽ x  ⫹ 1

x ⫺ 1

Also,

1 ⫹ 1
x
1 ⫺ 1
x

x ⫹ 1
x ⫺ 1

 lim
 
xS⬁

⫽ lim
 
xS⬁

 ⫽ 1

Divide numerator and 
denominator by x.

  lim
xS⫺⬁   

 

x ⫹ 1
x ⫺ 1

⫽ lim
xS⫺⬁

  

 ⫽ 1

1 ⫹ 1
x
1 ⫺ 1
x

In either case, we conclude that y ⫽ 1 is a horizontal asymptote of the graph of f, as
observed earlier.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 2 Find the horizontal asymptotes of the graph of the function

10.3 CURVE SKETCHING

715

2

f  1x2 ⫽ x 

4 ⫺ x 

Solution We compute

2

x 

4 ⫺ x 
2

 lim
 
xS⬁  

⫽ lim
 
xS⬁

1

⫺ 1

4
2
x 

 

 ⫽ ⫺1

2

Divide numerator and 
denominator by x 2.

so y ⫽ ⫺1 is a horizontal asymptote, as before. (Similarly, 
The graph of f sketched in Figure 51 confirms this result.

 f  1x2 ⫽ ⫺1

lim
xS⫺⬁

as well.)

x = – 2  

y

4

x = 2  

– 4

4

x
y = – 1  

FIGURE 51
The graph of f has a horizontal asymptote
at y ⫽ ⫺1.

– 4

We next state an important property of polynomial functions.

The graph of a polynomial function has no vertical or horizontal asymptotes.

To see this, note that a polynomial function P(x) can be written as a rational function
with denominator equal to 1. Thus,

P 1x2 ⫽

P1x2

1

Since the denominator is never equal to zero, P has no vertical asymptotes. Next, if P
is a polynomial of degree greater than or equal to 1, then

 P1x2  and  lim

xS⫺⬁

P1x2

lim
xS⬁

are either infinity or minus infinity; that is, they do not exist. Therefore, P has no hor-
izontal asymptotes.

In the last two sections, we saw how the first and second derivatives of a function
are used to reveal various properties of the graph of a function f. We now show how
this information can be used to help us sketch the graph of f. We begin by giving a
general procedure for curve sketching.

A Guide to Curve Sketching
1. Determine the domain of f.
2. Find the x- and y-intercepts of f.*

*The equation f (x) ⫽ 0 may be difficult to solve, in which case one may decide against finding the x-intercepts or to
use technology, if available, for assistance.

(continued)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

716

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

3. Determine the behavior of f for large absolute values of x.
4. Find all horizontal and vertical asymptotes of the graph of f.
5. Determine the intervals where f is increasing and where f is decreasing.
6. Find the relative extrema of f.
7. Determine the concavity of the graph of f.
8. Find the inflection points of f.
9. Plot a few additional points to help further identify the shape of the graph of

f and sketch the graph.

We now illustrate the techniques of curve sketching in the next two examples.

VIDEO

Two Step-by-Step Examples
EXAMPLE 3 Sketch the graph of the function

y ⫽ f1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 6x 2 ⫹ 9x ⫹ 2

Solution Obtain the following information on the graph of f.
Step 1 The domain of f is the interval (⫺⬁, ⬁).
Step 2 By setting x ⫽ 0, we find that the y-intercept is 2. The x-intercept is found

by setting y ⫽ 0, which in this case leads to a cubic equation. Since the solu-
tion is not readily found, we will not use this information.

Step 3 Since

 f  1x2 ⫽ lim
xS⫺⬁1x 
 f  1x2 ⫽ lim
xS⬁ 1x 

 lim
xS⫺⬁
 lim
xS⬁

3 ⫺ 6x 

3 ⫺ 6x 

2 ⫹ 9x ⫹ 22 ⫽ ⫺⬁
2 ⫹ 9x ⫹ 22 ⫽ ⬁

we see that f decreases without bound as x decreases without bound and that
f increases without bound as x increases without bound.

Step 4 Since f is a polynomial function, there are no asymptotes.

Step 5

+ + + + + +

0

– – –

0

1

2

FIGURE 52
Sign diagram for f ⬘

+ + + +

x

0

3

f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 3x 2 ⫺ 12x ⫹ 9 ⫽ 31x 2 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 32

⫽ 31x ⫺ 121x ⫺ 32

Setting f ⬘(x) ⫽ 0 gives x ⫽ 1 or x ⫽ 3. The sign diagram for f ⬘ shows that f
is increasing on the intervals (⫺⬁, 1) and (3, ⬁) and decreasing on the inter-
val (1, 3) (Figure 52).

Step 6 From the results of Step 5, we see that x ⫽ 1 and x ⫽ 3 are critical numbers

of f. Furthermore, f ⬘ changes sign from positive to negative as we move
across x ⫽ 1, so a relative maximum of f occurs at x ⫽ 1. Similarly, we see
that a relative minimum of f occurs at x ⫽ 3. Now,

so f(1) ⫽ 6 is a relative maximum of f and f(3) ⫽ 2 is a relative minimum 
of f.

f112 ⫽ 1 ⫺ 6 ⫹ 9 ⫹ 2 ⫽ 6
f132 ⫽ 33 ⫺ 6132 2 ⫹ 9132 ⫹ 2 ⫽ 2

f ⬙(x) ⫽ 6x ⫺ 12 ⫽ 61x ⫺ 22

– – – – – – – – – 0

+ + + +

1

0
FIGURE 53
Sign diagram for f ⬙

2

Step 7

x

which is equal to zero when x ⫽ 2. The sign diagram of f ⬙ shows that the
graph of f is concave downward on the interval (⫺⬁, 2) and concave upward
on the interval (2, ⬁) (Figure 53).

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

y

(1, 6)

Relative maximum

Point of inﬂection

Intercept

(3, 2)

Relative
minimum

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

1

2

3

4

5

6

FIGURE 54
We first plot the intercept, the relative
extrema, and the inflection point.

y

(1, 6)

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

(3, 2)

1

2

3

4

5

6

FIGURE 55
The graph of y ⫽ x3 ⫺ 6x2 ⫹ 9x ⫹ 2

x

x

10.3 CURVE SKETCHING

717

Step 8 From the results of Step 7, we see that f ⬙ changes sign as we move across 

x ⫽ 2. Next,

f122 ⫽ 23 ⫺ 6122 2 ⫹ 9122 ⫹ 2 ⫽ 4

so the required inflection point of f is (2, 4).

Step 9 Summarizing, we have the following:

: ⫺⬁; ⬁

 f1x2;  lim

xS⬁

Domain: (⫺⬁, ⬁)
Intercept: (0, 2)
 f1x2
lim
xS⫺⬁
Asymptotes: None
Intervals where f is 
Relative extrema: Relative maximum at (1, 6); relative minimum at (3, 2)
Concavity: Downward on (⫺⬁, 2); upward on (2, ⬁)
Point of inflection: (2, 4)

on (⫺⬁, 1) and (3, ⬁); 

QRQ

R

on (1, 3)

or 

:

In general, it is a good idea to start graphing by plotting the intercept(s), relative
extrema, and inflection point(s) (Figure 54). Then, using the rest of the information,
we complete the graph of f, as sketched in Figure 55.

Explore & Discuss
The average price of gasoline at the pump over a 3-month period, during which there was a
temporary shortage of oil, is described by the function f defined on the interval [0, 3]. Dur-
ing the first month, the price was increasing at an increasing rate. Starting with the second
month, the good news was that the rate of increase was slowing down, although the price of
gas was still increasing. This pattern continued until the end of the second month. The price
of gas peaked at t ⫽ 2 and began to fall at an increasing rate until t ⫽ 3.

1. Describe the signs of f ⬘(t) and f ⬙(t) over each of the intervals (0, 1), (1, 2), and (2, 3).
2. Make a sketch showing a plausible graph of f over [0, 3].

EXAMPLE 4 Sketch the graph of the function

y ⫽ f  1x2 ⫽ x ⫹ 1

x ⫺ 1

Solution Obtain the following information:

Step 1

f is undefined when x ⫽ 1, so the domain of f is the set of all real numbers
other than x ⫽ 1.

Step 2 Setting y ⫽ 0 gives x ⫽ ⫺1, the x-intercept of f. Next, setting x ⫽ 0 gives 

y ⫽ ⫺1 as the y-intercept of f.

Step 3 Earlier, we found that

x ⫹ 1
x ⫺ 1

lim
 
xS⬁

⫽ 1  and  lim
 
xS⫺⬁

x ⫹ 1
x ⫺ 1

⫽ 1

(see page 714). Consequently, we see that the graph of f approaches the line 
y ⫽ 1 as 
becomes arbitrarily large. For x ⬎ 1, f(x) ⬎ 1 and the graph of
f approaches the line y ⫽ 1 from above. For x ⬍ 1, f(x) ⬍ 1, so the graph of
f approaches the line y ⫽ 1 from below.

0 x 0

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

718

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

f ' is not deﬁned here

– – – – – – – – –

– – – – –

0

1

FIGURE 56
The sign diagram for f ⬘

f '' is not deﬁned here

– – – – – – – – –

+ + + + +

0

1

FIGURE 57
The sign diagram for f ⬙

x

x

y

4

2

y =  

x + 1
x – 1

y = 1

x

– 2

2

4

– 2

– 4

x = 1

FIGURE 58
The graph of f has a horizontal asymp-
tote at y ⫽ 1 and a vertical asymptote at 
x ⫽ 1.

Step 4 The straight line x ⫽ 1 is a vertical asymptote of the graph of f. Also, from the

results of Step 3, we conclude that y ⫽ 1 is a horizontal asymptote of the
graph of f.

Step 5

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫺ 12112 ⫺ 1x ⫹ 12112

1x ⫺ 12 2

⫽ ⫺ 

2

1x ⫺ 12 2

and is discontinuous at x ⫽ 1. The sign diagram of f ⬘ shows that f ⬘(x) ⬍ 0
whenever it is defined. Thus, f is decreasing on the intervals (⫺⬁, 1) and 
(1, ⬁) (Figure 56).

Step 6 From the results of Step 5, we see that there are no critical numbers of f,

since f ⬘(x) is never equal to zero for any value of x in the domain of f.

Step 7

f  –1x2 ⫽ d

dx  3 ⫺21x ⫺ 12 ⫺24 ⫽ 41x ⫺ 12 ⫺3 ⫽

4

1x ⫺ 12 3

The sign diagram of f ⬙ shows immediately that the graph of f is concave
downward on the interval (⫺⬁, 1) and concave upward on the interval (1, ⬁)
(Figure 57).

Step 8 From the results of Step 7, we see that there are no candidates for inflection
points of f, since f ⬙(x) is never equal to zero for any value of x in the domain
of f. Hence, f has no inflection points.
Step 9 Summarizing, we have the following:

Domain: (⫺⬁, 1) 傼 (1, ⬁)
Intercepts: (⫺1, 0); (0, ⫺1)
 f  1x2: 1; 1
lim
xS⫺⬁
Asymptotes: x ⫽ 1 is a vertical asymptote
y ⫽ 1 is a horizontal asymptote

 f  1x2; lim

xS⬁

RRQ

:

on (⫺⬁, 1) and (1, ⬁)

or 
Intervals where f is 
Relative extrema: None
Concavity: Downward on (⫺⬁, 1); upward on (1, ⬁)
Points of inflection: None

The graph of f is sketched in Figure 58.

10.3 Self-Check Exercises

1. Find the horizontal and vertical asymptotes of the graph of

2. Sketch the graph of the function

the function

2

f  1x2 ⫽ 2x 

x 

2 ⫺ 1

f  1x2 ⫽ 2
3  x 

3 ⫺ 2x 

2 ⫺ 6x ⫹ 4

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 10.3 can be found on 
page 722.

10.3 Concept Questions

1. Explain the following terms in your own words:

a. Vertical asymptote

b. Horizontal asymptote

3. How do you find the vertical asymptotes of the graph of a

rational function?

2. a. How many vertical asymptotes can the graph of a func-

4. Give a procedure for sketching the graph of a function.

tion f have? Explain using graphs.

b. How  many  horizontal  asymptotes  can  the  graph  of  a

function f have? Explain using graphs.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.3 Exercises

In Exercises 1–10, find the horizontal and vertical asymptotes of
the graph of the function.
1.

y

2.

3.

4.

5.

2

y =

2

1 + 0.5  x

–5

5

y

  

y =

1

(x + 1) 2

1

x

x

–1

20

10

–10

–20

–1

y

y = 

 

1
x 3

x

1

y

1

y

–1

1

–1

– 1

1

 
y = 
x 2  + 1

x

y = 

x

x 2 – 1

x

1

1

10.3 CURVE SKETCHING

719

y

1
2

1
2

–1

      x

y =

x 2 + 1

1

x

y

3

y = 3 –

 

1
x 2

– 3   – 2   – 1

1

2

3

x

y

  
y =

1

(x + 2)2

1

– 1

y

1

y ⫽ e⫺x2

x

x

⫺2

⫺1

1

2

10.

y

4

⫺1

1

0

x

⫺4

y ⫽ ln | x2 ⫺ 1|

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

720

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

In Exercises 11–28, find the horizontal and vertical asymptotes of
the graph of the function. (You need not sketch the graph.)

11.

13.

15.

x

f  1x2 ⫽ 1
f  1x2 ⫽ ⫺ 
f  1x2 ⫽ x ⫺ 2

x ⫹ 2

2
2
x 

12.

14.

16.

x ⫹ 2
1

f  1x2 ⫽ 1
t1x2 ⫽
t1t2 ⫽ t ⫹ 1

2t ⫺ 1

1 ⫹ 2x 

2

2 ⫺ x ⫺ 6

2 ⫹ x ⫺ 2

17. h1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 1
18. t1x2 ⫽ 2x 3 ⫹ x 2 ⫹ 1

19.

21.

23.

25.

27.

x 

3x

2 ⫺ 16
t 

f  1t2 ⫽ t   2
f  1x2 ⫽
t 1t2 ⫽ 2 ⫹
f  1x2 ⫽ x 
t 1x2 ⫽ x3 ⫺ x
x1x  ⫹ 12

2 ⫺ 2
2 ⫺ 4

x 

5

1t ⫺ 22 2

20.

22.

24.

26.

28.

x 

x 

2x

2 ⫺ 4

t 1x2 ⫽ x 3
t 1x2 ⫽
f  1x2 ⫽ 1 ⫹ 2
h1x2 ⫽ 2 ⫺ x 
f  1x2 ⫽

2 ⫹ x

x 

2

x ⫺ 3

x4 ⫺ x 

2

x1x  ⫺ 121x ⫹ 22

In Exercises 29 and 30, you are given the graphs of two functions
f and g. One function is the derivative function of the other. Iden-
tify each of them. 
29.

y

10
7.5
5
2.5

–2.5
–5
–7.5
–10

1

2

x

3

may be described in terms of her velocity as follows: Start-
ing  at  rest  (zero  velocity),  her  velocity  increases  and
approaches a constant velocity, called the terminal veloc-
ity. Sketch a graph of her velocity √ versus time t.

32. SPREAD OF A FLU EPIDEMIC Initially, 10 students at a junior
high school contracted influenza. The flu spread over time,
and the total number of students who eventually contracted
the flu approached but never exceeded 200. Let P(t) denote
the number of students who had contracted the flu after t
days, where P is an appropriate function.
a. Make a sketch of the graph of P. (Your answer will not

be unique.)

b. Where is the function increasing?
c. Does the graph of P have a horizontal asymptote? If so,

what is it?

d. Discuss the concavity of the graph of P. Explain its sig-

nificance.

e. Is  there  an  inflection  point  on  the  graph  of  P?  If  so,

explain its significance.

In Exercises 33–36, use the information summarized in the table
to sketch the graph of f.
33. f x ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫹ 1

2

1
Domain: (⫺⬁, ⬁)
Intercept: y-intercept: 1
Asymptotes: None
Intervals where f is 

Q

and 

:

QR
R

on (⫺⬁, 0) and (2, ⬁); 
on (0, 2)

Relative extrema: Rel. max. at (0, 1); rel. min. at (2, ⫺3)
Concavity: Downward on (⫺⬁, 1); upward on (1, ⬁)
Point of inflection: (1, ⫺1)

34.

f  1x2 ⫽ 1

9  1x4 ⫺ 4x32

Domain: (⫺⬁, ⬁)
Intercepts: x-intercepts: 0, 4; y-intercept: 0
Asymptotes: None
Intervals where f is 

and 

Q

:

QR
R

on (3, ⬁); 
on (⫺⬁, 3)

Relative extrema: Rel. min. at (3, ⫺3)
Concavity: Downward on (0, 2); 

g

–3

–2

–1

y

f

f

10
8
6
4
2

–2
–4
–6

–2

–1

g

30.

35.

1

2

3

4

x

upward on (⫺⬁, 0) and (2, ⬁)

Points of inflection: (0, 0) and Ó2, 
f  1x2 ⫽ 4x ⫺ 4

2

x 

)

⫺16
9

Domain: (⫺⬁, 0) 傼 (0, ⬁)
Intercept: x-intercept: 1
Asymptotes: x-axis and y-axis
QR
Intervals where f is 
:
R

and 

Q

on (0, 2); 
on (⫺⬁, 0) and (2, ⬁)

31. TERMINAL VELOCITY A skydiver leaps from the gondola of a
hot-air  balloon.  As  she  free-falls,  air  resistance,  which  is
proportional to her velocity, builds up to a point where it
balances  the  force  due  to  gravity.  The  resulting  motion

Relative extrema: Rel. max. at (2, 1)
Concavity: Downward on (⫺⬁, 0) and (0, 3) 
Point of inflection: Ó3,  Ô8

upward on (3, ⬁)

9

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

⫾313, 0

; y-intercept: 0

62. AVERAGE COST OF PRODUCING DVDS The  average  cost 
per disc (in dollars) incurred by Herald Media Corpora-
tion  in  pressing  x DVDs  is  given  by  the  average  cost
function 

10.3 CURVE SKETCHING

721

36. f1x2 ⫽ x ⫺ 3x1/3
Domain: (⫺⬁, ⬁)
Intercepts: x-intercepts: 
Asymptotes: None
Intervals where f is 

Q

and 

:

QR
R

on (⫺⬁, ⫺1) and (1, ⬁); 
on (⫺1, 1)

Relative extrema: Rel. max. at (⫺1, 2); rel. min. at (1, ⫺2)
Concavity: Downward on (⫺⬁, 0); upward on (0, ⬁)
Point of inflection: (0, 0)

In Exercises 37–60, sketch the graph of the function, using the
curve-sketching guide of this section.

38. f1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫹ 3
40. f1x2 ⫽ 2x 3 ⫹ 1

37. t1x2 ⫽ 4 ⫺ 3x ⫺ 2x 3
39. h1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 1
41. f1x2 ⫽ ⫺2x 3 ⫹ 3x 2 ⫹ 12x ⫹ 2
42. f1t2 ⫽ 2t 3 ⫺ 15t 2 ⫹ 36t ⫺ 20
2 ⫹ 8

4 ⫺ 2x3 ⫺ 6x 

43.

45.

44. f1t2 ⫽ 3t 4 ⫹ 4t 3
2 ⫺ 4
2   x ⫺ 1x

47.

h1x2 ⫽ 3
2    x 
f  1t2 ⫽ 2t 
t1x2 ⫽ 1
t1x2 ⫽ 2
h1x2 ⫽ x ⫹ 2
f  1t2 ⫽ t 

x ⫺ 2

x ⫺ 1

1 ⫹ t 

2

2

49.

51.

53.

55. f(t) ⫽ e t ⫺ t

57. f(x) ⫽ 2 ⫺ e⫺x

2 ⫹ 5

x ⫹ 1

f 1x2 ⫽ 2x 
f  1x2 ⫽ 23 x 2
f  1x2 ⫽ 1
t1x2 ⫽ x
t1x2 ⫽ x
h 1x2 ⫽ e x ⫹ e⫺x
f 1x2 ⫽

1 ⫹ e⫺x

x ⫺ 1

2 ⫺ 4

x 

2

3

46.

48.

50.

52.

54.

56.

58.

59. f(x) ⫽ ln(x ⫺ 1)

60. f(x) ⫽ 2x ⫺ ln x

61. COST OF REMOVING TOXIC POLLUTANTS A  city’s  main  well
was recently found to be contaminated with trichloroethyl-
ene  (a  cancer-causing  chemical)  as  a  result  of  an  aban-
doned  chemical  dump  that  leached  chemicals  into  the
water. A proposal submitted to the city council indicated
that the cost, measured in millions of dollars, of removing
x% of the toxic pollutants is given by

C 1x2 ⫽ 0.5x

100 ⫺ x

a. Find the vertical asymptote of the graph of C.
b. Is  it  possible  to  remove  100%  of  the  toxic  pollutant

from the water?

C 1x2 ⫽ 2.2 ⫹ 2500

x

a. Find the horizontal asymptote of the graph of C苶.
b. What is the limiting value of the average cost?

63. CONCENTRATION OF A DRUG IN THE BLOODSTREAM The  con-
centration (in milligrams per cubic centimeter) of a certain
drug in a patient’s bloodstream t hr after injection is given
by

C 1t2 ⫽ 0.2t

2 ⫹ 1

t 

a. Find the horizontal asymptote of the graph of C.
b. Interpret your result.

64. EFFECT OF ENZYMES ON CHEMICAL REACTIONS Certain  pro-
teins,  known  as  enzymes,  serve  as  catalysts  for  chemical
reactions in living things. In 1913, Leonor Michaelis and 
L. M. Menten discovered the following formula giving the
initial speed V (in moles per liter per second) at which the
reaction begins in terms of the amount of substrate x (the
substance that is being acted upon, measured in moles per
liter):

V ⫽ ax
x ⫹ b

where a and b are positive constants.
a. Find the horizontal asymptote of the graph of V.
b. What does the result of part (a) tell you about the initial
speed at which the reaction begins, if the amount of sub-
strate is very large?

65. GDP  OF A DEVELOPING COUNTRY A  developing  country’s
gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  from  2002  to  2010  is
approximated by the function

G1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.2t 3 ⫹ 2.4t 2 ⫹ 60

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 82

where G(t) is measured in billions of dollars, and t is mea-
sured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 2002. Sketch
the graph of the function G, and interpret your results.

66. CRIME RATE The number of major crimes per 100,000 com-
mitted in a city between 2003 and 2010 is approximated by
the function 

N1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.1t3 ⫹ 1.5t2 ⫹ 80

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 72

where  N(t)  denotes  the  number  of  crimes  per  100,000
committed  in  year  t,  with  t ⫽ 0  corresponding  to  2003.
Enraged  by  the  dramatic  increase  in  the  crime  rate,  the
citizens,  with  the  help  of  the  local  police,  organized
Neighborhood Crime Watch groups in early 2007 to com-
bat this menace. Sketch the graph of the function N⬘, and
interpret your results. Is the Neighborhood Crime Watch
program working?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

722

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

67. WORKER EFFICIENCY An  efficiency  study  showed  that  the
total  number  of  smartphones  assembled  by  an  average
worker  at  Delphi  Electronics  t hr  after  starting  work  at 
8 A.M. is given by

N1t2 ⫽ ⫺ 

1
2  t 

3 ⫹ 3t 

2 ⫹ 10t    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

Sketch  the  graph  of  the  function  N,  and  interpret  your
results.

68. CONCENTRATION OF A DRUG IN THE BLOODSTREAM The concen-
tration (in milligrams per cubic centimeter) of a certain drug
in a patient’s bloodstream t hr after injection is given by

C 1t2 ⫽ 0.2t
2 ⫹ 1  

t 

Sketch the graph of the function C, and interpret your results.

69. BOX-OFFICE RECEIPTS The 

total  worldwide  box-office
receipts for a long-running movie are approximated by the
function

2
T 1x2 ⫽ 120x 
2 ⫹ 4  

x 

where T(x) is measured in millions of dollars and x is the
number  of  years  since  the  movie’s  release.  Sketch  the
graph of the function T, and interpret your results.

70. OXYGEN CONTENT OF A POND When  organic  waste  is
dumped into a pond, the oxidation process that takes place
reduces the pond’s oxygen content. However, given time,
nature will restore the oxygen content to its natural level.
Suppose the oxygen content t days after organic waste has
been dumped into the pond is given by

f  1t2 ⫽ 100a t 

2 ⫺ 4t ⫹ 4

t 

2 ⫹ 4

b     10 ⱕ t ⬍ ⬁2  

percent of its normal level. Sketch the graph of the function
f, and interpret your results.

10.3 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

71. COST OF REMOVING TOXIC POLLUTANTS Refer to Exercise 61.
The cost, measured in millions of dollars, of removing x%
of a toxic pollutant is given by

C 1x2 ⫽ 0.5x
100 ⫺ x  

Sketch the graph of the function C, and interpret your results.
72. TRAFFIC FLOW ANALYSIS The speed of traffic flow in miles per
hour on a stretch of Route 123 between 6 A.M. and 10 A.M.
on a typical workday is approximated by the function

f 1t2 ⫽ 20t ⫺ 401t ⫹ 52        10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

where t is measured in hours, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
6 A.M. Sketch the graph of f, and interpret your results.

73. SPREAD OF AN EPIDEMIC During  a  flu  epidemic,  the  total
number of students on a state university campus who had
contracted influenza by the xth day was given by

N(x) ⫽

3000

1 ⫹ 99e⫺x

(x ⱖ 0)

a. How many students had influenza initially?
b. Derive an expression for the rate at which the disease
was  being  spread  and  prove  that  the  function  N is
increasing on the interval (0, ⬁).

c. Sketch  the  graph  of  N.  What  was  the  total  number  of
students who contracted influenza during that particular
epidemic?

74. ABSORPTION OF DRUGS A liquid carries a drug into an organ
of volume V cm3 at the rate of a cm3/sec and leaves at the
same rate. The concentration of the drug in the entering liq-
uid is c g/cm3. Letting x(t) denote the concentration of the
drug in the organ at any time t, we have x(t) ⫽ c(1 ⫺ e⫺at/V).
a. Show that x is an increasing function on (0, ⬁).
b. Sketch the graph of x.

1. Since

2
2x 
2 ⫺ 1   ⫽ lim
 
xS⬁

 lim
 
xS⬁

x 

2

 

1 ⫺ 1
x 

2

 ⫽ 2

Divide the numerator 
and denominator by x 2.

2. We obtain the following information on the graph of f.

(1) The domain of f is the interval (⫺⬁, ⬁).
(2) By setting x ⫽ 0, we find that the y-intercept is 4.
(3) Since

we see that y ⫽ 2 is a horizontal asymptote. Next, since

x 2 ⫺ 1 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 121x ⫺ 12 ⫽ 0

implies  x ⫽ ⫺1  or  x ⫽ 1,  these  are  candidates  for  the 
vertical asymptotes of the graph of f. Since the numerator 
of f is not equal to zero for x ⫽ ⫺1 or x ⫽ 1, we conclude
that x ⫽ ⫺1 and x ⫽ 1 are vertical asymptotes of the graph
of f.

 lim
xS⫺⬁

 lim
xS⬁

xS⫺⬁

 f  1x2 ⫽ lim
 f  1x2 ⫽ lim

xS⬁

 a 2
3   x 
 a 2
3   x 

3 ⫺ 2x 

3 ⫺ 2x 

2 ⫺ 6x ⫹ 4b ⫽ ⫺⬁
2 ⫺ 6x ⫹ 4b ⫽ ⬁

we  see  that  f(x)  decreases  without  bound  as  x decreases 
without bound and that f(x) increases without bound as x
increases without bound.
(4) Since f is a polynomial function, the graph of f has no
asymptotes.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(5)

f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 2x 2 ⫺ 4x ⫺ 6 ⫽ 21x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 32

⫽ 21x ⫹ 121x ⫺ 32

Setting f ⬘(x) ⫽ 0 gives x ⫽ ⫺1 or x ⫽ 3. The accompa-
nying  sign  diagram  for  f ⬘ shows  that  f is  increasing 
on the intervals (⫺⬁,  ⫺1) and (3, ⬁) and decreasing on
(⫺1, 3).

10.3 CURVE SKETCHING

723

(8) From the results of Step 7, we see that x ⫽ 1 is the
only candidate for an inflection point of f. Since f ⬙(x)
changes sign as we move across the point x ⫽ 1 and

f  112 ⫽ 2

3   112 3 ⫺ 2112 2 ⫺ 6112 ⫹ 4 ⫽ ⫺ 
3 2
11, ⫺10

10
3

we see that the required inflection point is 
(9) Summarizing this information, we have the following:

.

+ + + + 0 – – – – – – 0 + + + +

–1

0

Sign diagram for f ' 

3

 

x

(6) From  the  results  of  Step  5,  we  see  that  x ⫽ ⫺1  and 
x ⫽ 3 are critical numbers of f. Furthermore, the sign diagram
of f ⬘ tells us that x ⫽ ⫺1 gives rise to a relative maximum of
f and x ⫽ 3 gives rise to a relative minimum of f. Now,

3  1⫺12 3 ⫺ 21⫺12 2 ⫺ 61⫺12 ⫹ 4 ⫽ 22
3  132 3 ⫺ 2132 2 ⫺ 6132 ⫹ 4 ⫽ ⫺14

3

f  1⫺12 ⫽ 2
f  132 ⫽ 2
f  1⫺12 ⫽ 22

so 
is a relative minimum of f.

3

is a relative maximum of f and f(3) ⫽ ⫺14

(7)

f ⬙1x2 ⫽ 4x ⫺ 4 ⫽ 41x ⫺ 12

which is equal to zero when x ⫽ 1. The accompanying sign
diagram of f ⬙ shows that the graph of f is concave down-
ward on the interval (⫺⬁, 1) and concave upward on the
interval (1, ⬁).

– – – – – – – –

0

+ + + +

0

1

Sign diagram for f "

x

Domain: (⫺⬁, ⬁)
y-intercept: 4
lim
xS⫺⬁
Asymptotes: None
Intervals where f is 

 f  1x2; lim

xS⬁

 f  1x2: ⫺⬁; ⬁

QRQ
R
Relative extrema: Rel. max. at 

or 

:

on (⫺⬁, ⫺1) and (3, ⬁); 
on (⫺1, 3)
1⫺1, 22
3 2

; rel. min. 

Concavity: Downward on (⫺⬁, 1); upward on (1, ⬁)
Point of inflection:

at (3, ⫺14)
11, ⫺10
3 2

The graph of f is sketched in the accompanying figure.

y

2

y = 3 x 3 – 2 x 2 – 6x + 4

– 1

1

2

3

4

5

x

–10

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Analyzing the Properties of a Function
One of the main purposes of studying Section 10.3 is to see how the many concepts
of calculus come together to paint a picture of a function. The techniques of graphing
also play a very practical role. For example, using the techniques of graphing devel-
oped  in  Section  10.3,  you  can  tell  whether  the  graph  of  a  function  generated  by  a
graphing  utility  is  reasonably  complete.  Furthermore,  these  techniques  can  often
reveal details that are missing from a graph.

EXAMPLE 1 Consider the function f(x) ⫽ 2x 3 ⫺ 3.5x 2 ⫹ x ⫺ 10. A plot of the
graph of f in the standard viewing window is shown in Figure T1. Since the domain of
f is the interval (⫺⬁, ⬁), we see that Figure T1 does not reveal the part of the graph to
the left of the y-axis. This suggests that we enlarge the viewing window accordingly.
Figure T2 shows the graph of f in the viewing window [⫺10, 10] ⫻ [⫺20, 10].

(continued)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

724

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

_10

10

_10

_10

10

10

10

_20

FIGURE T1
The graph of f in the standard viewing
window

FIGURE T2
The graph of f in the viewing window
[⫺10, 10] ⫻ [⫺20, 10]

The behavior of f for large values of x

lim
xS⫺⬁

 f  1x2 ⫽ ⫺⬁  and  lim

xS⬁

 f  1x2 ⫽ ⬁

_1

_8

2

_11

FIGURE T3
The graph of f in the viewing window
[⫺1, 2] ⫻ [⫺11, ⫺8]

_10

10

_10

10

FIGURE T4
The graph of f(x) ⫽ x3 ⫺ 3x2 ⫹ x ⫹ 1.5

suggests that this viewing window has captured a sufficiently complete picture of f. 
Next, an analysis of the first derivative of x,

f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 6x 2 ⫺ 7x ⫹ 1 ⫽ 16x ⫺ 121x ⫺ 12

x ⫽ 1
and x ⫽ 1. In fact, a sign diagram of f ⬘
reveals that f has critical values at 
6
x ⫽ 1
and a relative minimum at x ⫽ 1,
shows that f has a relative maximum at 
6
details that are not revealed in the graph of f shown in Figure T2. To examine this
portion of the graph of f, we use, say, the viewing window [⫺1, 2] ⫻ [⫺11, ⫺8].
The resulting graph of f is shown in Figure T3, which certainly reveals the hitherto
missing details! Thus, through an interaction of calculus and a graphing utility, we
are able to obtain a good picture of the properties of f.

Finding x-Intercepts
As was noted in Section 10.3, it is not always easy to find the x-intercepts of the graph
of  a  function.  But  this  information  is  very  important  in  applications.  By  using  the
function  for  solving  polynomial  equations  or  the  function  for  finding  the  roots  of 
an  equation,  we  can  solve  the  equation  f(x)  ⫽ 0  quite  easily  and  hence  yield  the 
x-intercepts of the graph of a function.

EXAMPLE 2 Let f(x) ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 1.5.
a. Use the function for solving polynomial equations on a graphing utility to find

the x-intercepts of the graph of f.

b. Use the function for finding the roots of an equation on a graphing utility to find

the x-intercepts of the graph of f.

Solution

a. Observe that f is a polynomial function of degree 3, so we may use the function

for solving polynomial equations to solve the equation x 3 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫹ x ⫹
1.5 ⫽ 0 [ f(x) ⫽ 0]. We find that the solutions (x-intercepts) are

x1 ⬇ ⫺0.525687120865

x3 ⬇ 2.26703509836
b. Using the graph of f (Figure T4), we see that x1 ⬇ ⫺0.5, x2 ⬇ 1, and x3 ⬇ 2.

x2 ⬇ 1.2586520225

Using the function for finding the roots of an equation on a graphing utility and
these values of x as initial guesses, we find

x1 ⬇ ⫺0.5256871209

x2 ⬇ 1.2586520225

x3 ⬇ 2.2670350984

Note The function for solving polynomial equations on a graphing utility will solve
a polynomial equation f(x) ⫽ 0, where f is a polynomial function. The function for
finding the roots of an equation, however, will solve equations f(x) ⫽ 0 even if f is not
a polynomial.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

10.3 CURVE SKETCHING

725

APPLIED EXAMPLE 3 TV Mobile Phones The number of people watching
TV on mobile phones (in millions) is approximated by

N1t2 ⫽ 11.911 ⫹ 0.91t        10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to the beginning of 2007.
a. Use a graphing calculator to plot the graph of N.
b. Based on this model, when did the number of people watching TV on mobile

phones first exceed 20 million?

Source: IDC, U.S. forecast.

Solution
a. The graph of N in the window [0, 4] ⫻ [0, 30] is shown in Figure T5a.
b. Using the function for finding the intersection of the graphs of y1 ⫽ N(t) and 

y2 ⫽ 20, we find t ⬇ 2.005 (see Figure T5b). So the number of people watching
TV on mobile phones first exceeded 20 million at the beginning of 2009.

30

30

Intersection
X=2.0051201 Y=20

4

0
(a)
FIGURE T5
(a) The graph of N in the viewing window [0, 4] ⫻ [0, 30]; (b) the graph showing the
intersection of y1 ⫽ N(t) and y2 ⫽ 20 on the TI 83/84.

0
(b)

4

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

In  Exercises  1–4,  use  the  method  of  Example  1  to  analyze  the
function. (Note: Your answers will not be unique.)

1. f1x2 ⫽ 4x 3 ⫺ 4x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 10
2. f1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫹ 2x 2 ⫹ x ⫺ 12

f  1x2 ⫽ 1

3.

2  x 4 ⫹ x 

2 ⫺ 10
4. f1x2 ⫽ 2.25x 4 ⫺ 4x 3 ⫹ 2x 2 ⫹ 2

3 ⫹ 1
2  x 

In  Exercises  5–10,  find  the  x-intercepts  of  the  graph  of  f.  Give
your answers accurate to four decimal places.

7.

2 ⫺ 1x ⫹ 1 ⫺ 3

5. f1x2 ⫽ 0.2x 3 ⫺ 1.2x 2 ⫹ 0.8x ⫹ 2.1
6. f1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.2x 4 ⫹ 0.8x 3 ⫺ 2.1x ⫹ 1.2
f  1x2 ⫽ 2x 
f  1x2 ⫽ x ⫺ 21 ⫺ x 
9. f1x2 ⫽ ex ⫺2x ⫺ 2
10. f1x2 ⫽ ln11 ⫹ x 22 ⫹ 2x ⫺ 3

8.

2

11. AIR POLLUTION The level of ozone, an invisible gas that irri-
tates and impairs breathing, present in the atmosphere on a
certain day in June in the city of Riverside is approximated
by

S1t2 ⫽ 1.0974t3 ⫺ 0.0915t4

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 112

where  S(t)  is  measured  in  pollutant  standard  index  (PSI)
and  t is  measured  in  hours,  with  t ⫽ 0  corresponding  to 
7 A.M. Sketch the graph of S, and interpret your results.
Source: Los Angeles Times.

12. FLIGHT PATH OF A PLANE The function

f 1x2 ⫽ μ

0
⫺0.0411523x 3 ⫹ 0.679012x 2
        ⫺1.23457x ⫹ 0.5968
15

if 0 ⱕ x ⬍ 1

if 1 ⱕ x ⬍ 10
if 10 ⱕ x ⱕ 11

where  both  x and  f (x)  are  measured  in  units  of  1000  ft,
describes the flight path of a plane taking off from the ori-
gin  and  climbing  to  an  altitude  of  15,000  ft.  Sketch  the
graph of f to visualize the trajectory of the plane.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

726

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

10.4 Optimization I

Absolute Extrema
The graph of the function f in Figure 59 shows the average age of cars in use in the
United States from the beginning of 1946 (t ⫽ 0) to the beginning of 2009 (t ⫽ 63).
Observe that the highest average age of cars in use during this period is 9.3 years,
whereas the lowest average age of cars in use during the same period is 5.5 years. The
number  9.3,  the  largest  value  of  f(t)  for  all  values  of  t in  the  interval  [0,  63]  (the
domain of f ), is called the absolute maximum value of f on that interval. The number
5.5, the smallest value of f(t) for all values of t in [0, 63], is called the absolute mini-
mum value of f on that interval. Notice, too, that the absolute maximum value of f is
attained at the endpoint t ⫽ 63 of the interval, whereas the absolute minimum value
of f is attained at the points t ⫽ 12 (corresponding to 1958) and t ⫽ 23 (correspond-
ing to 1969) that lie within the interval (0, 63).

Absolute
maximum

Absolute minimum

y = f (t) 

y  (years)

e
s
u

 

n
i
 
s
r
a
c
 
f
o

 
e
g
a
 
e
g
a
r
e
v
A

10

9.3
9

8

7

6

5

FIGURE 59
f(t) gives the average age of cars in use in
year t, t in [0, 63].

0

12

23

Source: American Automobile Association.

t (years)

63

(Incidentally, it is interesting to note that 1946 marked the first year of peace fol-
lowing World War II and the two years 1958 and 1969 marked the end of two periods
of prosperity in recent U.S. history.)

A  precise  definition  of  the  absolute  extrema (absolute  maximum  or  absolute

minimum) of a function follows.

The Absolute Extrema of a Function f
If  f(x)  ⱕ f(c)  for  all  x in  the  domain  of  f,  then  f(c)  is  called  the  absolute 
maximum value of f.
If  f(x)  ⱖ f(c)  for  all  x in  the  domain  of  f,  then  f(c)  is  called  the  absolute 
minimum value of f.

Figure 60 shows the graphs of several functions and gives the absolute maximum

and absolute minimum of each function, if they exist.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

y = x 2

y

4

3

2

1

y

4

3

2

1

y = 4 – x 2

– 2   –1

1

2

x

–2

–1

1

2

x

(a) f(0) ⫽ 0 is the absolute 
minimum of f; f has no 
absolute maximum.
FIGURE 60

(b) f(0) ⫽ 4 is the absolute
maximum of f; f has
no absolute minimum.

10.4 OPTIMIZATION I

727

y

1
2

1
2

–1

y = x 1 – x 2

x

1

– 2

y

2

1

– 1

– 2

y = x 3

x

1

2

(c) 

(d) f has no absolute extrema.

f  112>22 ⫽ 1>2
maximum of f; f  1⫺12>22 ⫽ ⫺1>2

is the absolute

is the absolute minimum of f.

Absolute Extrema on a Closed Interval
As the preceding examples show, a continuous function defined on an arbitrary inter-
val  does  not  always  have  an  absolute  maximum  or  an  absolute  minimum.  But  an
important case arises often in practical applications in which both the absolute maxi-
mum  and  the  absolute  minimum  of  a  function  are  guaranteed  to  exist.  This  occurs
when a continuous function is defined on a closed interval. Let’s state this important
result in the form of a theorem, whose proof we will omit.

THEOREM 3
The Extreme Value Theorem
If a function f is continuous on a closed interval [a, b], then f has both an absolute
maximum value and an absolute minimum value on [a, b].

Observe  that  if  an  absolute  extremum  of  a  continuous  function  f occurs  at  a 
point in an open interval (a, b), then it must be a relative extremum of f, and hence its
x-coordinate must be a critical number of  f. Otherwise, the absolute extremum of  f
must occur at one or both of the endpoints of the interval [a, b]. A typical situation is
illustrated in Figure 61.

y

Relative
maximum

y = f (x)

Absolute
maximum

FIGURE 61
The relative minimum of f at x3 is the
absolute minimum of f. The right end-
point b of the interval [a, b] gives rise to
the absolute maximum value f(b) of f.

Relative
minimum

a

x1

x2

x3

Absolute
minimum

x

b

Here, x1, x2, and x3 are critical numbers of f. The absolute minimum of f occurs at
x3, which lies in the open interval (a, b) and is a critical number of f. The absolute
maximum of f occurs at b, an endpoint. This observation suggests the following pro-
cedure for finding the absolute extrema of a continuous function on a closed interval.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

728

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

Finding the Absolute Extrema of f on a Closed Interval
1. Find the critical numbers of f that lie in (a, b).
2. Compute the value of f at each critical number found in Step 1 and compute

f(a) and f(b).

3. The absolute maximum value and absolute minimum value of f will corre-

spond to the largest and smallest numbers, respectively, found in Step 2.

EXAMPLE 1 Find the absolute extrema of the function F(x) ⫽ x 2 defined on the
interval [⫺1, 2].

y

3

1

y = x2

x

2

1

– 3   – 2   –1
FIGURE 62
F has an absolute minimum value of 0
and an absolute maximum value of 4.

3

y

Absolute maximum

4

2

y = x3 – 2x2 –4x + 4

– 2

2

4

x

–2

Absolute minimum

–4
FIGURE 63
f has an absolute maximum value of 4
and an absolute minimum value of ⫺4.

Solution The function F is continuous on the closed interval [⫺1, 2] and differen-
tiable on the open interval (⫺1, 2). The derivative of F is

F ⬘1x2 ⫽ 2x

so 0 is the only critical number of F. Next, evaluate F(x) at x ⫽ ⫺1, x ⫽ 0, and 
x ⫽ 2. Thus,

F1⫺12 ⫽ 1

F102 ⫽ 0

F122 ⫽ 4

It follows that 0 is the absolute minimum value of F and 4 is the absolute maximum
value of F. The graph of F, in Figure 62, confirms our results.

EXAMPLE 2 Find the absolute extrema of the function

f1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 2x 2 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 4

defined on the interval [0, 3].

Solution The function f is continuous on the closed interval [0, 3] and differen-
tiable on the open interval (0, 3). The derivative of f is

f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 3x 2 ⫺ 4x ⫺ 4 ⫽ 13x ⫹ 221x ⫺ 22
x ⫽ ⫺2
3

and x ⫽ 2. Since 

x ⫽ ⫺2
3

and it is equal to zero when 
lies outside the inter-
val [0, 3], it is dropped from further consideration, and x ⫽ 2 is seen to be the sole
critical number of f. Next, we evaluate f(x) at the critical number of f as well as the
endpoints of f, obtaining

f102 ⫽ 4

f122 ⫽ ⫺4

f132 ⫽ 1

From these results, we conclude that ⫺4 is the absolute minimum value of f and 4 
is the absolute maximum value of f. The graph of f, which appears in Figure 63,
confirms our results. Observe that the absolute maximum of f occurs at the endpoint
x ⫽ 0 of the interval [0, 3], while the absolute minimum of f occurs at x ⫽ 2, which
lies in the interval (0, 3).

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY

Let f(x) ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 2x 2 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 4. (This is the function of Example 2.)
1. Use  a  graphing  utility  to  plot  the  graph  of  f,  using  the  viewing  window 
[0, 3] ⫻ [⫺5, 5]. Use ZOOM and TRACE to find the absolute extrema of f on the
interval [0, 3] and thus verify the results obtained analytically in Example 2.

2. Plot the graph of f, using the viewing window [⫺2, 1] ⫻ [⫺5, 6]. Use ZOOM
and TRACE to find the absolute extrema of f on the interval [⫺2, 1]. Verify
your results analytically.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

y

4
3
2

–1

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 3 Find the absolute maximum and absolute minimum values of the func-
tion f(x) ⫽ x 2/3 on the interval [⫺1, 8].

10.4 OPTIMIZATION I

729

Absolute
maximum

y = x 2/3

Solution The derivative of f is

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ 2

3   x⫺1/3 ⫽ 2

3x 

1/3

4

2
Absolute minimum

6

x

8

FIGURE 64
f has an absolute minimum value of 
f(0) ⫽ 0 and an absolute maximum value
of f(8) ⫽ 4.

Note that f ⬘ is not defined at x ⫽ 0, and does not equal zero for any x. Therefore, 0
is the only critical number of f. Evaluating f(x) at x ⫽ ⫺1, 0, and 8, we obtain

f182 ⫽ 4
We conclude that the absolute minimum value of f is 0, attained at x ⫽ 0, and the
absolute maximum value of f is 4, attained at x ⫽ 8 (Figure 64).

f1⫺12 ⫽ 1

f102 ⫽ 0

Many real-world applications call for finding the absolute maximum value or the
absolute minimum value of a given function. For example, management is interested in
finding what level of production will yield the maximum profit for a company; a farmer
is interested in finding the right amount of fertilizer to maximize crop yield; a doctor is
interested in finding the maximum concentration of a drug in a patient’s body and the
time at which it occurs; and an engineer is interested in finding the dimensions of a con-
tainer with a specified shape and volume that can be constructed at a minimum cost.

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 4 Maximizing Profits Acrosonic’s total profit (in dol-
lars) from manufacturing and selling x units of their model F loudspeaker 

systems is given by

P1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.02x 2 ⫹ 300x ⫺ 200,000

10 ⱕ x ⱕ 20,0002

How many units of the loudspeaker system must Acrosonic produce to maximize
its profits?

Solution To find the absolute maximum of P on [0, 20,000], first find the criti-
cal points of P on the interval (0, 20,000). To do this, compute

Solving the equation P⬘(x) ⫽ 0 gives x ⫽ 7500. Next, evaluate P(x) at x ⫽ 7500 as
well as the endpoints x ⫽ 0 and x ⫽ 20,000 of the interval [0, 20,000], obtaining

P⬘1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.04x ⫹ 300

P102 ⫽ ⫺200,000
P175002 ⫽ 925,000
P120,0002 ⫽ ⫺2,200,000

s
r
a
l
l
o
d

 
f
o
 
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
T

1000
800
600
400
200

– 200
– 400

y

Absolute
maximum

y = P(x)

2 4 6 8

10  12

16

18 20

x

Units of a thousand

FIGURE 65
P has an absolute maximum at 
(7500, 925,000).

From these computations, we see that the absolute maximum value of the func-
tion P is 925,000. Thus, by producing 7500 units, Acrosonic will realize a maxi-
mum profit of $925,000. The graph of P is sketched in Figure 65.

Explore & Discuss
Recall that the total profit function P is defined as P(x) ⫽ R(x) ⫺ C(x), where R is the total
revenue function, C is the total cost function, and x is the number of units of a product pro-
duced and sold. (Assume that all derivatives exist.)

1. Show that at the level of production x0 that yields the maximum profit for the company,

the following two conditions are satisfied:

R⬘1x02 ⫽ C⬘1x02

and R ⬙1x02 ⬍ C ⬙1x02

2. Interpret the two conditions in part 1 in economic terms, and explain why they make sense.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

730

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

APPLIED EXAMPLE 5 Trachea Contraction During a Cough When a person
coughs, the trachea (windpipe) contracts, allowing air to be expelled at a 
maximum velocity. It can be shown that during a cough, the velocity √ of airflow
is given by the function

√ ⫽ f1r2 ⫽ kr 21R ⫺ r2

where r is the trachea’s radius (in centimeters) during a cough, R is the trachea’s
normal radius (in centimeters), and k is a positive constant that depends on the
length of the trachea. Find the radius r for which the velocity of airflow is
greatest.

Solution To find the absolute maximum of f on [0, R], first find the critical
numbers of f on the interval (0, R). We compute

√

Absolute
maximum

√ = f (r)

r

R2
3

R

FIGURE 66
The velocity of airflow is greatest when
the radius of the contracted trachea is 

.2
3  R

f ⬘1r2 ⫽ 2kr1R ⫺ r2 ⫺ kr 2

⫽ ⫺3kr 2 ⫹ 2kRr ⫽ kr1⫺3r ⫹ 2R2

Use the Product Rule.

Setting f ⬘(r) ⫽ 0 gives r ⫽ 0 or 
, so 
f (r ⫽ 0 is an endpoint). Evaluating f(r) at 
r ⫽ 0 and r ⫽ R, we obtain

r ⫽ 2

3 R

2
3 R
r ⫽ 2

is the sole critical number of 
3 R

, as well as at the endpoints 

 f  a 2

 f  102 ⫽ 0
3  Rb ⫽ 4k
27  R 3
 f  1R2 ⫽ 0

from which we deduce that the velocity of airflow is greatest when the radius of
the contracted trachea is  —that is, when the radius is contracted by approxi-
mately 33%. The graph of the function f is shown in Figure 66.

2
3 R

Explore & Discuss
Prove that if a cost function C(x) is concave upward [C ⬙(x) ⬎ 0], then the level of produc-
tion that will result in the smallest average production cost occurs when 

C1x2 ⫽ C ¿1x2
is equal to the marginal cost C⬘(x).

—that is, when the average cost 
Hints:

C1x2

1. Show that

C ¿1x2 ⫽

xC ¿1x2 ⫺ C1x2

x 2

so the critical number of the function  occurs when

C

xC⬘1x2 ⫺ C1x2 ⫽ 0

2. Show that at a critical number of 

C

,

C –1x2 ⫽

C –1x2

x

Use the Second Derivative Test to reach the desired conclusion.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

10.4 OPTIMIZATION I

731

APPLIED EXAMPLE 6 Minimizing Average Cost The daily average cost
function (in dollars per unit) of Elektra Electronics is given by 

C1x2 ⫽ 0.0001x 2 ⫺ 0.08x ⫹ 40 ⫹ 5000

x

    1x ⬎ 02

where x stands for the number of graphing calculators that Elektra produces.
Show that a production level of 500 units per day results in a minimum average
cost for the company.

is the interval (0, ⬁), which is not
Solution The domain of the function 
closed. To solve the problem, we resort to the graphical method. Using the 
techniques of graphing from the last section, we sketch the graph of 
(Figure 67).

C

C

Now,

C¿1x2 ⫽ 0.0002x  ⫺ 0.08 ⫺ 5000

2

x 

Substituting the given value of x, 500, into 
a critical number of 

. Next,

C

C¿1x2

gives 

C¿15002 ⫽ 0

, so 500 is 

C –1x2 ⫽ 0.0002  ⫹

10,000

3
 

x 

y ($)

y = C(x)

Absolute
minimum

(500, 35)

100

80

60

40

20

x

200  400  600  800

1000

FIGURE 67
The minimum average cost is $35 per
unit.

Thus,

C –15002 ⫽ 0.0002  ⫹

10,000
3
 

15002  

⬎ 0

and by the Second Derivative Test, a relative minimum of the function  occurs 
at 500. Furthermore, 
concave upward everywhere, so the relative minimum of  must be the absolute 
minimum of 

C
⬙(x) ⬎ 0 for x ⬎ 0, which implies that the graph of 

. The minimum average cost is given by

is 

C

C

C

C

C 15002 ⫽ 0.000115002 2  ⫺ 0.0815002 ⫹ 40 ⫹ 5000

500 

 ⫽ 35 

or $35 per unit.

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
Refer to the preceding Explore & Discuss and Example 6.
1. Using a graphing utility, plot the graphs of 

 C 1x2 ⫽ 0.0001x 2 ⫺ 0.08x ⫹ 40 ⫹ 5000
 C¿  1x2 ⫽ 0.0003x 2 ⫺ 0.16x ⫹ 40

x 

using the viewing window [0, 1000] ⫻ [0, 150].
Note: C(x) ⫽ 0.0001x 3 ⫺ 0.08x 2 ⫹ 40x ⫹ 5000. (Why?)

2. Find the point of intersection of the graphs of 

and C⬘ and thus verify the
assertion in the Explore & Discuss for the special case studied in Example 6.

C

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

732

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

Our  final  example  involves  finding  the  absolute  maximum  of  an  exponential 

function.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 7 Optimal Market Price The present value of the mar-
ket price of the Blakely Office Building is given by

P1t2 ⫽ 300,000e⫺0.09t⫹1t/2    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

Find the optimal present value of the building’s market price.

Solution To find the maximum value of P over [0, 10], we compute

d

 P ¿1t2 ⫽ 300,000e⫺0.09 t⫹1t/2

dt  a ⫺0.09t ⫹ 1
1/2b
2  t 
 ⫽ 300,000e⫺0.09t⫹1t/2a ⫺0.09 ⫹ 1
⫺1/2b
4  t 

  

Setting P⬘(t) ⫽ 0 gives

e⫺0.09t⫹1t/2

since 

⫺0.09 ⫹ 1
4t 

1/2

⫽ 0

is never zero for any value of t. Solving this equation, we find

1
 
1/2
4t 

⫽ 0.09

 t 

1/2 ⫽ 1
410.092

 ⫽ 1
0.36
 t ⫽ a 1

0.36b 2

⬇ 7.72

the sole critical number of the function P. Finally, evaluating P(t) at the critical
number as well as at the endpoints of [0, 10], we have

t

0

7.72

10

P(t)

300,000

600,779

592,838

We conclude, accordingly, that the optimal present value of the property’s market
price is $600,779 and that this will occur 7.72 years from now.

10.4 Self-Check Exercises

1. Let 

f  1x2 ⫽ x ⫺ 21x

.

a. Find the absolute extrema of f on the interval [0, 9].
b. Find the absolute extrema of f.

2. Find  the  absolute  extrema  of  f(x)  ⫽ 3x 4 ⫹ 4x 3 ⫹ 1  on 

[⫺2, 1].

3. The  operating  rate  (expressed  as  a  percent)  of  factories,
mines, and utilities in a certain region of the country on the
tth day of 2010 is given by the function

f  1t2 ⫽ 80 ⫹ 1200t

2 ⫹ 40,000

t 

    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 2502

On which of the first 250 days of 2010 was the operating
rate highest?

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 10.4 can be found on 
page 738.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10.4 Concept Questions

1. Explain  the  following  terms:  (a)  absolute  maximum  and

2. Describe the procedure for finding the absolute extrema of

(b) absolute minimum.

a continuous function on a closed interval.

10.4 OPTIMIZATION I

733

10.4 Exercises

In Exercises 1–8, you are given the graph of a function f defined
on the indicated interval. Find the absolute maximum and the
absolute minimum of f, if they exist.
1.

y

2.

3.

4.

4

2

1

– 2   – 1

1

2

f deﬁned on (–⬁, ⬁     )

y

–4

–3

–2

–1

1
2

1
2

1 2 3 4 5

f deﬁned on (–⬁, ⬁     )

y

2

–1

1

f deﬁned on (–⬁, ⬁     )

y

5

0

f deﬁned on [0, ⬁)

x

x

x

x

5.

y

6.

7.

8.

3

2

1

–1

–2

1

2

f deﬁned on [0, 2]

y

1

–1

1

f deﬁned on (–1, ⬁)

y

x

x

–1

3

2

1

–1

– 2

y

1

1

2

x

(

3 , – 27
16
2

)

f deﬁned on [–1, 2]

– 2  

– 1

1

2

3

x

–1

– 2

– 3

f deﬁned on [–1, 3]

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

734

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

In  Exercises  9–40,  find  the  absolute  maximum  value  and  the
absolute minimum value, if any, of each function.

9. f1x2 ⫽ 2x 2 ⫹ 3x ⫺ 4
11. h1x2 ⫽ x 1/3
f  1x2 ⫽ 1

1 ⫹ x 2

13.

10. t1x2 ⫽ ⫺x 2 ⫹ 4x ⫹ 3
12. f1x2 ⫽ x 2/3
f  1x2 ⫽ x

1 ⫹ x 2

14.

15. f1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 3 on 3⫺2, 34
16. t1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 3 on 3 0, 44
17. f1x2 ⫽ ⫺x 2 ⫹ 4x ⫹ 10 on 3 0, 54
18. f1x2 ⫽ ⫺x 2 ⫹ 4x ⫹ 6 on 3 3, 64
19. f1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫹ 3x 2 ⫺ 1 on 3⫺3, 24
20. t1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫹ 3x 2 ⫺ 1 on 3⫺3, 14
21. t1x2 ⫽ 3x 4 ⫹ 4x 3 on 3⫺2, 14

2 ⫹ 3 on 3 ⫺2, 34
t 1t2 ⫽ t

24.

t ⫺ 1   on 32, 44

22.

23.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

3 ⫺ 2x 

2  x4 ⫺ 2
f  1x2 ⫽ 1
3  x 
f  1x2 ⫽ x ⫹ 1
x ⫺ 1   on 32, 44
f  1x2 ⫽ 4x ⫹ 1
x   on 31, 24
f  1x2 ⫽ 9x ⫺ 1
x   on 31, 34
2 ⫺ 2 1x on 30, 34
f  1x2 ⫽ 1
2   x 
2 ⫺ 4 1x on 30, 94
t 1x2 ⫽ 1
8   x 
f  1x2 ⫽ 1
x    on 10, ⬁2

30.

t 1x2 ⫽ 1

x ⫹ 1    on 10, ⬁2

31. f1x2 ⫽ 3x 2/3 ⫺ 2x on 3 0, 34
32. t1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 2x 2/3 on 3⫺2, 24
33. f1x2 ⫽ x 2/31x 2 ⫺ 42 on 3⫺1, 24
34. f1x2 ⫽ x 2/31x 2 ⫺ 42 on 3⫺1, 34
35. f(x) ⫽ 2e⫺x 2 on 3⫺1, 14
36. h1x2 ⫽ ex 2⫺4 on 3⫺2, 24
37. t1x2 ⫽ 12x ⫺ 12 e⫺x on 30, ⬁2
38. f1x2 ⫽ xe⫺x 2 on 30, 24
40. t1x2 ⫽
on 32, 54

x
ln x

39. f1x2 ⫽ x ⫺ ln x on 

2, 34
3 1

41. A  stone  is  thrown  straight  up  from  the  roof  of  an  80-ft
building. The height (in feet) of the stone at any time t (in
seconds), measured from the ground, is given by

h1t2 ⫽ ⫺16t 2 ⫹ 64t ⫹ 80

What is the maximum height the stone reaches?

42. MAXIMIZING PROFITS Lynbrook  West,  an  apartment  com-
plex,  has  100  two-bedroom  units.  The  monthly  profit  (in
dollars) realized from renting out x apartments is given by

P1x2 ⫽ ⫺10x 2 ⫹ 1760x ⫺ 50,000

To  maximize  the  monthly  rental  profit,  how  many  units
should be rented out? What is the maximum monthly profit
realizable?

43. SENIORS IN THE WORKFORCE The  percentage  of  men  age 
65  years  and  older  in  the  workforce  from  1950  (t ⫽ 0)
through 2000 (t ⫽ 50) is approximately
P1t2 ⫽ 0.0135t 2 ⫺ 1.126t ⫹ 41.2

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 502

Show that the percentage of men age 65 years and older in
the  workforce  in  the  period  of  time  under  consideration 
was smallest around mid-September 1991. What is that per-
centage?
Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

44. FLIGHT OF A ROCKET The  altitude  (in  feet)  attained  by  a

model rocket t sec into flight is given by the function

h 1t2 ⫽ ⫺ 

1
3

 t 

3 ⫹ 4t 

2 ⫹ 20t ⫹ 2    1t ⱖ 02

Find the maximum altitude attained by the rocket.

45. FEMALE SELF-EMPLOYED WORKFORCE Data  show  that  the
number  of  nonfarm,  full-time,  self-employed  women  can
be approximated by

N 1t2 ⫽ 0.81t ⫺ 1.14 1t ⫹ 1.53    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 62

where  N(t)  is  measured  in  millions  and  t is  measured  in 
5-year intervals, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to the beginning
of 1963. Determine the absolute extrema of the function N
on the interval [0, 6]. Interpret your results.
Source: U.S. Department of Labor.

46. AVERAGE SPEED OF A VEHICLE The average speed of a vehi-
cle on a stretch of Route 134 between 6 A.M. and 10 A.M.
on a typical weekday is approximated by the function

f  1t2 ⫽ 20t ⫺ 40 1t ⫹ 50    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

where f(t) is measured in miles per hour and t is measured
in hours, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 6 A.M. At what time
of the morning commute is the traffic moving at the slowest
rate? What is the average speed of a vehicle at that time?

47. MAXIMIZING PROFITS The  management  of  Trappee  and
Sons, producers of the famous TexaPep hot sauce, estimate
that their profit (in dollars) from the daily production and
sale of x cases (each case consisting of 24 bottles) of the
hot sauce is given by

P1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.000002x 3 ⫹ 6x ⫺ 400

What  is  the  largest  possible  profit  Trappee  can  make  in 
1 day?

48. MAXIMIZING PROFITS The quantity demanded each month of
the  Walter  Serkin  recording  of  Beethoven’s  Moonlight

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Sonata,  manufactured  by  Phonola  Record  Industries,  is
related to the price per compact disc. The equation

manufacturing  x units of the model M1 digital camera is
given by the function 

10.4 OPTIMIZATION I

735

p ⫽ ⫺0.00042x ⫹ 6

10 ⱕ x ⱕ 12,0002

where p denotes the unit price in dollars and x is the num-
ber of discs demanded, relates the demand to the price. The
total monthly cost (in dollars) for pressing and packaging x
copies of this classical recording is given by

C1x2 ⫽ 600 ⫹ 2x ⫺ 0.00002x 2

10 ⱕ x ⱕ 20,0002

To maximize its profits, how many copies should Phonola
produce each month?
Hint: The revenue is R(x) ⫽ px, and the profit is 
P(x) ⫽ R(x) ⫺ C(x).

49. MAXIMIZING PROFIT A manufacturer of tennis rackets finds
that  the  total  cost  C(x)  (in  dollars)  of  manufacturing 
x rackets/day  is  given  by  C(x)  ⫽ 400  ⫹ 4x ⫹ 0.0001x 2.
Each racket can be sold at a price of p dollars, where p is
related to x by the demand equation p ⫽ 10 ⫺ 0.0004x. If
all rackets that are manufactured can be sold, find the daily
level of production that will yield a maximum profit for the
manufacturer.

50. MAXIMIZING PROFIT The weekly demand for the Pulsar 40-in.

high-definition television is given by the demand equation

p ⫽ ⫺0.05x ⫹ 600

10 ⱕ x ⱕ 12,0002

where p denotes the wholesale unit price in dollars and x
denotes the quantity demanded. The weekly total cost func-
tion associated with manufacturing these sets is given by

C1x2 ⫽ 0.000002x 3 ⫺ 0.03x 2 ⫹ 400x ⫹ 80,000

where C(x) denotes the total cost incurred in producing x
sets.  Find  the  level  of  production  that  will  yield  a  maxi-
mum profit for the manufacturer.
Hint: Use the quadratic formula.

51. MAXIMIZING PROFIT A  division  of  Chapman  Corporation
manufactures a pager. The weekly fixed cost for the divi-
sion is $20,000, and the variable cost for producing x pagers
per week is

V1x2 ⫽ 0.000001x 3 ⫺ 0.01x 2 ⫹ 50x

dollars. The company realizes a revenue of

R1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.02x 2 ⫹ 150x

10 ⱕ x ⱕ 75002

dollars from the sale of x pagers/week. Find the level of pro-
duction  that  will  yield  a  maximum  profit  for  the  manu-
facturer.
Hint: Use the quadratic formula.

52. MINIMIZING AVERAGE COST Suppose  the  total  cost  function

for manufacturing a certain product is C1x2 ⫽ 0.210.01x 2 ⫹
1202 dollars, where x represents the number of units pro-

duced. Find the level of production that will minimize the
average cost.

53. MINIMIZING PRODUCTION COSTS The  total  monthly  cost  (in
dollars)  incurred  by  Cannon  Precision  Instruments  for

C1x2 ⫽ 0.0025x 2 ⫹ 80x ⫹ 10,000

a. Find the average cost function 
b. Find the level of production that results in the smallest

.
C

average production cost.

c. Find the level of production for which the average cost

is equal to the marginal cost.

d. Compare the result of part (c) with that of part (b).

54. MINIMIZING PRODUCTION COSTS The daily total cost (in dol-
lars) incurred by Trappee and Sons for producing x cases
of TexaPep hot sauce is given by the function

C1x2 ⫽ 0.000002x 3 ⫹ 5x ⫹ 400

Using  this  function,  answer  the  questions  posed  in  Exer-
cise 53.

55. MINIMIZING AVERAGE COST Suppose  that  the  total  cost
incurred  in  manufacturing  x units  of  a  certain  product  is
,  where  C is  a  differentiable  cost  function.
given  by 
Show that the average cost is minimized at the level of pro-
duction  where  the  average  cost  is  equal  to  the  marginal
cost.

C1x2

56. Re-solve Exercise 53 using the result of Exercise 55.
57. MAXIMIZING REVENUE Suppose  the  quantity  demanded  per
week of a certain dress is related to the unit price p by the
demand equation 
, where p is in dollars and
x is the number of dresses made. To maximize the revenue,
how many dresses should be made and sold each week?
Hint: R(x) ⫽ px.

p ⫽ 1800 ⫺ x

58. MAXIMIZING REVENUE The  quantity  demanded  each  month
of the Sicard sports watch is related to the unit price by the
equation

p ⫽

50
2 ⫹ 1
0.01x 

    10 ⱕ x ⱕ 202

where p is measured in dollars and x is measured in units 
of  a  thousand.  To  yield  a  maximum  revenue,  how  many
watches must be sold?

59. OPTIMAL SELLING TIME The  present  value  of  a  piece  of
waterfront property purchased by an investor is given by
the function

21
P t ⫽ 80,000e /2⫺0.09t

1t

1

0 ⱕ t ⱕ 8

2

where P(t) is measured in dollars and t is the time in years
from  the  present.  Determine  the  optimal  time  (based  on
present value) for the investor to sell the property. What is
the property’s optimal present value?

60. MAXIMUM OIL PRODUCTION It  has  been  estimated  that  the

total production of oil from a certain oil well is given by

21
T t ⫽ ⫺1000 t ⫹ 10 e⫺0.1t ⫹ 10,000

1

2

thousand barrels t years after production has begun. Deter-
mine the year when the rate of production of oil at this well
will be maximal.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

736

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

61. OXYGEN CONTENT OF A POND When  organic  waste  is
dumped into a pond, the oxidation process that takes place
reduces the pond’s oxygen content. However, given time,
nature will restore the oxygen content to its natural level.
Suppose the oxygen content t days after organic waste has
been dumped into the pond is given by

f  1t2 ⫽ 100 a t 

2 ⫺ 4t ⫹ 4

t 

2 ⫹ 4

b     10 ⱕ t ⬍ ⬁2

percent of its normal level.
a. When is the level of oxygen content lowest?
b. When is the rate of oxygen regeneration greatest?

62. AIR POLLUTION The amount of nitrogen dioxide, a brown gas
that impairs breathing, present in the atmosphere on a certain
May day in the city of Long Beach is approximated by

A1t2 ⫽

136

1 ⫹ 0.251t ⫺ 4.52 2

⫹ 28    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 112

where  A(t)  is  measured  in  pollutant  standard  index  (PSI)
and  t is  measured  in  hours,  with  t ⫽ 0  corresponding  to 
7 A.M. Determine the time of day when the pollution is at
its highest level.

63. MAXIMIZING REVENUE The average revenue is defined as the

function 

R1x2 ⫽

R1x2

x

    1x ⬎ 02

Prove that if a revenue function R(x) is concave downward
[R ⬙(x)  ⬍ 0], then the level of sales that will result in the
largest average revenue occurs when 

.

R1x2 ⫽ R¿1x2

64. VELOCITY OF BLOOD According to a law discovered by the
19th-century  physician  Jean  Louis  Marie  Poiseuille,  the
velocity (in centimeters per second) of blood r cm from the
central axis of an artery is given by

√1r2 ⫽ k1R 2 ⫺ r 22

where  k is  a  constant  and  R is  the  radius  of  the  artery. 
Show that the velocity of blood is greatest along the central
axis.

65. GDP  OF A DEVELOPING COUNTRY A  developing  country’s
gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  from  2004  to  2012  is
approximated by the function

G1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.2t 3 ⫹ 2.4t 2 ⫹ 60

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 82

where G1t2 is measured in billions of dollars and t ⫽ 0 cor-

responds to 2004. Show that the growth rate of the coun-
try’s GDP was maximal in 2008.

66. CRIME RATES The number of major crimes committed in the
city of Bronxville between 2003 and 2010 is approximated
by the function

N1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.1t 3 ⫹ 1.5t 2 ⫹ 100

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 72

where  N1t2 denotes  the  number  of  crimes  committed  in
year  t (t ⫽ 0  corresponds  to  2003).  Enraged  by  the  dra-
matic increase in the crime rate, the citizens of Bronxville,

with the help of the local police, organized Neighborhood
Crime Watch groups in early 2007 to combat this menace.
Show  that  the  growth  in  the  crime  rate  was  maximal  in
2008, giving credence to the claim that the Neighborhood
Crime Watch program was working.

67. FOREIGN-BORN MEDICAL RESIDENTS The  percentage  of  for-
eign-born medical residents in the United States from 1910
through 2000 is approximated by the function

P1t2 ⫽ 0.04363t 3 ⫺ 0.267t 2 ⫺ 1.59t ⫹ 14.7

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 92
where t is measured in decades, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding
to 1910. Show that the percentage of foreign-born medical
residents was lowest in early 1970.
Hint: Use the quadratic formula.
Source: Journal of the American Medical Association.

68. BRAIN GROWTH AND IQS In  a  study  conducted  at  the
National Institute of Mental Health, researchers followed
the  development  of  the  cortex,  the  thinking  part  of  the
brain, in 307 children. Using repeated magnetic resonance
imaging scans from childhood to the latter teens, they mea-
sured the thickness (in millimeters) of the cortex of chil-
dren of age t years with the highest IQs—121 to 149. These
data lead to the model

S1t2 ⫽ 0.000989t3 ⫺ 0.0486t2 ⫹ 0.7116t ⫹ 1.46
15 ⱕ t ⱕ 192

Show that the cortex of children with superior intelligence
reaches maximum thickness around age 11 years.
Hint: Use the quadratic formula.
Source: Nature.

69. BRAIN GROWTH AND IQS Refer to Exercise 68. The researchers
at the Institute also measured the thickness (also in millime-
ters) of the cortex of children of age t years who were of aver-
age intelligence. These data lead to the model

A1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.00005t3 ⫺ 0.000826t2 ⫹ 0.0153t ⫹ 4.55
15 ⱕ t ⱕ 192

Show that the cortex of children with average intelligence
reaches maximum thickness at age 6 years.
Source: Nature.

70. WORLD POPULATION The total world population is forecast

to be

P1t2 ⫽ 0.00074t 3 ⫺ 0.0704t 2 ⫹ 0.89t ⫹ 6.04
10 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

in year t, where t is measured in decades, with t ⫽ 0 corre-
sponding to 2000 and P(t) is measured in billions.
a. Show  that  the  world  population  is  forecast  to  peak

around 2071.
Hint: Use the quadratic formula.

b. At what number will the population peak?
Source: International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis.

71. VENTURE-CAPITAL INVESTMENT Venture-capital investment
increased  dramatically  in  the  late  1990s  but  came  to  a
screeching  halt  after  the  dot-com  bust.  The  venture-
capital  investment  (in  billions  of  dollars)  from  1995 

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(t ⫽ 0)  through  2003  (t ⫽ 8)  is  approximated  by  the
function

C1t2 ⫽ μ

0.6t 2 ⫹ 2.4t ⫹ 7.6
3t 2 ⫹ 18.8t ⫺ 63.2
⫺3.3167t 3 ⫹ 80.1t 2
       ⫺ 642.583t ⫹ 1730.8025

if 0 ⱕ t ⬍ 3
if 3 ⱕ t ⬍ 5

if 5 ⱕ t ⱕ 8

a. In what year did venture-capital investment peak over
the period under consideration? What was the amount
of that investment?

b. In what year was the venture-capital investment lowest
over this period? What was the amount of that invest-
ment?
Hint: Find  the  absolute  extrema  of  C on  each  of  the  closed
intervals [0, 3], [3, 5], and [5, 8].
Sources: Venture One; Ernst & Young.

72. ENERGY EXPENDED BY A FISH It has been conjectured that a
fish swimming a distance of L ft at a speed of √ ft/sec rela-
tive to the water and against a current flowing at the rate of
u ft/sec (u ⬍ √) expends a total energy given by

E1√2 ⫽ aL√ 3
√ ⫺ u

where E is measured in foot-pounds (ft-lb) and a is a con-
stant. Find the speed √ at which the fish must swim in order
to minimize the total energy expended. (Note: This result
has been verified by biologists.)

73. REACTION TO A DRUG The strength of a human body’s reac-

tion R to a dosage D of a certain drug is given by

R ⫽ D 2a k

2

⫺ D
3 b

where  k is  a  positive  constant.  Show  that  the  maximum
reaction is achieved if the dosage is k units.

74. Refer to Exercise 73. Show that the rate of change in the
reaction  R with  respect  to  the  dosage  D is  maximal  if 

D ⫽ k>2.

75. MAXIMUM POWER OUTPUT Suppose the source of current in
an electric circuit is a battery. Then the power output P (in
watts) obtained if the circuit has a resistance of R ohms is
given by

P ⫽ E 2R
1R ⫹ r2 2

where  E is  the  electromotive  force  in  volts  and  r is  the
internal  resistance  of  the  battery  in  ohms.  If  E and  r are
constant, find the value of R that will result in the greatest
power output. What is the maximum power output? 

76. VELOCITY OF A WAVE In deep water, a wave of length L trav-

els with a velocity

√ ⫽ kB L

C

⫹ C
L

10.4 OPTIMIZATION I

737

77. CHEMICAL REACTION In  an  autocatalytic  chemical  reaction,
the product formed acts as a catalyst for the reaction. If Q
is the amount of the original substrate present initially and
x is the amount of catalyst formed, then the rate of change
of the chemical reaction with respect to the amount of cat-
alyst present in the reaction is

R1x2 ⫽ kx1Q ⫺ x2

10 ⱕ x ⱕ Q2

where k is a constant. Show that the rate of the chemical
reaction  is  greatest  at  the  point  when  exactly  half  of  the
original substrate has been transformed.

78. CONCENTRATION OF A DRUG IN THE BLOODSTREAM The  con-
centration of a drug in the bloodstream t sec after injection
into a muscle is given by

y ⫽ c1e⫺bt ⫺ e⫺at2

1t ⱖ 02

where a, b, and c are positive constants, with a ⬎ b.
a. Find the time at which the concentration is maximal.
b. Find the time at which the concentration of the drug in

the bloodstream is decreasing most rapidly.

79. ABSORPTION OF DRUGS Jane  took  100  mg  of  a  drug  one
morning and another 100 mg of the same drug at the same
time the following morning. The amount of the drug in her
body t days after the first dose was taken is given by

A1t2 ⫽ e 100e⫺1.4 t

10011 ⫹ e1.42e⫺1.4t

if 0 ⱕ t ⬍ 1
if t ⱖ 1

a. How fast was the amount of drug in Jane’s body chang-

b. When was the amount of drug in Jane’s body a maxi-

mum?

c. What was the maximum amount of drug in Jane’s body?
80. ABSORPTION OF DRUGS The  concentration  of  a  drug  in  an

organ at any time t (in seconds) is given by

C 1t2 ⫽ e 0.3t ⫺ 1811 ⫺ e⫺t/602
t⫺202/60

18e⫺t/60 ⫺ 12e⫺1 

if 0 ⱕ t ⱕ 20
if t ⬎ 20

where  C(t)  is  measured  in  grams  per  cubic  centimeter
(g/cm3).
a. How fast is the concentration of the drug in the organ

changing after 10 sec?

b. How fast is the concentration of the drug in the organ

changing after 30 sec?

c. When  will  the  concentration  of  the  drug  in  the  organ

reach a maximum?

d. What is the maximum drug concentration in the organ?

In Exercises 81–84, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
81. If  f is  defined  on  a  closed  interval  [a,  b],  then  f has  an

absolute maximum value.

82. If f is continuous on an open interval (a, b), then f does not

have an absolute minimum value.

ing after 12 hr 

? After 2 days?

22
1t ⫽ 1

where k and C are positive constants. Find the length of the
wave that has a minimum velocity.

83. If f is not continuous on the closed interval [a, b], then f

cannot have an absolute maximum value.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

738

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

84. If f is continuous on [a, b], f ⬙(x) ⬍ 0 on (a, b), and f ⬘(c) ⫽
0,  where  a ⬍ c ⬍ b,  then  f(c)  is  the  absolute  maximum
value of f on [a, b].

85. Let f be a constant function—that is, let f(x) ⫽ c, where c
is some real number. Show that every number a gives rise
to an absolute maximum and, at the same time, an absolute
minimum of f.

86. Show  that  a  polynomial  function  defined  on  the  interval
(⫺⬁,  ⬁)  cannot  have  both  an  absolute  maximum  and  an
absolute minimum unless it is a constant function.

87. One  condition  that  must  be  satisfied  before  Theorem  3 
(page 727) is applicable is that the function f must be con-
tinuous on the closed interval [a, b]. Define a function f on
the closed interval [⫺1, 1] by

f  1x2 ⫽ •

1
  if ⫺1 ⱕ x ⱕ 1 and x ⫽ 0
x
0  if x ⫽ 0

10.4 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. a. The function f is continuous in its domain and differen-

tiable on the interval (0, 9). The derivative of f is

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ 1 ⫺ x ⫺1/2 ⫽ x 

1/2 ⫺ 1
x 1/2

and it is equal to zero when x ⫽ 1. Evaluating f(x) at 
the endpoints x ⫽ 0 and x ⫽ 9 and at the critical num-
ber 1 of f, we have

f102 ⫽ 0

f112 ⫽ ⫺1

f192 ⫽ 3

From these results, we see that ⫺1 is the absolute mini-
mum  value  of  f and  3  is  the  absolute  maximum  value 
of f.

b. In this case, the domain of f is the interval [0, ⬁), which
is  not  closed.  Therefore,  we  resort  to  the  graphical
method.  Using  the  techniques  of  graphing,  we  sketch
the graph of f in the accompanying figure.

y

3

Absolute
minimum

(1, –1)

–2

x

8

a. Show that f is not continuous at x ⫽ 0.
b. Show that f does not attain an absolute maximum or an

absolute minimum on the interval [⫺1, 1].

c. Confirm your results by sketching the function f.

88. One  condition  that  must  be  satisfied  before  Theorem  3
(page 727) is applicable is that the interval on which f is
defined must be a closed interval [a, b]. Define a function
f on the open interval (⫺1, 1) by f(x) ⫽ x. Show that f does
not attain an absolute maximum or an absolute minimum
on the interval (⫺1, 1).
Hint: What happens to f(x) if x is close to but not equal to 
x ⫽ ⫺1? If x is close to but not equal to x ⫽ 1?

2. The function f is continuous on the interval [⫺2, 1]. It is
also differentiable on the open interval (⫺2, 1). The deriv-
ative of f is

f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 12x 3 ⫹ 12x 2 ⫽ 12x 21x ⫹ 12

and it is continuous on (⫺2, 1). Setting f ⬘(x) ⫽ 0 gives ⫺1
and 0 as critical numbers of f. Evaluating f(x) at these crit-
ical numbers of f as well as at the endpoints of the interval 
[⫺2, 1], we obtain
f1⫺22 ⫽ 17

f1⫺12 ⫽ 0

f112 ⫽ 8

f102 ⫽ 1

From these results, we see that 0 is the absolute minimum
value of f and 17 is the absolute maximum value of f.

3. The problem is solved by finding the absolute maximum of

the function f on [0, 250]. Differentiating f(t), we obtain

f  ¿1t2 ⫽ 1t 

 ⫽

2 ⫹ 40,0002112002 ⫺ 1200t12t2
⫺12001t 

1t 
2 ⫹ 40,0002 2
2 ⫺ 40,0002
2 ⫹ 40,0002 2

1t 

Upon setting f ⬘(t) ⫽ 0 and solving the resulting equation,
we obtain t ⫽ ⫺200 or 200. Since ⫺200 lies outside the
interval [0, 250], we are interested only in the critical num-
ber 200 of f. Evaluating f(t) at t ⫽ 0, t ⫽ 200, and t ⫽ 250,
we find

The graph of f shows that ⫺1 is the absolute minimum
value  of  f but  f has  no  absolute  maximum,  since  f(x)
increases without bound as x increases without bound.

f102 ⫽ 80

f12002 ⫽ 83

f12502 ⬇ 82.93

We conclude that the operating rate was the highest on the
200th day of 2010—that is, a little past the middle of July
2010.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Finding the Absolute Extrema of a Function
Some  graphing  utilities  have  a  function  for  finding  the  absolute  maximum  and  the
absolute minimum values of a continuous function on a closed interval. If your graphing
utility has this capability, use it to work through the example and exercises of this section.

10.4 OPTIMIZATION I

739

5

_1

_3

FIGURE T1
The graph of f in the viewing window
[⫺3, 3] ⫻ [⫺1, 5]

fMax((2X+4)/(X^2
+1)^1.5,X,-3,3)

 .1583117413

(2*.1583117413+4)/(.15
83117413^2+1)^1.5
  4.15928406

FIGURE T2
The TI-83/84 screen for Example 1

EXAMPLE 1 Let 

f  1x2 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 4
1x 2 ⫹ 12 3/2

.

[⫺1, 5].

a. Use a graphing utility to plot the graph of f in the viewing window [⫺3, 3] ⫻

b. Find the absolute maximum and absolute minimum values of f on the interval

[⫺3, 3]. Express your answers accurate to four decimal places.

3

Solution

a. The graph of f is shown in Figure T1.
b. Using the function on a graphing utility for finding the absolute minimum value

of a continuous function on a closed interval, we find the absolute minimum
value of f to be ⫺0.0632. Similarly, using the function for finding the absolute
maximum value, we find the absolute maximum value to be 4.1593.

Note Some  graphing  utilities  will  enable  you  to  find  the  absolute  minimum  and
absolute  maximum  values  of  a  continuous  function  on  a  closed  interval  without 
having to graph the function. For example, using fMax on the TI-83/84 will yield the 
x-coordinate of the absolute maximum of f. The absolute maximum value can then be
found by evaluating f at that value of x. Figure T2 shows the work involved in finding
the absolute maximum of the function of Example 1.

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

In  Exercises  1–8,  find  the  absolute  maximum  and  the  absolute
minimum values of f in the given interval using the method of
Example 1. Express your answers accurate to four decimal places.

3.

4.

x 

2 ⫹ 2x ⫺ 8

1. f1x2 ⫽ 3x 4 ⫺ 4.2x 3 ⫹ 6.1x ⫺ 2; 3⫺2, 34
2. f1x2 ⫽ 2.1x 4 ⫺ 3.2x 3 ⫹ 4.1x 2 ⫹ 3x ⫺ 4; 3⫺1, 24
f  1x2 ⫽ 2x 3 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫹ 1
; 3 ⫺3, 14
f  1x2 ⫽ 1x1x 
3 ⫺ 42 2; 30.5, 14
5. f1x2 ⫽ e⫺x ln1x 2 ⫹ 12; 3⫺2, 24
6. f1x2 ⫽ x 2e⫺2x; 3⫺1, 14
f  1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 1
; 31, 34
8. f  1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ x 2 ⫹ 1

; 31, 34

x ⫺ 2

2

x 

7.

9. BANK FAILURE The  Haven  Trust  Bank  of  Duluth,  Ga.,
founded  in  2000,  quickly  increased  its  risky  commercial
real  estate  portfolio,  despite  many  red  flags  from  regula-
tors.  The  bank  failed  in  December  2008.  The  amount  of
construction loans of the bank as a percentage of its capi-
tal is approximated by the function

f1t2 ⫽ ⫺5.92t 4 ⫹ 58.89t 3 ⫺ 165.75t2 ⫹ 56.21t ⫹ 629
10 ⱕ t ⱕ 52

where t ⫽ 0 corresponds to the beginning of 2003.
a. Plot the graph of f using the viewing window [0, 5] ⫻

[0, 650].

b. Show that at no time during the period from the begin-
ning  of  2003  through  the  beginning  of  2008  did  the
amount of construction loans of the bank as a percent-
age of its capital fall below 415%. Note: The maximum
percentage  recommended  by  regulators  in  2008  was
100%.

Source: FDIC Office of Inspector General.

(continued)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

740

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

10. CONSTRUCTION LOANS Refer to Exercise 9. The amount of
construction loans of peer banks as a percentage of capital
from the beginning of 2003 (t ⫽ 0) through the beginning
of 2008 is approximated by the function

t1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.656t 4 ⫹ 5.693t 3 ⫺ 16.798t 2 ⫹ 36.083t 2 ⫹ 51.9
10 ⱕ t ⱕ 52

a. When  did  the  amount  of  construction  loans  of  peer
banks as a percentage of capital first exceed the maxi-
mum of 100% as recommended by regulators in 2006?
b. What was the highest amount of construction loans as a
share of capital of peer banks over the period from the
beginning of 2003 through the beginning of 2008?

Source: FDIC Office of Inspector General.

11. SICKOUTS In  a  sickout  by  pilots  of  American  Airlines  in
February 1999, the number of canceled flights from Febru-
ary 6 (t ⫽ 0) through February 14 (t ⫽ 8) is approximated
by the function

N1t2 ⫽ 1.2576t 4 ⫺ 26.357t 3 ⫹ 127.98t 2 ⫹ 82.3t ⫹ 43
10 ⱕ t ⱕ 82

where  t is measured in days. The sickout ended after the
union was threatened with millions of dollars in fines.

a. Show that the number of canceled flights was increas-

ing at the fastest rate on February 8.

b. Estimate the maximum number of canceled flights in a

day during the sickout.

Source: Associated Press.

12. MODELING WITH DATA The following data give the average
account  balance  (in  thousands  of  dollars)  of  a  401(k)
investor during a 6-year period.

Year
Account Balance

0

1

2

3

4

37.5

40.8

47.3

55.5

49.4

5
43

6
40

a. Use QuartReg to find a fourth-degree polynomial regres-
sion model for the data. Let t ⫽ 0 correspond to the begin-
ning of the first year.

b. Plot the graph of the function found in part (a), using the

viewing window [0, 6] ⫻ [0, 60].

c. When  was  the  average  account  balance  lowest  in  the 

period under consideration? When was it highest?

d. What were the lowest average account balance and the
highest average account balance during the period under
consideration?

Source: Investment Company Institute.

10.5 Optimization II

Section  10.4  outlined  how  to  find  the  solution  to  certain  optimization  problems  in
which the objective function is given. In this section, we consider problems in which
we are required to find first the appropriate function to be optimized. The following
guidelines will be useful for solving these problems.

Guidelines for Solving Optimization Problems
1. Assign  a  letter  to  each  variable  mentioned  in  the  problem.  If  appropriate,

draw and label a figure.

2. Find an expression for the quantity to be optimized.
3. Use the conditions given in the problem to write the quantity to be optimized
as  a  function  f of  one variable.  Note  any  restrictions  to  be  placed  on  the
domain of f from physical considerations of the problem.

4. Optimize the function f over its domain using the methods of Section 10.4.

Note In carrying out Step 4, remember that if the function f to be optimized is con-
tinuous on a closed interval, then the absolute maximum and absolute minimum of f
are, respectively, the largest and smallest values of f(x) on the set composed of the
critical numbers of f and the endpoints of the interval. If the domain of f is not a
closed interval, then we resort to the graphical method.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10.5 OPTIMIZATION II

741

Maximization Problems

APPLIED EXAMPLE 1 Fencing a Garden A man wishes to have a
rectangular-shaped garden in his backyard. He has 50 feet of fencing with 

which to enclose his garden. Find the dimensions for the largest garden he can
have if he uses all of the fencing.

Solution

Step 1 Let x and y denote the dimensions (in feet) of two adjacent sides of the

garden (Figure 68), and let A denote its area.

(x2)

See page 143.

x

Step 2 The area of the garden

A ⫽ xy

y

FIGURE 68
What is the maximum rectangular area
that can be enclosed with 50 feet of 
fencing?

is the quantity to be maximized.

Step 3 The perimeter of the rectangle, (2x ⫹ 2y) feet, must equal 50 feet. 

Therefore, we have the equation

2x ⫹ 2y ⫽ 50

Next, solving this equation for y in terms of x yields

y ⫽ 25 ⫺ x

which, when substituted into Equation (1), gives

A ⫽ x125 ⫺ x2
⫽ ⫺x 2 ⫹ 25x

(1)

(2)

(Remember, the function to be optimized must involve just one variable.)
Since the sides of the rectangle must be nonnegative, we must have 
x ⱖ 0 and y ⫽ 25 ⫺ x ⱖ 0; that is, we must have 0 ⱕ x ⱕ 25. Thus, 
the problem is reduced to that of finding the absolute maximum of 
A ⫽ f(x) ⫽ ⫺x 2 ⫹ 25x on the closed interval [0, 25].

Step 4 Observe that f is continuous on [0, 25], so the absolute maximum value of

f must occur at the endpoint(s) of the interval or at the critical number(s)
of f. The derivative of the function A is given by

Setting A⬘ ⫽0 gives

A⬘ ⫽f ⬘1x2 ⫽ ⫺2x ⫹ 25

⫺2x ⫹ 25 ⫽ 0

or 12.5, as the critical number of A. Next, we evaluate the function 
A ⫽ f(x) at x ⫽ 12.5 and at the endpoints x ⫽ 0 and x ⫽ 25 of the 
interval [0, 25], obtaining

f102 ⫽ 0

f112.52 ⫽ 156.25

f1252 ⫽ 0

We see that the absolute maximum value of the function f is 156.25. From

Equation (2), we see that y ⫽ 12.5 when x ⫽ 12.5. Thus, the garden of maximum
area (156.25 square feet) is a square with sides of length 12.5 feet.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 2 Packaging By cutting away identical squares from
each corner of a rectangular piece of cardboard and folding up the resulting 
flaps, the cardboard may be turned into an open box. If the cardboard is 16 inches
long and 10 inches wide, find the dimensions of the box that will yield the maxi-
mum volume.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

742

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

Solution

Step 1 Let x denote the length (in inches) of one side of each of the identical
squares to be cut out of the cardboard (Figure 69), and let V denote the
volume of the resulting box.

x

10 10 – 2x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

16 – 2x

16

FIGURE 69
The dimensions of the open box are 
(16 ⫺ 2x) inches by (10 ⫺ 2x) inches by x
inches.

x

1 6 – 2 x

1

0 – 2

x

Step 2 The dimensions of the box are (16 ⫺ 2x) inches by (10 ⫺ 2x) inches by x

inches. Therefore, its volume (in cubic inches),

V ⫽ 116 ⫺ 2x2110 ⫺ 2x2x
⫽ 41x 3 ⫺ 13x 2 ⫹ 40x2

is the quantity to be maximized.

Expand the expression.

Step 3 Since each side of the box must be nonnegative, x must satisfy the

inequalities x ⱖ 0, 16 ⫺ 2x ⱖ 0, and 10 ⫺ 2x ⱖ 0. This set of inequalities
is equivalent to 0 ⱕ x ⱕ 5. Thus, the problem at hand is equivalent to that
of finding the absolute maximum of

V ⫽ f1x2 ⫽ 41x 3 ⫺ 13x 2 ⫹ 40x2

on the closed interval [0, 5].

Step 4 Observe that f is continuous on [0, 5], so the absolute maximum value of f

must be attained at the endpoint(s) or at the critical number(s) of f.

Differentiating f(x), we obtain

f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 413x 2 ⫺ 26x ⫹ 402
⫽ 413x ⫺ 2021x ⫺ 22

or x ⫽ 2. Since 

Upon setting f ⬘(x) ⫽ 0 and solving the resulting equation for x, we obtain 
x ⫽ 20
3
considered, and we are interested only in the critical number 2 of f. Next,
evaluating f(x) at x ⫽ 0, x ⫽ 5 (the endpoints of the interval [0, 5]), and 
x ⫽ 2, we obtain

lies outside the interval [0, 5], it is no longer

20
3

f102 ⫽ 0

f122 ⫽ 144

f152 ⫽ 0

Thus, the volume of the box is maximized by taking x ⫽ 2. The dimensions

of the box are 12 in. ⫻ 6 in. ⫻ 2 in., and the volume is 144 cubic inches.

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
Refer to Example 2.
1. Use a graphing utility to plot the graph of

f1x2 ⫽ 41x 3 ⫺ 13x 2 ⫹ 40x2

using the viewing window [0, 5] ⫻ [0, 150]. Explain what happens to f(x) as
x increases from x ⫽ 0 to x ⫽ 5 and give a physical interpretation.

2. Using  ZOOM and  TRACE,  find  the  absolute  maximum  of  f on  the  interval 

[0, 5], and thus verify the solution for Example 2 obtained analytically.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

10.5 OPTIMIZATION II

743

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 3 Optimal Subway Fare A city’s Metropolitan Transit
Authority (MTA) operates a subway line for commuters from a certain 

suburb to the downtown metropolitan area. Currently, an average of 6000 passen-
gers a day take the trains, paying a fare of $3.00 per ride. The board of the MTA,
contemplating raising the fare to $3.50 per ride to generate a larger revenue,
engages the services of a consulting firm. The firm’s study reveals that for each
$0.50 increase in fare, the ridership will be reduced by an average of 1000 pas-
sengers a day. Thus, the consulting firm recommends that MTA stick to the cur-
rent fare of $3.00 per ride, which already yields a maximum revenue. Show that
the consultants are correct.

Solution

Step 1 Let x denote the number of passengers per day, p denote the fare per ride,

and R be MTA’s revenue.

(x2)

See page 143.

Step 2 To find a relationship between x and p, observe that the given data imply
that when x ⫽ 6000, p ⫽ 3, and when x ⫽ 5000, p ⫽ 3.50. Therefore, the
points (6000, 3) and (5000, 3.50) lie on a straight line. (Why?) To find the
linear relationship between p and x, use the point-slope form of the equa-
tion of a straight line. Now, the slope of the line is

m ⫽ 3.50 ⫺ 3
5000 ⫺ 6000

⫽ ⫺0.0005

Therefore, the required equation is

p ⫺ 3 ⫽ ⫺0.00051x ⫺ 60002

⫽ ⫺0.0005x ⫹ 3
p ⫽ ⫺0.0005x ⫹ 6

Therefore, the revenue

R ⫽ f1x2 ⫽ xp ⫽ ⫺0.0005x 2 ⫹ 6x

is the quantity to be maximized.

Number of riders  unit fare

#

Step 3 Since both p and x must be nonnegative, we see that 0 ⱕ x ⱕ 12,000, and
the problem is that of finding the absolute maximum of the function f on
the closed interval [0, 12,000].

Step 4 Observe that f is continuous on [0, 12,000]. To find the critical number of

R, we compute

and set it equal to zero, giving x ⫽ 6000. Evaluating the function f at 
x ⫽ 6000, as well as at the endpoints x ⫽ 0 and x ⫽ 12,000, yields

f ⬘1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.001x ⫹ 6

f102 ⫽ 0
f160002 ⫽ 18,000
f112,0002 ⫽ 0

y ($)

20,000

16,000

12,000

8,000

4,000

Absolute
maximum

y = R(x)

6,000

12,000

x

FIGURE 70
f has an absolute maximum of 18,000
when x ⫽ 6000.

We conclude that a maximum revenue of $18,000 per day is realized when
the ridership is 6000 per day. The optimum price of the fare per ride is therefore
$3.00, as recommended by the consultants. The graph of the revenue function R
is shown in Figure 70.

Minimization Problems

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 4 Packaging Betty Moore Company requires that its
corned beef hash containers have a capacity of 54 cubic inches, have the 

shape of a right circular cylinder, and be made of aluminum. Determine the
radius and height of the container that requires the least amount of metal.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

744

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

r

Solution

h

FIGURE 71
We want to minimize the amount of
material used to construct the container.

Step 1 Let the radius and height of the container be r and h inches, respectively,

and let S denote the surface area of the container (Figure 71).

Step 2 The amount of aluminum used to construct the container is given by the

total surface area of the cylinder. Now, the area of the base and the top of
the cylinder are each pr 2 square inches, and the area of the side is 2prh
square inches. Therefore,

S ⫽ 2pr 2 ⫹ 2prh

(3)

is the quantity to be minimized.

Step 3 The requirement that the volume of a container be 54 cubic inches implies

y

200

150

100

50

s
e
h
c
n
i

e
r
a
u
q
S

1

2

3

4

5

Inches

r

FIGURE 72
The total surface area of the right
cylindrical container is graphed as a 
function of r.

that

pr 2h ⫽ 54
Solving Equation (4) for h, we obtain
h ⫽ 54
pr 

2

which, when substituted into Equation (3), yields

S ⫽ 2pr 

 ⫽ 2pr 

2 ⫹ 2pr a 54
2b
2 ⫹ 108
r 

pr 

(4)

(5)

Clearly, the radius r of the container must satisfy the inequality r ⬎ 0.
The problem now is reduced to finding the absolute minimum of the func-
tion S ⫽ f(r) on the interval (0, ⬁).

Step 4 Using the curve-sketching techniques of Section 10.3, we obtain the graph

of f in Figure 72.

To find the critical number of f, we compute

S ¿ ⫽ 4pr  ⫺ 108
2
r 

and solve the equation S⬘ ⫽0 for r:
 4pr ⫺ 108
r 

2

⫽ 0

 4pr 

 r 

3 ⫺ 108 ⫽ 0
3 ⫽ 27
p
 r ⫽ 323 p

⬇ 2

(6)

Next, let’s show that this value of r gives rise to the absolute mini-

mum of f. To show this, we first compute
S– ⫽ 4p ⫹ 216
3
r 
3>23 p

Since S ⬙ ⬎0 for r ⫽
value of r in Equation (6) gives rise to a relative minimum of f. Finally,
this relative minimum of f is also the absolute minimum of f, since the
graph of f is always concave upward (S ⬙ ⬎0 for all r ⬎ 0). To find the

, the Second Derivative Test implies that the

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

10.5 OPTIMIZATION II

745

height of the given container, we substitute the value of r given in 
Equation (6) into Equation (5). Thus,

h ⫽ 54
pr 

2

⫽

54

p 1/3b 2
pa 3
 ⫽ 54p 
1p29

2/3

 ⫽ 6
p1/3

⫽ 623 p

 ⫽ 2r

We conclude that the required container has a radius of approximately 2 inches

and a height of approximately 4 inches, or twice the size of the radius.

An Inventory Problem
One problem faced by many companies is that of controlling the inventory of goods
carried.  Ideally,  the  manager  must  ensure  that  the  company  has  sufficient  stock  to
meet customer demand at all times. At the same time, she must make sure that this is
accomplished  without  overstocking  (incurring  unnecessary  storage  costs)  and  also
without having to place orders too frequently (incurring reordering costs).

APPLIED EXAMPLE 5 Inventory Control and Planning Dixie Import-Export
is the sole agent for the Excalibur 250-cc motorcycle. Management esti-

mates that the demand for these motorcycles is 10,000 per year and that they will
sell at a uniform rate throughout the year. The cost incurred in ordering each
shipment of motorcycles is $10,000, and the cost per year of storing each motor-
cycle is $200.

Dixie’s management faces the following problem: Ordering too many motor-

cycles at one time ties up valuable storage space and increases the storage cost.
On the other hand, placing orders too frequently increases the ordering costs.
How large should each order be, and how often should orders be placed, to mini-
mize ordering and storage costs?

Solution Let x denote the number of motorcycles in each order (the lot size).
Then, assuming that each shipment arrives just as the previous shipment has been

sold, the average number of motorcycles in storage during the year is x>2. You
for the year is given by 200(x>2), or 100x dollars.

can see that this is the case by examining Figure 73. Thus, Dixie’s storage cost

Next, since the company requires 10,000 motorcycles for the year and since

each order is for x motorcycles, the number of orders required is

10,000

x

    1x ⫽ 02

This gives an ordering cost of

10,000a 10,000

x

b ⫽

100,000,000

x

dollars for the year. Thus, the total yearly cost incurred by Dixie, which includes the
ordering and storage costs attributed to the sale of these motorcycles, is given by

C1x2 ⫽ 100x ⫹

100,000,000

x

Inventory level

x
x
2

Average
inventory

Time

FIGURE 73
As each lot is depleted, the new lot
arrives. The average inventory level is x>2

if x is the lot size.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

746

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

The problem is reduced to finding the absolute minimum of the function C

on the interval (0, 10,000]. To accomplish this, we compute

C¿1x2 ⫽ 100 ⫺

100,000,000

2

x 

C

Setting C⬘(x) ⫽ 0 and solving the resulting equation, we obtain x ⫽ ⫾1000.
Since the number ⫺1000 is outside the domain of the function C, it is rejected,
leaving 1000 as the only critical number of C. Next, we find

C–1x2 ⫽

200,000,000

3

x 

200,000

C(x) = 100x + 

100,000,000

x

x

1,000  2,000  3,000

FIGURE 74
C has an absolute minimum at 
(1000, 200,000).

Since C⬙(1000) ⬎ 0, the Second Derivative Test implies that the critical number
1000 is a relative minimum of the function C (Figure 74). Also, since C⬙(x) ⬎ 0
for all x in (0, 10,000), the graph of C is concave upward everywhere, so x ⫽ 1000
also gives the absolute minimum of C. Thus, to minimize the ordering and storage
costs, Dixie should place 10,000>1000, or 10, orders a year, each for a shipment of

1000 motorcycles.

10.5 Self-Check Exercises

1. A man wishes to have an enclosed vegetable garden in his
backyard. If the garden is to be a rectangular area of 300
ft2,  find  the  dimensions  of  the  garden  that  will  minimize
the amount of fencing needed.

2. The  demand  for  Super  Titan  tires  is  1,000,000/year.  The
setup cost for each production run is $4000, and the man-
ufacturing  cost  is  $20/tire.  The  cost  of  storing  each  tire

10.5 Concept Questions

1. If the domain of a function f is not a closed interval, how

would you find the absolute extrema of f, if they exist?

10.5 Exercises

1. Find  the  dimensions  of  a  rectangle  with  a  perimeter  of 

100 ft that has the largest possible area.

2. Find the dimensions of a rectangle of area 144 sq ft that has

the smallest possible perimeter.

3. ENCLOSING THE LARGEST AREA The owner of the Rancho Los
Feliz has 3000 yd of fencing with which to enclose a rec-
tangular piece of grazing land along the straight portion of
a river. If fencing is not required along the river, what are
the  dimensions  of  the  largest  area  that  he  can  enclose?
What is this area?

4. ENCLOSING THE LARGEST AREA Refer  to  Exercise  3.  As  an
alternative plan, the owner of the Rancho Los Feliz might
use the 3000 yd of fencing to enclose the rectangular piece
of grazing land along the straight portion of the river and

over  the  year  is  $2.  Assuming  uniformity  of  demand
throughout  the  year  and  instantaneous  production,  deter-
mine how many tires should be manufactured per produc-
tion run to keep the total cost to a minimum.

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 10.5 can be found on 
page 750.

2. Refer to Example 4 (page 743). In the solution given in the
example, we solved for h in terms of r, resulting in a function
of r, which we then optimized with respect to r. Write S in
terms of h and re-solve the problem. Which choice is better?

then subdivide it by means of a fence running parallel to the
sides. Again, no fencing is required along the river. What
are the dimensions of the largest area that can be enclosed?
What is this area? (See the accompanying figure.)

x

y

x

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

10.5 OPTIMIZATION II

747

11. PARCEL POST REGULATIONS Postal regulations specify that a
parcel sent by priority mail may have a combined length
and girth of no more than 108 in. Find the dimensions of a
rectangular package that has a square cross section and the
largest volume that may be sent via priority mail. What is
the volume of such a package?
Hint: The length plus the girth is 4x ⫹ h (see the accompanying
figure).

x

x

h

12. BOOK DESIGN A book designer has decided that the pages
of a book should have 1-in. margins at the top and bottom
and  -in. margins on the sides. She further stipulated that
each page should have an area of 50 in.2 (see the accompa-
nying  figure).  Determine  the  page  dimensions  that  will
result in the maximum printed area on the page.

1
2

x

1
2 in.

y

1 in.

13. PARCEL POST REGULATIONS Postal regulations specify that a
parcel sent by priority mail may have a combined length
and girth of no more than 108 in. Find the dimensions of
the cylindrical package of greatest volume that may be sent
via priority mail. What is the volume of such a package?
Compare with Exercise 11.
Hint: The length plus the girth is 2pr ⫹ l.

5. MINIMIZING CONSTRUCTION COSTS The  management  of  the
UNICO department store has decided to enclose an 800-ft2
area outside the building for displaying potted plants and
flowers. One side will be formed by the external wall of the
store,  two  sides  will  be  constructed  of  pine  boards,  and 
the  fourth  side  will  be  made  of  galvanized  steel  fencing
(see the figure). If the pine board fencing costs $6/running
foot and the steel fencing costs $3/running foot, determine
the dimensions of the enclosure that can be erected at min-
imum cost.

Wood

Wood

Steel

6. PACKAGING By  cutting  away  identical  squares  from  each
corner of a rectangular piece of cardboard and folding up
the resulting flaps, an open box may be made. If the card-
board is 15 in. long and 8 in. wide, find the dimensions of
the box that will yield the maximum volume.

7. METAL FABRICATION If an open box is made from a tin sheet
8 in. square by cutting out identical squares from each cor-
ner  and  bending  up  the  resulting  flaps,  determine  the
dimensions of the largest box that can be made.

8. MINIMIZING PACKAGING COSTS If an open box has a square
base and a volume of 108 in.3 and is constructed from a tin
sheet, find the dimensions of the box, assuming that a min-
imum amount of material is used in its construction.

9. MINIMIZING PACKAGING COSTS What are the dimensions of a
closed rectangular box that has a square cross section and
a  capacity  of  128  in.3 and  is  constructed  using  the  least
amount of material?

y

x

x

r

l

10. MINIMIZING PACKAGING COSTS A rectangular box is to have a
square base and a volume of 20 ft3. If the material for the base
costs  30¢/square  foot,  the  material  for  the  sides  costs
10¢/square foot, and the material for the top costs 20¢/square
foot, determine the dimensions of the box that can be con-
structed at minimum cost. (Refer to the figure for Exercise 9.)

14. MINIMIZING COSTS For its beef stew, Betty Moore Company
uses aluminum containers that have the form of right cir-
cular cylinders. Find the radius and height of a container if
it has a capacity of 36 in.3 and is constructed using the least
amount of metal.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

748

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

15. PRODUCT DESIGN The  cabinet 

that  will  enclose 

the
Acrosonic model D loudspeaker system will be rectangular
and will have an internal volume of 2.4 ft3. For aesthetic
reasons, the design team has decided that the height of the
cabinet is to be 1.5 times its width. If the top, bottom, and
sides  of  the  cabinet  are  constructed  of  veneer  costing
40¢/square foot and the front (ignore the cutouts in the baf-
fle)  and  rear  are  constructed  of  particle  board  costing
20¢/square foot, what are the dimensions of the enclosure
that can be constructed at a minimum cost?

16. DESIGNING A NORMAN WINDOW A  Norman  window  has
the shape of a rectangle surmounted by a semicircle (see
the  accompanying  figure).  If  a  Norman  window  is  to
have a perimeter of 28 ft, what should its dimensions be
in order to allow the maximum amount of light through
the window?

x

y

17. OPTIMAL CHARTER-FLIGHT FARE If  exactly  200  people  sign
up  for  a  charter  flight,  Leisure  World  Travel  Agency
charges  $300/person.  However,  if  more  than  200  people
sign  up  for  the  flight  (assume  that  this  is  the  case),  then
each  fare  is  reduced  by  $1  for  each  additional  person.
Determine how many passengers will result in a maximum
revenue for the travel agency. What is the maximum rev-
enue? What would be the fare per passenger in this case?
Hint: Let x denote the number of passengers above 200. Show that
the revenue function R is given by R(x) ⫽ (200 ⫹ x)(300 ⫺ x).

18. MAXIMIZING YIELD An apple orchard has an average yield of
36 bushels of apples/tree if tree density is 22 trees/acre. For
each unit increase in tree density, the yield decreases by 2
bushels/tree. How many trees should be planted in order to
maximize the yield?

19. CHARTER REVENUE The owner of a luxury motor yacht that
sails among the 4000 Greek islands charges $600/person/
day if exactly 20 people sign up for the cruise. However, if
more than 20 people sign up (up to the maximum capacity
of 90) for the cruise, then each fare is reduced by $4 for
each additional passenger. Assuming that at least 20 peo-
ple sign up for the cruise, determine the number of passen-
gers that will result in the maximum revenue for the owner
of the yacht. What is the maximum revenue? What would
be the fare per passenger in this case?

20. PROFIT OF A VINEYARD Phillip, the proprietor of a vineyard,
estimates that the first 10,000 bottles of wine produced this

season  will  fetch  a  profit  of  $5/bottle.  But  if  more  than
10,000 bottles were produced, then the profit per bottle for
the  entire  lot  would  drop  by  $0.0002  for  each  additional
bottle sold. Assuming that at least 10,000 bottles of wine
are produced and sold, what is the maximum profit?

21. OPTIMAL SPEED OF A TRUCK A truck gets 600>x mpg when

driven  at  a  constant  speed  of  x mph  (between  50  and 
70 mph). If the price of fuel is $3/gallon and the driver is
paid $18/hour, at what speed between 50 and 70 mph is it
most economical to drive?

22. MINIMIZING COSTS Suppose the cost incurred in operating a
cruise ship for one hour is a ⫹ b√3 dollars, where a and b
are positive constants and √ is the ship’s speed in miles per
hour. At what speed should the ship be operated between
two ports to minimize the cost?

23. STRENGTH OF A BEAM A  wooden  beam  has  a  rectangular
cross  section  of  height  h in.  and  width  w in.  (see  the
accompanying  figure).  The  strength  S of  the  beam  is
directly  proportional  to  its  width  and  the  square  of  its
height. What are the dimensions of the cross section of
the strongest beam that can be cut from a round log of
diameter 24 in.?
Hint: S ⫽ kh2w, where k is a constant of proportionality.

24 in.

h

w

24. DESIGNING A GRAIN SILO A grain silo has the shape of a right
circular  cylinder  surmounted  by  a  hemisphere  (see  the
accompanying figure). If the silo is to have a capacity of
504p ft3, find the radius and height of the silo that requires
the least amount of material to construct.
Hint: The volume of the silo is pr 2h ⫹ pr 3, and the surface area
(including the floor) is p(3r 2 ⫹ 2rh).

2
3

r

h

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

10.5 OPTIMIZATION II

749

25. MINIMIZING COST OF LAYING CABLE In the following diagram,
S represents the position of a power relay station located on
a straight coast, and E shows the location of a marine biol-
ogy experimental station on an island. A cable is to be laid
connecting the relay station with the experimental station.
If  the  cost  of  running  the  cable  on  land  is  $1.50/running
foot  and  the  cost  of  running  the  cable  under  water  is
$2.50/running foot, locate the point P that will result in a
minimum cost (solve for x).

Island

E

3 mi

Land

P

N

x

12 – 
x

12 mi

Island

E

3000'

Land

P

S

x

10,000 – 
x

10,000'

28. MINIMIZING TRAVEL TIME A woman is on a lake in a rowboat
located 1 mi from the closest point P of a straight shoreline
(see the accompanying figure). She wishes to get to point Q,
10  mi  along  the  shore  from  P,  by  rowing  to  a  point  R
between P and Q and then walking the rest of the distance.
If she can row at a speed of 3 mph and walk at a speed of 
4 mph, how should she pick the point R in order to get to Q
as quickly as possible? How much time does she require?

26. STORING RADIOACTIVE WASTE A  cylindrical  container  for
storing radioactive waste is to be constructed from lead and
have a thickness of 6 in. (see the accompanying figure). If
the volume of the outside cylinder is to be 16p ft3, find the
radius and the height of the inside cylinder that will result
in a container of maximum storage capacity.

10 mi

P

R

Q

1 mi

6 in.

r

h

6 in.

29. RACETRACK DESIGN The  accompanying  figure  depicts  a
racetrack  with  ends  that  are  semicircular  in  shape.  The
length of the track is 1760 ft Ó miÔ. Find l and r such that
the area enclosed by the rectangular region of the racetrack
is as large as possible. What is the area enclosed by the
track in this case?

1
3

Hint: Show that the storage capacity (inside volume) is given by

r

V 1r2 ⫽ pr 

2s

16

1r ⫹ 1
22 2

⫺ 1t     10 ⱕ r ⱕ 7
22

27. FLIGHTS OF BIRDS During  daylight  hours,  some  birds  fly
more  slowly  over  water  than  over  land  because  some  of
their energy is expended in overcoming the downdrafts of
air over open bodies of water. Suppose a bird that flies at a
constant speed of 4 mph over water and 6 mph over land
starts its journey at the point E on an island and ends at its
nest  N on  the  shore  of  the  mainland,  as  shown  in  the
accompanying figure. Find the location of the point P that
allows  the  bird  to  complete  its  journey  in  the  minimum
time (solve for x).

l

30. INVENTORY CONTROL AND PLANNING The demand for motor-
cycle tires imported by Dixie Import-Export is 40,000/year
and may be assumed to be uniform throughout the year. The
cost of ordering a shipment of tires is $400, and the cost of
storing each tire for a year is $2. Determine how many tires
should be in each shipment if the ordering and storage costs
are  to  be  minimized.  (Assume  that  each  shipment  arrives
just as the previous one has been sold.)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

750

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

31. INVENTORY CONTROL AND PLANNING McDuff  Preserves
expects to bottle and sell 2,000,000 32-oz jars of jam at a
uniform rate throughout the year. The company orders its
containers from Consolidated Bottle Company. The cost of
ordering a shipment of bottles is $200, and the cost of stor-
ing each empty bottle for a year is $0.40. How many orders
should  McDuff  place  per  year,  and  how  many  bottles
should be in each shipment if the ordering and storage costs
are to be minimized? (Assume that each shipment of bottles
is used up before the next shipment arrives.)

32. INVENTORY CONTROL AND PLANNING Neilsen  Cookie  Com-
pany  sells  its  assorted  butter  cookies  in  containers  that
have a net content of 1 lb. The estimated demand for the
cookies  is  1,000,000  1-lb  containers  per  year.  The  setup
cost for each production run is $500, and the manufactur-
ing cost is $0.50 for each container of cookies. The cost of
storing  each  container  of  cookies  over  the  year  is  $0.40.
Assuming  uniformity  of  demand  throughout  the  year  and
instantaneous production, how many containers of cookies
should Neilsen produce per production run to minimize the
production cost?
Hint: Following the method of Example 5, show that the total pro-
duction cost is given by the function

C1x2 ⫽

500,000,000

x

⫹ 0.2x ⫹ 500,000

Then minimize the function C on the interval (0, 1,000,000].

33. INVENTORY CONTROL AND PLANNING A  company  expects  to
sell D units of a certain product per year. Sales are assumed
to be at a steady rate with no shortages allowed. Each time

an  order  for  the  product  is  placed,  an  ordering  cost  of  K
dollars is incurred. Each item costs p dollars, and the hold-
ing cost is h dollars per item per year.
a. Show  that  the  inventory  cost  (the  combined  ordering

cost, purchasing cost, and holding cost) is

C1x2 ⫽ KD

x

⫹ pD ⫹ hx
2

    1x ⬎ 02

where  x is  the  order  quantity  (the  number  of  items  in
each order).

b. Use the result of part (a) to show that the inventory cost

is minimized if

x ⫽ B 2KD

h

This quantity is called the economic order quantity (EOQ).

34. INVENTORY CONTROL AND PLANNING Refer  to  Exercise  33.
The Camera Store sells 960 Yamaha A35 digital cameras
per year. Each time an order for cameras is placed with the
manufacturer, an ordering cost of $10 is incurred. The store
pays $80 for each camera, and the cost for holding a cam-
era (mainly due to the opportunity cost incurred in tying up
capital in inventory) is $12/year. Assume that the cameras
sell at a uniform rate and that no shortages are allowed.
a. What is the EOQ?
b. How many orders will be placed each year?
c. What is the interval between orders?

10.5 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. Let x and y (measured in feet) denote the length and width

of the rectangular garden. 

or, since y ⫽ 300>x (obtained by solving for y in the first

equation), we see that the expression to be minimized is

y

f  1x2 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 2a 300
x b

 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 600
x

for positive values of x. Now,

x

Since the area is to be 300 ft2, we have

xy ⫽ 300

2

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ 2 ⫺ 600
x ⫽ ⫺1300
1300

x 

Setting  f ⬘(x)  ⫽ 0  yields 
consider only the critical number 
outside the interval (0, ⬁). We then compute

or 
, since 

x ⫽ 1300
⫺1300

.  We
lies

Next,  the  amount  of  fencing  to  be  used  is  given  by  the
perimeter, and this quantity is to be minimized. Thus, we
want to minimize

Since

2x ⫹ 2y

f  –1x2 ⫽ 1200

3

x 

f ⬙13002 ⬎ 0

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

CONCEPT REVIEW QUESTIONS

751

C 1x2 ⫽ x ⫹

4,000,000,000

x

⫹ 20,000,000

Differentiating C(x), we find

C ¿1x2 ⫽ 1 ⫺

4,000,000,000

2
x 

Setting C⬘(x) ⫽ 0 gives 63,246 as the critical number in the
interval (0, 1,000,000). Next, we find

C–1x2 ⫽

8,000,000,000

3

x 

Since C ⬙(x) ⬎ 0 for all x ⬎ 0, we see that the graph of C is
concave upward for all x ⬎ 0. Furthermore, C ⬙(63,246) ⬎ 0
implies that x ⫽ 63,246 gives rise to a relative minimum of
C (by the Second Derivative Test). Since the graph of C is
always  concave  upward  for  x ⬎ 0,  x ⫽ 63,246  gives  the
absolute  minimum  of  C.  Therefore,  the  company  should
manufacture 63,246 tires in each production run.

x ⫽ 1300

x ⫽ 1300

the  Second  Derivative  Test  implies  that  a  relative  mini-
. In fact, since f ⬙(x) ⬎ 0 for
mum of f occurs at 
all x in (0, ⬁), we conclude that 
gives rise to the
absolute  minimum  of  f.  The  corresponding  value  of  y,
obtained  by  substituting  this  value  of  x into  the  equation 
xy ⫽ 300,  is 
.  Therefore,  the  required  dimen-
sions of the vegetable garden are approximately 17.3 ft ⫻
17.3 ft.

y ⫽ 1300

2. Let  x denote  the  number  of  tires  in  each  production  run. 

Then, the average number of tires in storage is x>2, so the
storage cost incurred by the company is 2(x>2), or x dol-

lars.  Next,  since  the  company  needs  to  manufacture
1,000,000 tires for the year to meet the demand, the num-

ber  of  production  runs  is  1,000,000>x.  This  gives  setup

costs amounting to

4000a 1,000,000

x

b ⫽

4,000,000,000

x

dollars  for  the  year.  The  total  manufacturing  cost  is
$20,000,000.  Thus,  the  total  yearly  cost  incurred  by  the
company is given by

CHAPTER 10

Summary of Principal Terms

TERMS

increasing function (674)
decreasing function (674)
relative maximum (679)
relative minimum (680)
relative extrema (680)
critical number (681)

First Derivative Test (681)
concave upward (694)
concave downward (694)
point of inflection (697)
inflection point (697)
Second Derivative Test (701)

vertical asymptote (712)
horizontal asymptote (714)
absolute extrema (726)
absolute maximum value (726)
absolute minimum value (726)

CHAPTER 10

Concept Review Questions

Fill in the blanks.
1. a. A function f is increasing on an interval I if for any two

numbers x1 and x2 in I, x1 ⬍ x2 implies that _____.

b. A function f is decreasing on an interval I if for any two

numbers x1 and x2 in I, x1 ⬍ x2 implies that _____.

2. a. If  f is  differentiable  on  an  open  interval  (a,  b)  and 

f ⬘(x) ⬎ 0 on (a, b), then f is _____ on (a, b).

b. If f is differentiable on an open interval (a, b) and _____

on (a, b), then f is decreasing on (a, b).

c. If f ⬘(x) ⫽ 0 for each value of x in the interval (a, b), then

f is _____ on (a, b).

3. a. A function f has a relative maximum at c if there exists
an open interval (a, b) containing c such that _____ for
all x in (a, b).

b. A function f has a relative minimum at c if there exists
an open interval (a, b) containing c such that _____ for
all x in (a, b).

4. a. A critical number of a function f is any number in the
_____ of f at which f ⬘(c) _____ or f ⬘(c) does not _____.
b. If  f has  a  relative  extremum  at  c,  then  c must  be  a/an

_____ _____ of f.

c. If c is a critical number of f, then f may or may not have

a/an _____ _____ at c.

5. a. The  graph  of  a  differentiable  function  f is  concave

upward on an interval I if _____ is increasing on I.

b. If  f has  a  second  derivative  on  an  open  interval  I and
f ⬙(x) _____ on I, then the graph of f is concave upward
on I.

c. If the graph of a continuous function f has a tangent line
at P(c, f (c)) and the graph of f changes _____ at P, then
P is called an inflection point of f.

d. Suppose f has a second derivative on an interval (a, b),
containing a critical number c of f. If f ⬙(c) ⬍ 0, then f
has a/an _____ _____ at c. If f ⬙(c) ⫽ 0, then f may or
may not have a/an _____ _____ at c.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

752

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

6. The line x ⫽ a is a vertical asymptote of the graph f if at 
_____  or

least  one  of  the  following  is  true:
lim
xSa⫺

 f  1x2 ⫽

_____.

 f  1x2 ⫽

lim
xSa⫹

7. For  a  rational  function 

 f  1x2 ⫽

,  the  line  x ⫽ a is  a 

P1x2
Q1x2

vertical asymptote of the graph of f if Q(a)  ⫽ _____ but 
P(a) ⫽ _____.

8. The  line  y ⫽ b is  a  horizontal  asymptote  of  the  graph 
 f  1x2 ⫽

of a function f if either 
_____.

 f  1x2 ⫽

_____ or 

lim
xS⫺⬁

lim
xS⬁

CHAPTER 10

Review Exercises

In  Exercises  1–12,  (a)  find  the  intervals  where  the  function  f is
increasing  and  where  it  is  decreasing,  (b)  find  the  relative
extrema  of  f,  (c)  find  the  intervals  where  the  graph  of  f is 
concave upward and where it is concave downward, and (d) find
the inflection points, if any, of f.

1.

f  1x2 ⫽ 1

3  x 3 ⫺ x 2 ⫹ x ⫺ 6

x

4.

2. f1x2 ⫽ (x ⫺ 2)3
f  1x2 ⫽ x ⫹ 4
f  1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫺ 1
f  1x2 ⫽ x1x ⫺ 1
f  1x2 ⫽ ⫺ 1

1 ⫹ x 

6.

8.

2

10.

12. f(x) ⫽ x 2 ln x

3. f1x2 ⫽ x 4 ⫺ 2x 2

5.

2

f  1x2 ⫽ x 

x ⫺ 1

7. f1x2 ⫽ 11 ⫺ x2 1/3

9.

f  1x2 ⫽ 2x

x ⫹ 1

11. f1x2 ⫽ 14 ⫺ x2 e x

In Exercises 13–22, use the curve-sketching guide on page 715 to
sketch the graph of the function.

14. f1x2 ⫽ ⫺2x 2 ⫺ x ⫹ 1

13. f1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 5x ⫹ 5
15. t1x2 ⫽ 2x 3 ⫺ 6x 2 ⫹ 6x ⫹ 1
3  x 3 ⫺ x 2 ⫹ x ⫺ 3

17.

16.

t 1x2 ⫽ 1
h1x2 ⫽ x1x ⫺ 2
f 1x2 ⫽ x ⫺ 2
x ⫹ 2
21. f1x2 ⫽ xe⫺2x

19.

2

18.

1 ⫹ x 

h1x2 ⫽ 2x
f  1x2 ⫽ x ⫺ 1
22. f1x2 ⫽ x2 ⫺ ln x

20.

x

In Exercises 23–26, find the horizontal and vertical asymptotes of
the graph of each function. Do not sketch the graph.

23.

25.

f  1x2 ⫽ 1
f  1x2 ⫽

2x ⫹ 3
5x

x 

2 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 8

24.

f  1x2 ⫽ 2x
26. f  1x2 ⫽ x 

x ⫹ 1

2 ⫹ x
x1x ⫺ 12

9. a. A function f has an absolute maximum at c if _____ for
all x in the domain D of f. The number f (c) is called the
_____ _____ _____ of f on D.

b. A function f has a relative minimum at c if _____ for all

values of x in some _____ _____ containing c.

10. The Extreme Value Theorem states that if f is _____ on the
closed interval [a, b], then f has both a/an _____ maximum
value and a/an _____ minimum value on [a, b].

In  Exercises  27–38,  find  the  absolute  maximum  value  and  the
absolute minimum value, if any, of the function.

27. f1x2 ⫽ 2x 2 ⫹ 3x ⫺ 2
28. t1x2 ⫽ x 2/3

t1t2 ⫽ 225 ⫺ t 
f  1x2 ⫽ 1

2

29.

30.

3  x 3 ⫺ x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 1 on 30, 24

x

x 

34.

33.

32.

2 ⫹ 1

t1x2 ⫽ x
f  1x2 ⫽ x ⫺ 1
h1t2 ⫽ 8t ⫺ 1

31. h(t) ⫽ t 3 ⫺ 6t 2 on [2, 5]
 on 30, 54
  on 31, 34
2  on 31, 34
35. f1t2 ⫽ 3te⫺t on  ⫺2, 2
3
4
36. t1t2 ⫽
3
4
f  1s2 ⫽ s21 ⫺ s 
f  1x2 ⫽ x 

  on 3 ⫺1, 34

on  1, 2

2 ln t

x ⫺ 1

37.

38.

t  

t

2

2  on 3 ⫺1, 14

39. REVENUE OF TWO BOOKSTORES The graphs of R1 and R2 that
follow show the revenue of a neighborhood bookstore and
that of a branch of a national bookstore, three months after
the opening of the latter (t ⫽ 0) until sometime later T.

y

y=R2(t)

y=R1(t)

t

T

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

a. Find the signs of the first and second derivatives of 

R1

and 

R2

on the interval (0, T).

b. Give an interpretation of the results obtained in part (a)

in terms of the revenues of the two bookstores.

40. SPREAD OF A RUMOR Initially, a handful of students heard a
rumor on campus. The rumor spread, and after t hr, the num-
ber  of  students  who  had  heard  it  had  grown  to  N(t).  The
graph of the function N is shown in the following figure.

y

y ⫽ N(t)

P

t (hr)

Describe the spread of the rumor in terms of the speed at
which it was spread. In particular, explain the significance
of the inflection point P of the graph of N.

41. MAXIMIZING PROFITS Odyssey Travel  Agency’s  monthly
profit (in thousands of dollars) depends on the amount of
money x (in thousands of dollars) spent on advertising each
month according to the rule

P1x2 ⫽ ⫺x 2 ⫹ 8x ⫹ 20

To  maximize 
Odyssey’s monthly advertising budget?

its  monthly  profits,  what  should  be

42. SALES OF CAMERA PHONES Camera  phones,  virtually  non-
existent  ten  years  ago,  are  quickly  gaining  in  popularity.
The function

N1t2 ⫽ 8.125t 2 ⫹ 24.625t ⫹ 18.375

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 32

gives the projected worldwide shipments of camera phones
(in millions of units) in year t, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
2002.
a. Find N ⬘(t). What does this say about the sales of camera

phones between 2002 and 2005?

b. Find N ⬙(t). What does this say about the rate of increase
of the rate of sales of camera phones between 2002 and
2005?

Source: In-Stat/MDR.

43. EFFECT OF ADVERTISING ON SALES The total sales S of Can-
non  Precision  Instruments  is  related  to  the  amount  of
money x that Cannon spends on advertising its products by
the function

S1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.002x 3 ⫹ 0.6x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 500

10 ⱕ x ⱕ 2002

where S and x are measured in thousands of dollars. Find
the inflection point of the function S, and discuss its signif-
icance.

44. ELDERLY WORKFORCE The percentage of men 65 years and
older in the workforce from 1970 through 2000 is approx-
imated by the function

P1t2 ⫽ 0.00093t 3 ⫺ 0.018t 2 ⫺ 0.51t ⫹ 25

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 302

REVIEW EXERCISES

753

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
the beginning of 1970.
a. Find the interval where P is decreasing and the interval

where P is increasing.

b. Interpret the results of part (a).
Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

45. COST OF PRODUCING CALCULATORS A  subsidiary  of  Elektra
Electronics  manufactures  graphing  calculators.  Manage-
ment determines that the daily cost C(x) (in dollars) of pro-
ducing these calculators is

C1x2 ⫽ 0.0001x 3 ⫺ 0.08x 2 ⫹ 40x ⫹ 5000

where  x is  the  number  of  calculators  produced.  Find  the
inflection point of the function C, and interpret your result.
46. SALES OF MOBILE PROCESSORS The rising popularity of note-
book computers is fueling the sales of mobile PC proces-
sors. In a study conducted in 2003, the sales of these chips
(in billions of dollars) was projected to be

S1t2 ⫽ 6.81t ⫹ 1.032 0.49

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
2003.
a. Show  that  S is  increasing  on  the  interval 10,  42 ,  and

interpret your result.

b. Show that the graph of S is concave downward on the

interval 10, 42 . Interpret your result.

Source: International Data Corp.

47. SMALL CAR MARKET SHARE IN EUROPE Owing  in  part  to  an
aging population and the squeeze from carbon-cutting reg-
ulations, the percentage of small and lower-midsize vehi-
cles  in  Europe  is  expected  to  increase  in  the  near  future.
The function

f1t2 ⫽ 1502t ⫹ 766
59 ⫺ 2t

    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

gives the projected percentage of small and lower-midsize
vehicles t years after 2005.
a. What  was  the  percentage  of  small  and  lower-midsize
vehicles in 2005? What is the projected percentage of
small and lower-midsize vehicles in 2015?

b. Show  that  f is  increasing  on  the  interval  (0,  10),  and

interpret your results.

Source: J.D. Power Automotive.

48. INDEX OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY The  Department  of  the
Interior of an African country began to record an index of
environmental quality to measure progress or decline in the
environmental  quality  of  its  wildlife.  The  index  for  the
years 1998 through 2008 is approximated by the function

I1t2 ⫽ 50t 

t 

2 ⫹ 600
2 ⫹ 10

    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

a. Compute  I⬘(t), and show that  I(t) is decreasing on the

interval (0, 10).

b. Compute I ⬙(t). Study the concavity of the graph of I.
c. Sketch the graph of I.
d. Interpret your results.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

754

CHAPTER 10 APPLICATIONS OF THE DERIVATIVE

49. MAXIMIZING PROFITS The weekly demand for DVDs manu-

factured by Herald Media Corporation is given by

p ⫽ ⫺0.0005x 2 ⫹ 60

where p denotes the unit price in dollars and x denotes the
quantity demanded. The weekly total cost function associ-
ated with producing these discs is given by

C1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.001x 2 ⫹ 18x ⫹ 4000

where  C(x)  denotes  the  total  cost  (in  dollars)  incurred  in
pressing x discs. Find the production level that will yield a
maximum profit for the manufacturer.
Hint: Use the quadratic formula.

50. MAXIMIZING PROFITS The estimated monthly profit (in dol-
lars) realizable by Cannon Precision Instruments for man-
ufacturing and selling x units of its model M1 digital cam-
era is

P1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.04x 2 ⫹ 240x ⫺ 10,000

To maximize its profits, how many cameras should Cannon
produce each month?

51. MINIMIZING AVERAGE COST The total monthly cost (in dol-
lars) incurred by Carlota Music in manufacturing x units of
its Professional Series guitars is given by the function

C1x2 ⫽ 0.001x 2 ⫹ 100x ⫹ 4000

a. Find the average cost function C苶.
b. Determine  the  production  level  that  will  result  in  the

smallest average production cost.

52. WORKER EFFICIENCY The  average  worker  at  Wakefield

Avionics will have assembled

N1t2 ⫽ ⫺2t 3 ⫹ 12t 2 ⫹ 2t

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

ready-to-fly radio-controlled model airplanes t hr into the 
8 A.M. to 12 noon shift. At what time during this shift is the
average worker performing at peak efficiency?

53. SENIOR WORKFORCE The percentage of women 65 years and
older in the workforce from 1970 through 2000 is approx-
imated by the function

P1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.0002t 3 ⫹ 0.018t 2 ⫺ 0.36t ⫹ 10

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 302
where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
the beginning of 1970.
a. Find the interval where P is decreasing and the interval

where P is increasing.

b. Find the absolute minimum of P.
c. Interpret the results of parts (a) and (b).
Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

54. SPREAD OF A CONTAGIOUS DISEASE The incidence (number of
new cases per day) of a contagious disease spreading in a
population of M people is given by

R1x2 ⫽ kx1M ⫺ x2

where k is a positive constant and x denotes the number of
people already infected. Show that the incidence R is great-
est when half the population is infected.

55. MAXIMIZING THE VOLUME OF A BOX A box with an open top 
is  to  be  constructed  from  a  square  piece  of  cardboard, 
10 in. wide, by cutting out a square from each of the four
corners  and  bending  up  the  sides.  What  is  the  maximum
volume of such a box?

56. MINIMIZING CONSTRUCTION COSTS A man wishes to construct
a cylindrical barrel with a capacity of 32p ft3. The cost per
square foot of the material for the side of the barrel is half
that of the cost per square foot for the top and bottom. Help
him  find  the  dimensions  of  the  barrel  that  can  be  con-
structed at a minimum cost in terms of material used.

57. PACKAGING You wish to construct a closed rectangular box
that has a volume of 4 ft3. The length of the base of the box
will be twice as long as its width. The material for the top
and bottom of the box costs 30¢/square foot. The material
for  the  sides  of  the  box  costs  20¢/square  foot.  Find  the
dimensions  of  the  least  expensive  box  that  can  be  con-
structed.

58. INVENTORY CONTROL AND PLANNING Lehen Vinters imports a
certain brand of beer. The demand, which may be assumed
to be uniform, is 800,000 cases/year. The cost of ordering
a  shipment  of  beer  is  $500,  and  the  cost  of  storing  each
case of beer for a year is $2. Determine how many cases of
beer should be in each shipment if the ordering and storage
costs are to be kept at a minimum. (Assume that each ship-
ment of beer arrives just as the previous one has been sold.)

59. Let f (x) ⫽ x2 ⫹ ax ⫹ b. Determine the constants a and b
such that f has a relative minimum at x ⫽ 2 and the rela-
tive minimum value is 7.

60. Find the values of c such that the graph of 

f1x2 ⫽ x4 ⫹ 2x3 ⫹ cx2 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 2

is concave upward everywhere.

61. Suppose that the point (a, f(a)) is an inflection point of the
graph of y ⫽ f (x). Show that the number a gives rise to a
relative extremum of the function f ⬘.

62. Let

3 ⫹ 1

f  1x2 ⫽ e x 

2

if x ⫽ 0
if x ⫽ 0

a. Compute f ⬘(x), and show that it does not change sign as

we move across x ⫽ 0.

b. Show  that  f has  a  relative  maximum  at  x ⫽ 0.  Does 
this contradict the First Derivative Test? Explain your
answer.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 10

Before Moving On . . .

BEFORE MOVING ON . . .

755

1. Find the interval(s) where 

where it is decreasing.

2

f  1x2 ⫽ x 

1 ⫺ x

is increasing and

4. Sketch the graph of f(x) ⫽ 2x 3 ⫺ 9x 2 ⫹ 12x ⫺ 1.

2. Find the relative maxima and inflection point of the graph

of f(x) ⫽ 4xe⫺x.

3. Find the intervals where the graph of 

2 ⫺ 1
2 

  x ⫹ 1

is concave upward, the intervals where the

1
  x 
4 
graph of f is concave downward, and the inflection
point(s) of f.

f  1x2 ⫽ 1

3 

3 ⫺

  x 

5. Find the absolute maximum and absolute minimum values

of f(x) ⫽ 2x 3 ⫹ 3x 2 ⫺ 1 on the interval [⫺2, 3].

6. An open bucket in the form of a right circular cylinder is 
to be constructed with a capacity of 1 ft3. Find the radius
and height of the cylinder if the amount of material used is
minimal.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

INTEGRATION

11

© iStockphoto.com/Andrew Johnson

DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS focuses on the problem of

finding the rate of change of one quantity with respect

to another. In this chapter, we begin the study of the other branch

of calculus, known as integral calculus. Here we are interested in

precisely the opposite problem: If we know the rate of change of

one quantity with respect to another, can we find the relationship

between the two quantities? The principal tool used in the study of

integral calculus is the antiderivative of a function, and we develop

rules for antidifferentiation, or integration, as the process of finding

the antiderivative is called. We also show that a link is established

between differential and integral calculus—via the Fundamental

Theorem of Calculus. 

How much electricity should be

produced over the next 3 years to meet

the projected demand? In Example 9,

page 797, you will see how the current

rate of consumption can be used to

answer this question.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

757

758

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

11.1 Antiderivatives and the Rules of Integration

Antiderivatives
Let’s return, once again, to the example involving the motion of the maglev (Figure 1).

FIGURE 1
A maglev moving along an elevated
monorail track

0 

4 

16 

36 

3600

s   (feet) 

In Chapter 9, we discussed the following problem:

If we know the position of the maglev at any time t, can we find its velocity at time t?

As it turns out, if the position of the maglev is described by the position function f,
then its velocity at any time t is given by f ⬘(t). Here, f ⬘—the velocity function of the
maglev—is just the derivative of f.

Now, in this chapter, we will consider precisely the opposite problem:

If we know the velocity of the maglev at any time t, can we find its position at time t?
Stated another way, if we know the velocity function f ⬘ of the maglev, can we find its
position function f ?

To solve this problem, we need the concept of an antiderivative of a function.

Antiderivative
A function F is an antiderivative of f on an interval I if F⬘(x) ⫽ f(x) for all x
in I.

Thus, an antiderivative of a function f is a function F whose derivative is f. For exam-
ple, F(x) ⫽ x 2 is an antiderivative of f(x) ⫽ 2x because
22 ⫽ 2x ⫽ f  1x2

F¿1x2 ⫽ d

 1x 

dx

and F(x) ⫽ x 3 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 1 is an antiderivative of f(x) ⫽ 3x 2 ⫹ 2 because

F¿1x2 ⫽ d

dx

 1x 

3 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 12 ⫽ 3x 

2 ⫹ 2 ⫽ f  1x2

EXAMPLE 1 Let 
f(x) ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 1.

F1x2 ⫽ 1
3 x 

3 ⫺ 2x 

2 ⫹ x ⫺ 1

. Show that F is an antiderivative of 

Solution Differentiating the function F, we obtain

and the desired result follows.

F¿1x2 ⫽ x 

2 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 1 ⫽ f  1x2

EXAMPLE 2 Let F(x) ⫽ x, G(x) ⫽ x ⫹ 2, and H(x) ⫽ x ⫹ C, where C is a constant.
Show that F, G, and H are all antiderivatives of the function f defined by f(x) ⫽ 1.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

11.1 ANTIDERIVATIVES AND THE RULES OF INTEGRATION

759

Solution Since

dx

 F¿1x2 ⫽ d
 G¿1x2 ⫽ d
 H¿1x2 ⫽ d

dx

dx

 1x2 ⫽ 1 ⫽ f 1x2
 1x ⫹ 22 ⫽ 1 ⫽ f 1x2
 1x ⫹ C2 ⫽ 1 ⫽ f 1x2

we see that F, G, and H are indeed antiderivatives of f.

Example  2  shows  that  once  an  antiderivative  G of  a  function  f is  known,  then
another antiderivative of f may be found by adding an arbitrary constant to the func-
tion G. The following theorem states that no function other than one obtained in this
manner can be an antiderivative of f. (We omit the proof.)

THEOREM 1
Let G be an antiderivative of a function f on an interval I. Then, every antideriv-
ative F of f on I must be of the form F(x) ⫽ G(x) ⫹ C, where C is a constant.

Returning to Example 2, we see that there are infinitely many antiderivatives of
the function f(x) ⫽ 1. We obtain each one by specifying the constant C in the func-
tion F(x)  ⫽ x ⫹ C. Figure 2 shows the graphs of some of these antiderivatives for
selected values of C. These graphs constitute part of a family of infinitely many par-
allel straight lines, each having a slope equal to 1. This result is expected, since there
are  infinitely  many  curves  (straight  lines)  with  a  given  slope  equal  to  1.  The  anti-
derivatives F(x) ⫽ x ⫹ C (C, a constant) are precisely the functions representing this
family of straight lines.

EXAMPLE 3 Prove that the function G(x) ⫽ x 2 is an antiderivative of the function
f(x) ⫽ 2x. Write a general expression for the antiderivatives of f.

y

4

2

F(x) = x + 3 (C = 3)
F(x) = x + 2 (C = 2)
F(x) = x + 1 (C = 1)
F(x) = x       (C = 0)
F(x) = x – 1 (C = –1)

– 4

x

2

FIGURE 2
The graphs of some antiderivatives of 
f(x) ⫽ 1

y

4

2

F(x) = x2 + 1 (C = 1)

F(x) = x2
(C = 0)
F(x) = x2 – 1(C = – 1)
2

2

Solution Since G⬘(x) ⫽ 2x ⫽ f(x), we have shown that G(x) ⫽ x 2 is an antideriva-
tive of f(x) ⫽ 2x. By Theorem 1, every antiderivative of the function f(x) ⫽ 2x has
the form F(x) ⫽ x 2 ⫹ C, where C is some constant. The graphs of a few of the anti-
derivatives of f are shown in Figure 3.

– 2

2

x

FIGURE 3
The graphs of some antiderivatives of 
f(x) ⫽ 2x

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
Let f(x) ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 1.
1. Show that 

derivative of f.

F1x2 ⫽ 1

3 x3 ⫺ x ⫹ C

, where C is an arbitrary constant, is an anti-

2. Use  a  graphing  utility  to  plot  the  graphs  of  the  antiderivatives  of  f corre-
sponding to C ⫽ ⫺2, C ⫽ ⫺1, C ⫽ 0, C ⫽ 1, and C ⫽ 2 on the same set of
axes, using the viewing window [⫺4, 4] ⫻ [⫺4, 4].

3. If your graphing utility has the capability, draw the tangent line to each of the
graphs in part 2 at the point whose x-coordinate is 2. What can you say about
this family of tangent lines?

4. What is the slope of a tangent line in this family? Explain how you obtained

your answer.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

760

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

The Indefinite Integral
The process of finding all antiderivatives of a function is called antidifferentiation,
or integration. We use the symbol 兰, called an integral sign, to indicate that the oper-
ation of integration is to be performed on some function f. Thus, 

冮  f 1x2 dx ⫽ F1x2 ⫹ C

(read “the indefinite integral of f of x with respect to x equals F of x plus C”) tells
us that the indefinite integral of  f is the family of functions given by F(x)  ⫹ C,
where F⬘(x) ⫽ f (x). The function f to be integrated is called the integrand, and the
constant C is called a constant of integration. The expression dx following the inte-
grand f (x) reminds us that the operation is performed with respect to x. If the inde-
pendent variable is t, we write 兰 f(t) dt instead. In this sense both t and x are “dummy
variables.”

Using this notation, we can write the results of Examples 2 and 3 as

冮 1 dx ⫽ x ⫹ C  and  冮 2x dx ⫽ x 

2 ⫹ K

where C and K are arbitrary constants.

Basic Integration Rules
Our next task is to develop some rules for finding the indefinite integral of a given
function f. Because integration and differentiation are reverse operations, we discover
many of the rules of integration by first making an “educated guess” at the antideriv-
ative F of the function f to be integrated. Then this result is verified by demonstrating
that F⬘ ⫽f.

Rule 1: The Indefinite Integral of a Constant

冮 k dx ⫽ kx ⫹ C    1k, a constant2

To prove this result, observe that

F¿1x2 ⫽ d

dx

 1kx ⫹ C2 ⫽ k

EXAMPLE 4 Find each of the following indefinite integrals:

冮 2 dx

a.

冮 p  

2 dx

b.

Solution Each of the integrands has the form f(x) ⫽ k, where k is a constant.
Applying Rule 1 in each case yields

冮 2 dx ⫽ 2x ⫹ C
冮 p  

2 dx ⫽ p 

2x ⫹ C

a.

b.

Next, from the rule of differentiation,

d
dx

 x 

n ⫽ nx 

n⫺1

we obtain the following rule of integration.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.1 ANTIDERIVATIVES AND THE RULES OF INTEGRATION

761

Rule 2: The Power Rule
冮 x 

n dx ⫽ 1

n ⫹ 1  x 

n⫹1 ⫹ C    1n ⫽ ⫺12

An  antiderivative  of  a  power  function  is  another  power  function  obtained  from  the
integrand by increasing its power by 1 and dividing the resulting expression by the
new power.

To prove this result, observe that

 F¿1x2 ⫽ d

1

n ⫹ 1

 x 

n⫹1 ⫹ Cb

dx

 a
 ⫽ n ⫹ 1
n ⫹ 1
 ⫽ x 
n
 ⫽ f 1x2

n

 x 

EXAMPLE 5 Find each of the following indefinite integrals:

冮 x 

3 dx

a.

冮 x 

3/2 dx

b.

c.

冮 

1
3/2 dx
x 

Solution Each integrand is a power function with exponent n ⫽ ⫺1. Applying
Rule 2 in each case yields the following results:

冮 x 
冮 x 

a.

b.

3 dx ⫽ 1
4

 x 4 ⫹ C

3/2 dx ⫽  

 x 

1
5
2

5/2 ⫹ C

5/2 ⫹ C ⫽ 2
5  x 
 x ⫺1/2 ⫹ C ⫽ ⫺2x ⫺1/2 ⫹ C ⫽ ⫺ 2
x 1/2

⫺1
2

⫹ C

冮 

c.

1
x 

3/2 dx ⫽ 冮 x ⫺3/2 dx ⫽ 1

These results may be verified by differentiating each of the antiderivatives and
showing that the result is equal to the corresponding integrand.

The next rule tells us that a constant factor may be moved through an integral sign.

Rule 3: The Indefinite Integral of a Constant Multiple of a Function

冮 cf 1x2 dx ⫽ c 冮 f 1x2 dx    1c, a constant2

The indefinite integral of a constant multiple of a function is equal to the constant mul-
tiple of the indefinite integral of the function.

This result follows from the corresponding rule of differentiation (see Rule 3, Sec-
tion 9.4).

Only a constant can be “moved out” of an integral sign. For example, it would be
incorrect to write

In fact,

兰x 

2 dx ⫽ 1

3 x 

3 ⫹ C

冮 x 
, whereas x 2 1 dx ⫽ x 2(x ⫹ C) ⫽ x 3 ⫹ Cx 2.

2 冮 1 dx
2 dx ⫽ x 
兰

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

762

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

EXAMPLE 6 Find each of the following indefinite integrals:

冮 2t 

a.

3 dt

b.

冮 ⫺3x ⫺2 dx

Solution Each integrand has the form cf(x), where c is a constant. Applying 
Rule 3, we obtain
3 dt ⫽ 2 冮 t 

冮 2t 

4 ⫹ C

a.

 t 

 t 

4 ⫹ Kb ⫽ 1

2

4 ⫹ 2K ⫽ 1
 t 
2

3 dt ⫽ 2a 1

4

where C ⫽ 2K. From now on, we will write the constant of integration as C,
since any nonzero multiple of an arbitrary constant is an arbitrary constant.

b.

冮 ⫺3x ⫺2 dx ⫽ ⫺3 冮 x ⫺2 dx ⫽ 1⫺321⫺12x ⫺1 ⫹ C ⫽ 3

x

⫹ C

Rule 4: The Sum Rule

冮 3  f 1x2 ⫹ t1x24 dx ⫽ 冮 f 1x2 dx ⫹ 冮 t1x2 dx
冮 3  f 1x2 ⫺ t1x24 dx ⫽ 冮 f 1x2 dx ⫺ 冮 t1x2 dx

The indefinite integral of a sum (difference) of two functions is equal to the sum (dif-
ference) of their indefinite integrals.

This result is easily extended to the case involving the sum and difference of any
finite number of functions. As in Rule 3, the proof of Rule 4 follows from the corre-
sponding rule of differentiation (see Rule 4, Section 9.4).

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 7 Find the indefinite integral

冮 13x 5 ⫹ 4x 3/2 ⫺ 2x ⫺1/22 dx

Solution Applying the extended version of Rule 4, we find that

 冮 13x 5 ⫹ 4x 3/2 ⫺ 2x ⫺1/22  dx

 ⫽ 冮 3x 5 dx ⫹ 冮 4x 3/2 dx ⫺ 冮 2x ⫺1/2 dx
 ⫽ 3 冮 x 5 dx ⫹ 4 冮 x 3/2 dx ⫺ 2 冮 x ⫺1/2 dx
 ⫽ 132 a 1
 ⫽ 1
 x 6 ⫹ 8
2
5

6b  x 6 ⫹ 142 a 2

 x 5/2 ⫺ 4x 1/2 ⫹ C

5b  x 5/2 ⫺ 122122x 1/2 ⫹ C

Rule 3

Rule 2

Observe  that  we  have  combined  the  three  constants  of  integration,  which  arise
from evaluating the three indefinite integrals, to obtain one constant C. After all, the
sum of three arbitrary constants is also an arbitrary constant.

Rule 5: The Indefinite Integral of the Exponential Function

冮 ex dx ⫽ ex ⫹ C

The indefinite integral of the exponential function with base e is equal to the function
itself (except, of course, for the constant of integration).

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.1 ANTIDERIVATIVES AND THE RULES OF INTEGRATION

763

EXAMPLE 8 Find the indefinite integral

冮 12e 

x ⫺ x 32 dx

Solution We have

 冮 12e 

x ⫺ x 

x dx ⫺ 冮 x 
x dx ⫺ 冮 x 

32 dx ⫽ 冮 2e 
 ⫽ 2 冮 e 
 ⫽ 2ex ⫺ 1

4  x 4 ⫹ C

3 dx

3 dx

The last rule of integration in this section covers the integration of the function
f(x) ⫽ x⫺1. Remember that this function constituted the only exceptional case in the
integration of the power function f(x) ⫽ x n (see Rule 2).

Rule 6: The Indefinite Integral of the Function f(x) ⴝ xⴚ1

冮 x⫺1 dx ⫽ 冮 

1
x

 dx ⫽ ln0 x 0 ⫹ C    1x ⫽ 02

To prove Rule 6, observe that

d
dx

 ln0 x 0 ⫽ 1

x

See Rule 10, Section 9.7.

EXAMPLE 9 Find the indefinite integral

冮 a 2x ⫹ 3

x

⫹ 4
x 

2b  dx

Solution

 冮 a 2x ⫹ 3

x

⫹ 4
x 

4
2 dx
x 

 dx ⫹ 冮 
1
x

2b  dx ⫽ 冮 2x dx ⫹ 冮 
3
x
 ⫽ 2 冮 x dx ⫹ 3 冮 
 ⫽ 2a 1
 ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 3 ln0 x 0 ⫺ 4

2b x 

x

⫹ C

 dx ⫹ 4 冮 x ⫺2 dx

2 ⫹ 3 ln0 x 0 ⫹ 41⫺12x ⫺1 ⫹ C

Differential Equations
Let’s return to the problem posed at the beginning of the section: Given the derivative
of a function, f ⬘, can we find the function f? As an example, suppose we are given the
function

f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 2x ⫺ 1

and we wish to find f(x). From what we now know, we can find f by integrating both
sides of Equation (1). Thus,

f 1x2 ⫽ 冮 f  ¿1x2 dx ⫽ 冮 12x ⫺ 12 dx ⫽ x 

2 ⫺ x ⫹ C

(1)

(2)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

764

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

C = 3
C = 2

C = 1

C = 0

C = –1

y

(1, 3)

3

2

1

– 1

2

3

x

FIGURE 4
The graphs of some of the functions 
having the derivative f ⬘(x) ⫽ 2x ⫺ 1.
Observe that the slopes of the tangent
lines to the graphs are the same for a
fixed value of x.

where C is an arbitrary constant. Thus, infinitely many functions have the derivative
f ⬘, each differing from the other by a constant.

Equation (1) is called a differential equation. In general, a differential equation
is an equation that involves the derivative or differential of an unknown function. [In
the case of Equation (1), the unknown function is f.] A solution of a differential equa-
tion is any function that satisfies the differential equation. Thus, Equation (2) gives all
the solutions of the differential Equation (1), and it is, accordingly, called the general
solution of the differential equation f ⬘(x) ⫽ 2x ⫺ 1.

The graphs of f(x) ⫽ x 2 ⫺ x ⫹ C for selected values of C are shown in Figure 4.
These graphs have one property in common: For any fixed value of x, the tangent lines
to these graphs have the same slope. This follows because any member of the family
f(x) ⫽ x 2 ⫺ x ⫹ C must have the same slope at x—namely, 2x ⫺ 1!

Although  there  are  infinitely  many  solutions  to  the  differential  equation 
f ⬘(x) ⫽ 2x ⫺ 1, we can obtain a particular solution by specifying the value the func-
tion must assume at a certain value of x. For example, suppose we stipulate that the
function f under consideration must satisfy the condition f(1) ⫽ 3 or, equivalently, the
graph of f must pass through the point (1, 3). Then, using the condition on the general
solution f(x) ⫽ x 2 ⫺ x ⫹ C, we find that

f112 ⫽ 1 ⫺ 1 ⫹ C ⫽ 3

and C ⫽ 3. Thus, the particular solution is f(x) ⫽ x 2 ⫺ x ⫹ 3 (see Figure 4).

The condition f(1) ⫽ 3 is an example of an initial condition. More generally, an

initial condition is a condition imposed on the value of f at x ⫽ a.

Initial-Value Problems
An initial-value problem is one in which we are required to find a function satisfy-
ing (1) a differential equation and (2) one or more initial conditions. The following are
examples of initial-value problems.

EXAMPLE 10 Find the function f if it is known that

f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 3x 2 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 8 and

f112 ⫽ 9

Solution We are required to solve the initial-value problem

Integrating the function f ⬘, we find

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ 3x 2 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 8
f  112 ⫽           9f
 f  1x2 ⫽ 冮 f ¿1x2 dx

 ⫽ 冮 13x 

2 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 82 dx
2 ⫹ 8x ⫹ C

3 ⫺ 2x 

 ⫽ x 
Using the condition f(1) ⫽ 9, we have

 9 ⫽ f 112 ⫽ 13 ⫺ 2112 2 ⫹ 8112 ⫹ C ⫽ 7 ⫹ C

 C ⫽ 2
Therefore, the required function f is given by f(x) ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 2x 2 ⫹ 8x ⫹ 2.

or

APPLIED EXAMPLE 11 Velocity of a Maglev In a test run of a maglev 
along a straight elevated monorail track, data obtained from reading its 

speedometer indicate that the velocity of the maglev at time t can be described 
by the velocity function

√1t2 ⫽ 8t

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 302

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

11.1 ANTIDERIVATIVES AND THE RULES OF INTEGRATION

765

Find the position function of the maglev. Assume that initially the maglev is
located at the origin of a coordinate line.

Solution Let s(t) denote the position of the maglev at any time t (0 ⱕ t ⱕ 30).
Then, s⬘(t) ⫽ √(t). So we have the initial-value problem

e s¿1t2 ⫽ 8t
s102 ⫽ 0

Integrating both sides of the differential equation s⬘(t) ⫽ 8t, we obtain

s1t2 ⫽ 冮 s¿1t2 dt ⫽ 冮 8t dt ⫽ 4t 

2 ⫹ C

where C is an arbitrary constant. To evaluate C, we use the initial condition 
s(0) ⫽ 0 to write

s(0) ⫽ 4(0)2 ⫹ C ⫽ 0

orC ⫽ 0

Therefore, the required position function is s(t) ⫽ 4t 2 (0 ⱕ t ⱕ 30).

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 12 Magazine Circulation The current circulation of the
Investor’s Digest is 3000 copies per week. The managing editor of this 

weekly projects a growth rate of

4 ⫹ 5t 2/3

copies per week, t weeks from now, for the next 3 years. On the basis of her pro-
jection, what will be the circulation of the digest 125 weeks from now?

Solution Let S(t) denote the circulation of the digest t weeks from now. Then
S⬘(t) is the rate of change in the circulation in the tth week and is given by

S⬘1t2 ⫽ 4 ⫹ 5t 2/3

Furthermore, the current circulation of 3000 copies per week translates into the
initial condition S(0) ⫽ 3000. Integrating both sides of the differential equation
with respect to t gives

 S1t2 ⫽ 冮 S¿1t2 dt ⫽ 冮 14 ⫹ 5t 
 ⫽ 4t ⫹ 5a t 5/3

2/32 dt
3 b ⫹ C

5

 ⫽ 4t ⫹ 3t 5/3 ⫹ C

To determine the value of C, we use the condition S(0) ⫽ 3000 to write

S102 ⫽ 4102 ⫹ 31025/3 ⫹ C ⫽ 3000

which gives C ⫽ 3000. Therefore, the circulation of the digest t weeks from now
will be

S1t2 ⫽ 4t ⫹ 3t 5/3 ⫹ 3000

In particular, the circulation 125 weeks from now will be

S11252 ⫽ 411252 ⫹ 311252 5/3 ⫹ 3000 ⫽ 12,875

copies per week.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

766

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

11.1 Self-Check Exercises

1. Find 

冮 a 11x

⫺ 2
x

⫹ 3exb  dx.

2. Find the rule for the function f given that (1) the slope of
the tangent line to the graph of f at any point P(x, f(x)) is
given by the expression 3x 2 ⫺ 6x ⫹ 3 and (2) the graph of
f passes through the point (2, 9).

11.1 Concept Questions

1. What is an antiderivative? Give an example.
2. If f ⬘(x) ⫽ t⬘(x) for all x in an interval I, what is the rela-

tionship between f and t?

11.1 Exercises

In Exercises 1–4, verify directly that F is an antiderivative of f.

1.

F1x2 ⫽ 1

3

 x 

3 ⫹ 2x 

2 ⫺ x ⫹ 2; f 1x2 ⫽ x 

2 ⫹ 4x ⫺ 1

3.

2. F1x2 ⫽ xe x ⫹ p; f1x2 ⫽ e x11 ⫹ x2
F1x2 ⫽ 22x 2 ⫺ 1; f 1x2 ⫽
4. F1x2 ⫽ x ln x ⫺ x; f1x2 ⫽ ln x

2x22x 2 ⫺ 1

In Exercises 5–8, (a) verify that G is an antiderivative of f, (b) find
all antiderivatives of f, and (c) sketch the graphs of a few mem-
bers of the family of antiderivatives found in part (b).

5. G1x2 ⫽ 2x; f1x2 ⫽ 2
3; f  1x2 ⫽ x 

G1x2 ⫽ 1

 x 

7.

3

2

6. G1x2 ⫽ 2x 2; f1x2 ⫽ 4x
8. G1x2 ⫽ e x; f1x2 ⫽ ex

In Exercises 9–50, find the indefinite integral.

9.

11.

13.

15.

17.

19.

冮 6 dx
冮 x 
3 dx
冮 x ⫺4 dx
冮 x 2/3 dx
冮 x ⫺5/4 dx
冮 
2
3 dx
x 

10.

12.

14.

16.

冮 12 dx
冮 2x 5 dx
冮 3t ⫺7 dt
冮 2u3/4 du
冮 3x ⫺2/3 dx

18.
20. 冮 

1
3x 

5 dx

3. Suppose United Motors’ share of the new cars sold in a

certain country is changing at the rate of

f1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.01875t 2 ⫹ 0.15t ⫺ 1.2
percent/year at year t (t ⫽ 0 corresponds to the beginning
of 2000). The company’s market share at the beginning of
2000 was 48.4%. What was United Motors’ market share
at the beginning of 2012?

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 122

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 11.1 can be found on 
page 771.

3. What is the difference between an antiderivative of f and

the indefinite integral of f ?

4. Can  the  Power  Rule  be  used  to  integrate 

your answer.

冮 1
x

dx

?  Explain

22.

24.

26.

28.

30.

32.

34.

36.

 dt

22 du

2 ⫹ 0.02t ⫹ 22 dt

冮 
31t
冮 11 ⫹ u ⫹ u 
冮 10.3t 
冮 11 ⫹ ex2 dx
冮 12 ⫹ x ⫹ 2x 2 ⫹ ex2 dx
冮 a 6x 3 ⫹ 3
⫺ xb  dx
冮 1t 
3/2 ⫹ 2t 1/2 ⫺ 4t ⫺1/22 dt
冮 a23 x 

2b  dx

2 ⫺ 1
x 

x 2

 u2 ⫹ 2
3

 u ⫺ 1
3

21.

23.

25.

27.

29.

31.

33.

35.

37.

冮 p1t dt
冮 13 ⫺ 4x2 dx
冮 1x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ x ⫺32 dx
冮 5ex dx
冮 11 ⫹ x ⫹ ex2 dx
冮 a 4x 3 ⫺ 2
⫺ 1b  dx
冮 1x 5/2 ⫹ 2x 3/2 ⫺ x2 dx
冮 a1x ⫹ 21xb  dx
冮 a u 
b  du
⫽ 1
3

3 ⫹ 2u 
3u

u3 ⫹ 2u2 ⫺ u

2 ⫺ u

Hint:

x 2

3u

x 

冮 

38.

2

 dx

4 ⫺ 1
x 
4 ⫺ 1
x 
x 

2

Hint:

⫽ x 

2 ⫺ x ⫺2

39.

冮 12t ⫹ 121t ⫺ 22 dt
40. 冮 u⫺211 ⫺ u2 ⫹ u42 du

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2 ⫹ 12 dx

42.

44.

46.

2 ⫹ t ⫺ 12 dt

冮 1t 1t 
冮 a1x ⫹ 3
冮 a 1
⫺ 123 x 

x 

x

2

2

⫺ 2e 

xb  dx
⫹ 12xb  dx

冮 

41.

1

x 2 1x 

4 ⫺ 2x 

ds

冮 
1s ⫹ 12 ⫺2
冮 1e 
e2 dt
t ⫹ t 
冮 

x 2

x 3 ⫹ x 2 ⫺ x ⫹ 1

 dx

43.

45.

47.

48.

49.

t 

2
t 

 dt

3 ⫹ 23 t

Hint: Simplify the integrand first.
冮 
冮 11x ⫺ 12 2

Hint: Simplify the integrand first.

 dx

2

x 

Hint: Simplify the integrand first.

50.

冮 1x ⫹ 12 2a 1 ⫺ 1

xb  dx

Hint: Simplify the integrand first.

In Exercises 51–58, find f(x) by solving the initial value problem.

51. f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 3x ⫹ 1; f112 ⫽ 3
52. f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 3x 2 ⫺ 6x; f122 ⫽ 4
53. f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 3x 2 ⫹ 4x ⫺ 1; f122 ⫽ 9

x 

54.

55.

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ 11x
f  ¿1x2 ⫽ 1 ⫹ 1

; f 142 ⫽ 2
2; f 112 ⫽ 3
56. f ⬘1x2 ⫽ e x ⫺ 2x; f102 ⫽ 2
; f 112 ⫽ 1

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ x ⫹ 1
f  ¿1x2 ⫽ 1 ⫹ ex ⫹ 1

57.

58.

x

x

; f 112 ⫽ 3 ⫹ e

In Exercises 59–62, find the function f given that the slope of the
tangent line to the graph of f at any point (x, f(x)) is fⴕ(x) and that
the graph of f passes through the given point.

2

59.

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ 1

 x ⫺1/2; 12, 122
60. f ⬘1t2 ⫽ t 2 ⫺ 2t ⫹ 3; 11, 22
61. f ⬘1x2 ⫽ e x ⫹ x; 10, 32

62.

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ 2

x

⫹ 1; 11, 22

63. BANK DEPOSITS Madison Finance opened two branches on
September 1 (t ⫽ 0). Branch A is located in an established
industrial park, and Branch B is located in a fast-growing
new  development.  The  net  rate  at  which  money  was  de-
posited into Branch A and Branch B in the first 180 busi-

11.1 ANTIDERIVATIVES AND THE RULES OF INTEGRATION

767

ness  days  is  given  by  the  graphs  of  f and t,  respectively
(see  the  figure).  Which  branch  has  the  larger  amount  on
deposit  at  the  end  of  180  business  days?  Justify  your
answer.

y

y = f(t)

t
i
s
o
p
e
d

 
f
o

 
e
t
a
R

s
r
a
l
l
o
d

 
f
o

 
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
t
 

n
i
(

)
y
a
d

 
r
e
p

y = g(t) 

t (days)

180

64. VELOCITY OF A CAR Two cars, side by side, start from rest
and travel along a straight road. The velocity of Car A is
given by √ ⫽ f(t), and the velocity of Car B is given by √ ⫽
t(t). The graphs of f and t are shown in the figure below.
Are the cars still side by side after T sec? If not, which car
is ahead of the other? Justify your answer.

√ (ft/sec)

√ = f (t)

√ = g (t)

T

t (sec)

65. VELOCITY OF A CAR The velocity of a car (in feet per second) 

t sec after starting from rest is given by the function

f 1t2 ⫽ 21t    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 302

Find  the  car’s  position,  s(t),  at  any  time  t.  Assume  that 
s(0) ⫽ 0.

66. VELOCITY OF A MAGLEV The velocity (in feet per second) of

a maglev is

√1t2 ⫽ 0.2t ⫹ 3

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 1202

At t ⫽ 0, it is at the station. Find the function giving the
position of the maglev at time t, assuming that the motion
takes place along a straight stretch of track.

67. COST OF PRODUCING CLOCKS Lorimar Watch Company man-
ufactures  travel  clocks.  The  daily  marginal  cost  function
associated with producing these clocks is

C⬘1x2 ⫽ 0.000009x 2 ⫺ 0.009x ⫹ 8

where C⬘(x) is measured in dollars per unit and x denotes
the  number  of  units  produced.  Management  has  deter-
mined that the daily fixed cost incurred in producing these
clocks is $120. Find the total cost incurred by Lorimar in
producing the first 500 travel clocks/day.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

768

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

68. REVENUE FUNCTIONS The  management  of  Lorimar  Watch
Company has determined that the daily marginal revenue
function associated with producing and selling their travel
clocks is given by

R⬘1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.009x ⫹ 12

where x denotes the number of units produced and sold and
R⬘(x) is measured in dollars per unit.
a. Determine  the  revenue  function  R(x)  associated  with

producing and selling these clocks.

b. What  is  the  demand  equation  that  relates  the  wholesale

unit price with the quantity of travel clocks demanded?

69. PROFIT FUNCTIONS Cannon Precision Instruments makes an
automatic  electronic  flash  with  Thyrister  circuitry.  The
estimated  marginal  profit  associated  with  producing  and
selling these electronic flashes is

P⬘1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.004x ⫹ 20

dollars per unit per month when the production level is x
units  per  month.  Cannon’s  fixed  cost  for  producing  and
selling these electronic flashes is $16,000/month. At what
level  of  production  does  Cannon  realize  a  maximum
profit? What is the maximum monthly profit?

70. COST OF PRODUCING GUITARS Carlota Music Company esti-
mates that the marginal cost of manufacturing its Profes-
sional Series guitars is

C⬘1x2 ⫽ 0.002x ⫹ 100

dollars/month  when  the  level  of  production  is  x guitars/
month.  The  fixed  costs  incurred  by  Carlota  are  $4000/
month. Find the total monthly cost incurred by Carlota in
manufacturing x guitars/month.

71. GROWTH OF NATIONAL HEALTH CARE COSTS National  health

expenditures are projected to grow at the rate of

r1t2 ⫽ 0.0058t ⫹ 0.159

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 132

trillion dollars/year from 2002 through 2015. Here, t ⫽ 0 cor-
responds to 2002. The expenditure in 2002 was $1.60 trillion.
a. Find  a  function  f giving  the  projected  national  health

expenditures in year t.

b. What  does  your  model  project  the  national  health

expenditure to be in 2015?

Source: National Health Expenditures.

72. QUALITY CONTROL As part of a quality-control program, the
chess sets manufactured by Jones Brothers are subjected to
a final inspection before packing. The rate of increase in
the number of sets checked per hour by an inspector t hr
into the 8 A.M. to 12 noon shift is approximately

N ⬘1t2 ⫽ ⫺3t 2 ⫹ 12t ⫹ 45

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

a. Find an expression N(t) that approximates the number

of sets inspected at the end of t hours.
Hint: N(0) ⫽ 0

b. How many sets does the average inspector check during

a morning shift?

73. SATELLITE RADIO SUBSCRIPTIONS Based on data obtained by
polling  automobile  buyers,  the  number  of  subscribers  of
satellite radios is expected to grow at the rate of

r1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.375t 2 ⫹ 2.1t ⫹ 2.45
million  subscribers  per  year  between  2003  (t ⫽ 0)  and
2008 (t ⫽ 5). The number of satellite radio subscribers at
the beginning of 2003 was 1.5 million.
a. Find an expression giving the number of satellite radio

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 52

subscribers in year t (0 ⱕ t ⱕ 5).

b. Based on this model, what was the number of satellite

radio subscribers in 2008?

Source: Carmel Group.

74. RISK OF DOWN SYNDROME The  rate  at  which  the  risk  of
Down  syndrome  is  changing  is  approximated  by  the
function

r1x2 ⫽ 0.004641x 2 ⫺ 0.3012x ⫹ 4.9

120 ⱕ x ⱕ 452

where r(x) is measured in percentage of all births per year
and x is the maternal age at delivery.
a. Find a function f giving the risk as a percentage of all
births  when  the  maternal  age  at  delivery  is  x years,
given  that  the  risk  of  Down  syndrome  at  age  30  is
0.14% of all births.

b. Based on this model, what is the risk of Down syndrome
when the maternal age at delivery is 40 years? 45 years?

Source: New England Journal of Medicine.

75. CREDIT CARD DEBT The  average  credit  card  debt  per  U.S.
household  between  1990  (t ⫽ 0)  and  2003  (t ⫽ 13)  was
growing at the rate of approximately

D1t2 ⫽ ⫺4.479t 2 ⫹ 69.8t ⫹ 279.5

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 132

dollars/year. The average credit card debt per U.S. house-
hold stood at $2917 in 1990.
a. Find an expression giving the approximate average 

credit card debt per U.S. household in year t
(0 ⱕ t ⱕ 13).

b. Use the result of part (a) to estimate the average credit

card debt per U.S. household in 2003.

Source: Encore Capital Group.

76. GENETICALLY MODIFIED CROPS The total number of acres of
genetically  modified  crops  grown  worldwide  from  1997
through 2003 was changing at the rate of

R1t2 ⫽ 2.718t 2 ⫺ 19.86t ⫹ 50.18

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 62

million acres/year. The total number of acres of such crops
grown in 1997 (t ⫽ 0) was 27.2 million acres. How many
acres of genetically modified crops were grown worldwide
in 2003?
Source: International Services for the Acquisition of Agri-biotech
Applications.

77. GASTRIC BYPASS SURGERIES One method of weight loss gain-
ing in popularity is gastric bypass surgery. It is generally

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

reserved for people at least 100 lb overweight because the
procedure carries a serious risk of death or complications.
According  to  the  American  Society  of  Bariatric  Surgery,
the number of morbidly obese patients undergoing the pro-
cedure was increasing at the rate of

R1t2 ⫽ 9.399t 2 ⫺ 13.4t ⫹ 14.07
thousands/year,  with  t ⫽ 0  corresponding  to  2000.  The
number of gastric bypass surgeries performed in 2000 was 
36.7 thousand.
a. Find an expression giving the number of gastric bypass

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 32

surgeries performed in year t (0 ⱕ t ⱕ 3).

b. Use the result of part (a) to find the number of gastric

bypass surgeries performed in 2003.
Source: American Society for Bariatric Surgery.

78. ONLINE AD SALES According to a study conducted in 2004,
the share of online advertisement, worldwide, as a percent-
age  of  the  total  ad  market,  is  expected  to  grow  at  the 
rate of

R1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.033t 2 ⫹ 0.3428t ⫹ 0.07
percent/year at time t (in years), with t ⫽ 0 corresponding
to  the  beginning  of  2000.  The  online  ad  market  at  the
beginning of 2000 was 2.9% of the total ad market.
a. What  is  the  projected  online  ad  market  share  at  any 

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 62

time t?

b. What  was  the  projected  online  ad  market  share  at  the

beginning of 2005?

Source: Jupiter Media Metrix, Inc.

79. HEALTH-CARE COSTS Before  passage  of  the  Medicare  Pre-
scription  Drug,  Improvement,  and  Modernization  Act  at
the end of 2003, the average out-of-pocket costs for bene-
ficiaries in traditional Medicare (including premiums, cost
sharing, and prescription drugs not covered by Medicare)
were growing at the rate of

C⬘1t2 ⫽ 12.288t 2 ⫺ 150.5594t ⫹ 695.23

dollars/year, where t is measured in 5-year intervals, with 
t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 2000. The out-of-pocket costs for
beneficiaries in 2000 were $3142.
a. Find  an  expression  giving  the  average  out-of-pocket

costs for beneficiaries in year t.

b. What were the average out-of-pocket costs for benefi-

ciaries in 2005?

Source: The Urban Institute.

80. BALLAST DROPPED FROM A BALLOON A  ballast  is  dropped
from a stationary hot-air balloon that is hovering at an alti-
tude  of  400  ft.  The  velocity  of  the  ballast  after  t sec  is 
⫺32t ft/sec.
a. Find  the  height  h(t)  of  the  ballast  from  the  ground  at 

time t.
Hint: h⬘(t) ⫽ ⫺32t; h(0) ⫽ 400

b. When will the ballast strike the ground?

11.1 ANTIDERIVATIVES AND THE RULES OF INTEGRATION

769

c. Find  the  velocity  of  the  ballast  when  it  hits  the

ground.

Ballast

81. CABLE TV  SUBSCRIBERS A  study  conducted  by  TeleCable
estimates  that  the  number  of  cable  TV  subscribers  will
grow at the rate of

100 ⫹ 210t 3/4

new subscribers/month, t months from the start date of the
service.  If  5000  subscribers  signed  up  for  the  service
before the starting date, how many subscribers will there
be 16 months from that date?

82. OZONE POLLUTION The rate of change of the level of ozone,
an  invisible  gas  that  is  an  irritant  and  impairs  breathing,
present in the atmosphere on a certain May day in the city
of Riverside is given by

R1t2 ⫽ 3.2922t 2 ⫺ 0.366t 3

10 ⬍ t ⬍ 112

(measured in pollutant standard index per hour). Here, t is
measured in hours, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 7 A.M. Find
the ozone level A(t) at any time t, assuming that at 7 A.M. it
is zero.
Hint: A⬘(t) ⫽ R(t); A(0) ⫽ 0
Source: Los Angeles Times.

83. FLIGHT OF A ROCKET The velocity, in feet per second, of a

rocket t sec into vertical flight is given by

√1t2 ⫽ ⫺3t 2 ⫹ 192t

Find an expression h(t) that gives the rocket’s altitude, in
feet,  t sec  after  liftoff.  What  is  the  altitude  of  the  rocket 
30 sec after liftoff?
Hint: h⬘(t) ⫽ √(t); h(0) ⫽ 0

84. POPULATION GROWTH The  development  of  AstroWorld
(“The Amusement Park of the Future”) on the outskirts of
a city will increase the city’s population at the rate of

45001t ⫹ 1000

people/year, t years from the start of construction. The pop-
ulation before construction is 30,000. Determine the pro-
jected population 9 years after construction of the park has
begun.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

770

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

85. U.S.  SALES OF ORGANIC MILK Sales  of  organic  milk  from

1999 through 2004 grew at the rate of approximately

R1t2 ⫽ 3t 3 ⫺ 17.9445t2 ⫹ 28.7222t ⫹ 26.632
10 ⱕ t ⱕ 52

million  dollars/year/year,  where  t is  measured  in  years,
with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 1999. Sales of organic milk in
1999 totaled $108 million.
a. Find  an  expression  giving  the  total  annual  sales  of

organic milk in year t (0 ⱕ t ⱕ 5).

b. According  to  this  model,  what  were  the  total  annual

sales of organic milk in 2004?

Source: Resource, Inc.

86. SURFACE AREA OF A HUMAN Empirical data suggest that the
surface area of a 180-cm-tall human body changes at the
rate of

S⬘1W2 ⫽ 0.131773W⫺0.575

square meters/kilogram, where W is the mass of the body
in  kilograms.  If  the  surface  area  of  a  180-cm-tall  human
body weighing 70 kg is 1.886277 m2, what is the surface
area of a human body of the same height weighing 75 kg?

87. OUTPATIENT SERVICE COMPANIES The  number  of  Medicare-
certified home-health-care agencies (70% are freestanding,
and 30% are owned by a hospital or other large facility) has
been declining at the rate of

⫺0.0000372t 2 ⫹ 0.00372t ⫺ 0.186

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 172

thousand  agencies/year  between  1988  (t ⫽ 0)  and  2005 
(t ⫽ 17). The number of such agencies stood at 9.3 thou-
sand in 1988.
a. Find  an  expression  giving  the  number  of  health-care

agencies in year t.

b. According  to  this  model,  what  was  the  number  of

health-care agencies in 2002?

c. How many health-care agencies were there in 2005?
Source: Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.

88. HEIGHTS OF CHILDREN According to the Jenss model for pre-
dicting the height of preschool children, the rate of growth
of a typical preschool child is

12.7659t 2 ⫺ 25.7118t ⫹ 32.2831    11

4

ⱕ t ⱕ 62

centimeters/year, where t is measured in years. The height
of a typical 3-month-old preschool child is 60.30 cm.
a. Find  a  model  for  predicting  the  height  of  a  typical

preschool child at age t.

b. Use the result of part (a) to estimate the height of a typ-

ical 1-year-old child.

89. BLOOD FLOW IN AN ARTERY Nineteenth-century  physician
Jean  Louis  Marie  Poiseuille  discovered  that  the  rate  of
change of the velocity of blood r cm from the central axis
of an artery (in centimeters per second per centimeter) is
given by

a1r2 ⫽ ⫺kr

where k is a constant. If the radius of an artery is R cm, find
an expression for the velocity of blood as a function of r
(see the accompanying figure).
Hint: √⬘(r) ⫽ a(r) and √(R) ⫽ 0. (Why?)

R

r

Blood vessel

90. ACCELERATION OF A CAR A  car  traveling  along  a  straight
road at 66 ft/sec accelerated to a speed of 88 ft/sec over a
distance  of  440  ft.  What  was  the  acceleration  of  the  car,
assuming that it was constant?

91. DECELERATION OF A CAR What constant deceleration would a
car moving along a straight road have to be subjected to if
it were brought to rest from a speed of 88 ft/sec in 9 sec?
What would be the stopping distance?

92. CARRIER LANDING A pilot lands a fighter aircraft on an air-
craft carrier. At the moment of touchdown, the speed of the
aircraft is 160 mph. If the aircraft is brought to a complete
stop  in  1  sec  and  the  deceleration  is  assumed  to  be  con-
stant, find the number of g’s the pilot is subjected to dur-
ing landing (1 g ⫽ 32 ft/sec2).

93. CROSSING THE FINISH LINE After  rounding  the  final  turn  in
the bell lap, two runners emerge ahead of the pack. When
Runner  A is  200  ft  from  the  finish  line,  his  speed  is 
22 ft/sec, a speed that he maintains until he crosses the line.
At that instant of time, Runner B, who is 20 ft behind Run-
ner A and running at a speed of 20 ft/sec, begins to sprint.
Assuming that Runner B sprints with a constant accelera-
tion, what minimum acceleration will enable him to cross
the finish line ahead of Runner A?

94. DRAINING A TANK A tank has a constant cross-sectional area
of 50 ft2 and an orifice of constant cross-sectional area of
1
2 ft2
located at the bottom of the tank (see the accompany-
ing figure).

h

If  the  tank  is  filled  with  water  to  a  height  of  h ft  and
allowed to drain, then the height of the water decreases at
a rate that is described by the equation

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

11.2 INTEGRATION BY SUBSTITUTION

771

a takeoff speed of at least 240 ft/sec after traveling 800 ft
along  the  flight  deck,  find  the  minimum  acceleration  to
which it must be subjected, assuming that it is constant.

In Exercises 97–100, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
97. If F and G are antiderivatives of f on an interval I, then 

F(x) ⫽ G(x) ⫹ C on I.

98. If F is an antiderivative of f on an interval I, then 

兰

f(x) dx ⫽ F(x).

99. If f and t are integrable, then 兰 [2f(x) ⫺ 3t(x)] dx ⫽

2 f(x) dx ⫺ 3 t(x) dx.
兰

兰

100. If f and t are integrable, then f(x)t(x) dx ⫽

兰

f(x) dx][ t(x) dx].

兰

兰

[

or  k ⫽ 7.  Hence,  the  required  rule  of  definition  of  the 
function f is

x dx

f1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫹ 3x ⫹ 7

3. Let  M(t)  denote  United  Motors’  market  share  at  year  t.

Then,

x ⫹ C
x ⫹ C

 M1t2 ⫽ 冮  f  1t2 dt

 ⫽ 冮 1⫺0.01875t 

 ⫽ ⫺0.00625t 

2 ⫹ 0.15t ⫺ 1.22 dt
3 ⫹ 0.075t 
2 ⫺ 1.2t ⫹ C

To determine the value of C, we use the initial condition 
M(0) ⫽ 48.4, obtaining C ⫽ 48.4. Therefore,

M1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.00625t 3 ⫹ 0.075t 2 ⫺ 1.2t ⫹ 48.4

In particular, United Motors’ market share of new cars at
the beginning of 2012 is given by

 M1122 ⫽ ⫺0.006251122 3 ⫹ 0.0751122 2

 ⫽ ⫺1.21122 ⫹ 48.4 ⫽ 34

or 34%.

dh
dt

⫽ ⫺ 1
25

 a120 ⫺ t

50b     10 ⱕ t ⱕ 501202

Find an expression for the height of the water at any time t
if its height initially is 20 ft.

95. AMOUNT OF RAINFALL During a thunderstorm, rain was fall-

ing at the rate of

822t ⫺ 32t 3    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 0.62

inches/hour.
a. Find  an  expression  giving  the  total  amount  of  rainfall

after t hr.
Hint: The total amount of rainfall at t ⫽ 0 is zero.

b. How much rain had fallen after  hr?

1
2

96. LAUNCHING A FIGHTER AIRCRAFT A  fighter  aircraft 

is
launched  from  the  deck  of  a  Nimitz-class  aircraft  carrier
with the help of a steam catapult. If the aircraft is to attain

11.1 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises
 冮 a 11x

⫺ 2
x

⫹ 3e 

1.

xb  dx
 dx ⫹ 3 冮 e 

x

⫹ 3e 

xb  dx ⫽ 冮 a x ⫺1/2 ⫺ 2
 ⫽ 冮 x ⫺1/2 dx ⫺ 2 冮 
 ⫽ 2x 1/2 ⫺ 2 ln0 x 0 ⫹ 3e 
 ⫽ 21x ⫺ 2 ln0 x 0 ⫹ 3e 

1
x

2. The slope of the tangent line to the graph of the function f
at  any  point  P(x,  f(x))  is  given  by  the  derivative  f ⬘ of  f.
Thus, the first condition implies that

which, upon integration, yields

f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 3x 2 ⫺ 6x ⫹ 3
 f 1x2 ⫽ 冮 13x 2 ⫺ 6x ⫹ 32 dx

 ⫽ x 

3 ⫺ 3x 

2 ⫹ 3x ⫹ k

where k is the constant of integration.

To evaluate k, we use the initial condition (2), which

implies that f(2) ⫽ 9, or 

9 ⫽ f122 ⫽ 23 ⫺ 3122 2 ⫹ 3122 ⫹ k

11.2 Integration by Substitution

In Section 11.1, we developed certain rules of integration that are closely related to the
corresponding  rules  of  differentiation  in  Chapter  9.  In  this  section,  we  introduce  a
method of integration called the method of substitution, which is related to the chain
rule for differentiating functions. When used in conjunction with the rules of integra-
tion developed earlier, the method of substitution is a powerful tool for integrating a
large class of functions.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

772

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

How the Method of Substitution Works
Consider the indefinite integral

冮 212x ⫹ 42 5 dx

One way of evaluating this integral is to expand the expression 2(2x ⫹ 4)5 and then
integrate the resulting integrand term by term. As an alternative approach, let’s see
whether we can simplify the integral by making a change of variable. Write

with differential*

u ⫽ 2x ⫹ 4

du ⫽ 2 dx

If we formally substitute these quantities into the integral (3), we obtain

冮 212x ⫹ 42 5 dx ⫽ 冮  12x ⫹ 42 512 dx2 ⫽ 冮  u5 du

앖

Rewrite

앖 冦u ⫽ 2x ⫹ 4
du ⫽ 2 dx

Now,  the  last  integral  involves  a  power  function  and  is  easily  evaluated  using

Rule 2 of Section 11.1. Thus,

冮 u5 du ⫽ 1
6

 u6 ⫹ C

Therefore, using this result and replacing u by u ⫽ 2x ⫹ 4, we obtain

冮 212x ⫹ 42 5 dx ⫽ 1

6

 12x ⫹ 42 6 ⫹ C

We can verify that the foregoing result is indeed correct by computing

d
 
dx

 c 1

6

 12x ⫹ 42 6 ⫹ Cd ⫽ 1

6

# 612x ⫹ 42 5122

Use the Chain Rule.

 ⫽ 212x ⫹ 42 5

and observing that the last expression is just the integrand of the integral (3).

The Method of Integration by Substitution
To see why the approach used in evaluating the integral in (3) is successful, write

f1x2 ⫽ x 5

and

t1x2 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 4

Then, t⬘(x) ⫽ 2. Furthermore, the integrand of (3) is just 2 times the composition of f
and t, that is,

(3)

(4)

(5)

Therefore, the integral (3) can be written as

 21   f ⴰ t21x2 ⫽ 2 f  1t1x22

 ⫽ 23t1x24 5  ⫽ 212x ⫹ 42 5
冮 2 f 1t1x22t ¿1x2 dx

冮  f 1u2 du

Next, let’s show that an integral having the form (4) can always be written as

Suppose F is an antiderivative of f. By the Chain Rule, we have

d
dx

 3F1t1x224 ⫽ F¿1t1x22t¿1x2
du ⫽ f  ¿1x2 dx

.

, the differential of u, written du, is 

*If 

u ⫽ f  1x2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.2 INTEGRATION BY SUBSTITUTION

773

Therefore,

冮 F¿1t1x22t¿1x2 dx ⫽ F1t1x22 ⫹ C
Letting F⬘ ⫽f and making the substitution u ⫽ t(x), we have

冮  f 1t1x22t¿1x2 dx ⫽ F1u2 ⫹ C ⫽ 冮 F¿1u2 du ⫽ 冮 f 1u2 du

as we wished to show. Thus, if the transformed integral is readily evaluated, as is the
case with the integral (3), then the method of substitution will prove successful.

Before we look at more examples, let’s summarize the steps involved in integra-

tion by substitution.

Integration by Substitution

Step 1

Step 2

Let  u ⫽ t(x),  where t(x)  is  part  of  the  integrand,  usually  the  “inside
function” of a composite function f (t(x)).
Find du ⫽ t⬘(x) dx.

Step 3 Use the substitution u ⫽ t(x) and du ⫽ t⬘(x) dx to convert the entire

integral into one involving only u.
Find the resulting integral.

Step 4

Step 5 Replace u by t(x) to obtain the final solution as a function of x.

Note Sometimes  we  need  to  consider  different  choices  of  t for  the  substitution 
u ⫽ t(x) in order to carry out Step 3 and/or Step 4.
EXAMPLE 1 Find  2x1x 2 ⫹ 32 4 dx.

冮

Solution
Step 1 Observe that the integrand involves the composite function (x 2 ⫹ 3)4 with

“inside function” t(x) ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 3. So we choose u ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 3.
Find du ⫽ 2x dx.

Step 2
Step 3 Making the substitution u ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 3 and du ⫽ 2x dx, we obtain

冮 2x1x 

2 ⫹ 32 4 dx ⫽ 冮 1x 

앖

2 ⫹ 32 412x dx2 ⫽ 冮 u4 du

an integral involving only the variable u.
Find the resulting integral:

Step 4

Rewrite

冮 u4 du ⫽ 1
5

 u5 ⫹ C

Step 5 Replacing u by x 2 ⫹ 3, we obtain

2 ⫹ 32 4 dx ⫽ 1

5

 1x 
2 ⫹ 32 5 ⫹ C

冮 2x1x 
13x ⫹ 1

dx.

冮
EXAMPLE 2 Find  3

Solution

Step 1

Step 2

The integrand involves the composite function 
tion” t(x) ⫽ 3x ⫹ 1. So let u ⫽ 3x ⫹ 1.
Find du ⫽ 3 dx.

13x ⫹ 1

with “inside func-

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

774

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

Step 3 Making the substitution u ⫽ 3x ⫹ 1 and du ⫽ 3 dx, we obtain

冮 313x ⫹ 1 dx ⫽ 冮13x ⫹ 113 dx2 ⫽ 冮1u du

an integral involving only the variable u.
Find the resulting integral:

Step 4

冮1u du ⫽ 冮 u1/2 du ⫽ 2

 u3/2 ⫹ C

3

Step 5 Replacing u by 3x ⫹ 1, we obtain

冮 313x ⫹ 1 dx ⫽ 2
21x 
3 ⫹ 12 3/2 dx

3

.

 13x ⫹ 12 3/2 ⫹ C

EXAMPLE 3 Find 

冮 x 

Solution

Step 1

The integrand contains the composite function (x 3 ⫹ 1)3/2 with “inside func-
tion” t(x) ⫽ x 3 ⫹ 1. So let u ⫽ x 3 ⫹ 1.
Find du ⫽ 3x 2 dx.

Step 2
Step 3 Making the substitution u ⫽ x 3 ⫹ 1 and du ⫽ 3x 2 dx, or x 2

dx ⫽ 1
3

du, we

obtain

 冮 x21x3 ⫹ 12 3/2 dx ⫽ 冮 1x3 ⫹ 12 3/21x2 dx2
 dub ⫽ 1

3/2 a 1

 ⫽ 冮 u 

3

3

 冮 u 

3/2 du

an integral involving only the variable u.
Find the resulting integral:

Step 4

1
3

 冮 u3/2 du ⫽ 1
3

# 2
5

 u5/2 ⫹ C ⫽ 2
15

 u5/2 ⫹ C

Step 5 Replacing u by x 3 ⫹ 1, we obtain

冮 x21x3 ⫹ 12 3/2 dx ⫽ 2

15

 1x3 ⫹ 12 5/2 ⫹ C

Explore & Discuss
Let f1x2 ⫽ x 21x 3 ⫹ 12 3/2. Using the result of Example 3, we see that an antiderivative of f is
F1x2 ⫽ 2
. However, in terms of u (where u ⫽ x 3 ⫹ 1), an antiderivative of f is 
G1u2 ⫽ 2
. Compute F(2). Next, suppose we want to compute F(2) using the function G

15 1x3 ⫹ 12 5/2
15 u5/2

instead. At what value of u should you evaluate G(u) to obtain the desired result? Explain
your answer.

In the remaining examples, we drop the practice of labeling the steps involved in

evaluating each integral.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 4 Find 

冮 e⫺3x dx

.

Solution Let u ⫽ ⫺3x, so that du ⫽ ⫺3 dx, or 

du. Then,

dx ⫽ ⫺1
3
 冮 e 

u du

 冮 e⫺3x dx ⫽ 冮 e 
 ⫽ ⫺1
3

 dub ⫽ ⫺1
ua⫺1
3
u ⫹ C ⫽ ⫺1
3

 e 

3

 e⫺3x ⫹ C

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.2 INTEGRATION BY SUBSTITUTION

775

EXAMPLE 5 Find 

冮 

x
2 ⫹ 1

3x 

.
 dx

Solution Let u ⫽ 3x 2 ⫹ 1. Then, du ⫽ 6x dx, or x
priate substitutions, we have

dx ⫽ 1
6

du. Making the appro-

 冮 

x

3x2 ⫹ 1

1
u

 du

1
 dx ⫽ 冮 
6
 du
u
 冮 
 ⫽ 1
6
 ⫽ 1
 ln0 u 0 ⫹ C
6
 ⫽ 1
 ln13x 
6

2 ⫹ 12 ⫹ C

Since 3x 2 ⫹ 1 ⬎ 0

EXAMPLE 6 Find 

冮 1ln x2 2

2x

.
 dx

Solution Let u ⫽ ln x. Then,

 冮 1ln x2 2

2x

 dx

x

 1ln x2 dx ⫽ 1
 冮 1ln x2 2
 冮 u 

2 du

 dx

x

 du ⫽ d
dx
 dx ⫽ 1
2
 ⫽ 1
2
 ⫽ 1
6
 ⫽ 1
6

 u 

3 ⫹ C
 1ln x2 3 ⫹ C

Explore & Discuss
Suppose 

冮 f1u2 du ⫽ F1u2 ⫹ C
冮 f1ax ⫹ b2 dx ⫽ 1

.

a

1. Show that 

 F1ax ⫹ b2 ⫹ C

.

2. How can you use this result to facilitate the evaluation of integrals such as 

and 

兰

e 3x⫺2 dx? Explain your answer.

兰

(2x ⫹ 3)5 dx

Examples 7 and 8 show how the method of substitution can be used in practical

situations.

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 7 Cost of Producing Solar Cell Panels In 1990 the head
of the research and development department of Soloron Corporation 
claimed that the cost of producing solar cell panels would drop at the rate of

58

13t ⫹ 22 2

    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

776

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

dollars per peak watt for the next t years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to the begin-
ning of 1990. (A peak watt is the power produced at noon on a sunny day.) In
1990, the panels, which are used for photovoltaic power systems, cost $10 per
peak watt. Find an expression giving the cost per peak watt of producing solar cell
panels at the beginning of year t. What was the cost at the beginning of 2000?

Solution Let C(t) denote the cost per peak watt for producing solar cell panels
at the beginning of year t. Then,

C¿1t2 ⫽ ⫺ 58

13t ⫹ 22 2

Integrating, we find that

 C1t2 ⫽ 冮 

⫺58

13t ⫹ 22 2 dt

 ⫽ ⫺58 冮 13t ⫹ 22 ⫺2 dt

Let u ⫽ 3t ⫹ 2 so that

Then,

du ⫽ 3 dt  or  dt ⫽ 1
3

 du

 C1t2 ⫽ ⫺58a 1

3b冮 u⫺2 du
 1⫺12u⫺1 ⫹ k

 ⫽ ⫺58
3
58

 ⫽

313t ⫹ 22 ⫹ k

where k is an arbitrary constant. To determine the value of k, note that the cost
per peak watt of producing solar cell panels at the beginning of 1990 (t ⫽ 0) was
10, or C(0) ⫽ 10. This gives

C102 ⫽ 58

3122 ⫹ k ⫽ 10

or 

k ⫽ 1
3

. Therefore, the required expression is given by

3

58

313t ⫹ 22 ⫹ 1
58 ⫹ 13t ⫹ 22
313t ⫹ 22 ⫽ 3t ⫹ 60
313t ⫹ 22

 C1t2 ⫽
 ⫽
 ⫽ t ⫹ 20
3t ⫹ 2

The cost per peak watt for producing solar cell panels at the beginning of 2000 is
given by

C1102 ⫽ 10 ⫹ 20
31102 ⫹ 2

⬇ 0.94

or approximately $0.94 per peak watt.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.2 INTEGRATION BY SUBSTITUTION

777

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
Refer to Example 7.
1. Use a graphing utility to plot the graph of

C1t2 ⫽ t ⫹ 20

3t ⫹ 2

using the viewing window [0, 10] ⫻ [0, 5]. Then, use the numerical differen-
tiation capability of the graphing utility to compute C⬘(10).

2. Plot the graph of

C¿1t2 ⫽ ⫺ 58

13t ⫹ 22 2

using the viewing window [0, 10] ⫻ [⫺10, 0]. Then, use the evaluation capa-
bility of the graphing utility to find C⬘(10). Is this value of C⬘(10) the same
as that obtained in part 1? Explain your answer.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 8 Computer Sales Projections A study prepared by the
marketing department of Universal Instruments forecasts that after its new 
line of Galaxy Home Computers is introduced into the market, the level of sales
in the t-th month will be

units per month. Find an expression that gives the total number of computers that
will have been sold in the first t months after they become available on the market.
How many computers will Universal sell in the first year they are on the market?

2000 ⫺ 1500e⫺0.05t

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 602

Solution Let N(t) denote the total number of computers that may be expected to
be sold t months after their introduction in the market. Then, the rate of growth of
sales is given by N⬘(t) units per month. Thus,

so that

N⬘1t2 ⫽ 2000 ⫺ 1500e⫺0.05t
 N1t2 ⫽ 冮 12000 ⫺ 1500e⫺0.05t2 dt
 ⫽ 冮 2000 dt ⫺ 1500 冮 e⫺0.05t dt

Upon integrating the second integral by the method of substitution, we obtain

 N1t2 ⫽ 2000t ⫹ 1500

0.05

 e⫺0.05t ⫹ C

 ⫽ 2000t ⫹ 30,000e⫺0.05t ⫹ C

Let u ⫽ ⫺0.05t;
then du ⫽ ⫺0.05 dt.

To determine the value of C, note that the number of computers sold at the end of
month 0 is nil, so N(0) ⫽ 0. This gives

N102 ⫽ 30,000 ⫹ C ⫽ 0
or C ⫽ ⫺30,000. Therefore, the required expression is given by
 N1t2 ⫽ 2000t ⫹ 30,000e⫺0.05t ⫺ 30,000

Since e0 ⫽ 1

 ⫽ 2000t ⫹ 30,0001e⫺0.05t ⫺ 12

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

778

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

The number of computers that Universal can expect to sell in the first year is 
given by

 N1122 ⫽ 20001122 ⫹ 30,0001e⫺0.051122 ⫺ 12

 ⬇ 10,464

11.2 Self-Check Exercises

.

冮 12x ⫹ 5 dx
冮 

3 ⫹ 12 3/2

12x 
冮 xe2x2⫺1 dx
.

2
x 

1. Find 

2. Find 

3. Find 

  dx
.

4. According  to  a  joint  study  conducted  by  Oxnard’s
Environmental Management Department and a state gov-
ernment  agency,  the  concentration  of  carbon  monoxide

11.2 Concept Questions

(CO) in the air due to automobile exhaust is increasing at
the rate given by

f 1t2 ⫽

810.1t ⫹ 12
2 ⫹ 4t ⫹ 642 1/3

30010.2t 

parts per million (ppm) per year t. Currently, the CO con-
centration due to automobile exhaust is 0.16 ppm. Find an
expression giving the CO concentration t years from now.

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 11.2 can be found on 
page 780.

1. Explain how the method of substitution works by showing

2. Explain why the method of substitution works for the inte-

gral 

兰xe⫺x2

dx but not for the integral 

兰e⫺x2 dx

.

兰 f 1t1x22t¿1x2 dx

.

the steps used to find 

11.2 Exercises

In Exercises 1–50, find the indefinite integral.

2.

4x

冮 4x12x 

2 ⫺ 22 dx

2 ⫹ 12 7 dx

冮 414x ⫹ 32 4 dx
冮 1x 
3 ⫺ 2x2 213x 
冮 13x2 ⫺ 2x ⫹ 121x3 ⫺ x2 ⫹ x2 4 dx
冮 
冮 
12x2 ⫹ 32 3 dx
3 ⫹ 2x2 2 dx
1x 
2 2t 
冮 3t 
冮 3t 
2 1t 
3 ⫹ 22 3/2 dt
3 ⫹ 2 dt
冮 21x 
冮 x 
2 ⫺ 12 9x  dx
212x3 ⫹ 32 4 dx
冮 
冮 
22x 
1 ⫺ x5 dx

x 
3 ⫺ 1

2 ⫹ 2

12.

10.

 dx

3x 

x4

6.

8.

冮 

冮 

2

x ⫺ 2

 dx

14.

冮 

2

x 
3 ⫺ 3

x 

 dx

0.3x ⫺ 0.2
2 ⫺ 0.4x ⫹ 2

0.3x 

 dx

16.

冮 

2x 
0.2x 

2 ⫹ 1
3 ⫹ 0.3x

 dx

1.

3.

4.

5.

7.

9.

11.

13.

15.

17.

19.

 dx

冮 
2x
2 ⫺ 1
3x 
冮 e⫺2x dx

冮 

x 

2 ⫺ 1

3 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 1

x 

18.
20. 冮 e⫺0.02x  dx

 dx

39.

41.

冮 e2⫺x dx
冮  xe⫺x2 dx
冮 1ex ⫺ e⫺x2 dx
冮 

2e 

x dx

x

1 ⫹ e 

2

冮 

 dx

e1x1x
冮 
e3x ⫹ x 
32 3 dx
1e3x ⫹ x 
冮 e2x1e2x ⫹ 12 3 dx
冮 

ln 5x

 dx

21.

23.

25.

27.

29.

31.

33.

35.

x

2

冮 

37.

 dx

 dx

x ln x

2ln x

x

冮 
冮 a xe 

x2 ⫺ x

2 ⫹ 2b  dx

x 

22.

24.

26.

28.

30.

2e 

x3⫺1 dx

冮 e2t⫹3 dt
冮 x 
冮 1e2x ⫹ e⫺3x2 dx
冮 
1 ⫹ e2x dx
e⫺1/x
x 

2  dx

冮 

e2x

u

e 

 du

36.

34.

32.

x ⫺ e⫺x

冮 
x ⫹ e⫺x2 3/2 dx
1e 
冮 e⫺x11 ⫹ e⫺x2  dx
冮 1ln u2 3
冮 
x1ln x2 2 dx
冮 1ln x2 7/2
42. 冮 a xe⫺x 

2 ⫹ e 

40.

38.

 dx

1

x

x

e 

x ⫹ 3b  dx

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

43.

45.

46.

48.

50.

x ⫹ 11x ⫺ 1

冮 
Hint: Let 

 dx

u ⫽ 1x ⫺ 1

44.

.

e⫺u ⫺ 1
e⫺u ⫹ u

冮 
Hint: Let √ ⫽ e⫺u ⫹ u.

 du

冮 x1x ⫺ 12 5 dx

Hint: u ⫽ x ⫺ 1 implies x ⫽ u ⫹ 1.
冮 
冮 

47.

 dt

t

t ⫹ 1
t

Hint:

⫽ 1 ⫺ 1
t ⫹ 1

冮 

 dx

t ⫹ 1

1 ⫹ 1x
1 ⫺ 1x
Let u ⫽ 1 ⫺ 1x
冮 x31x2 ⫹ 12 3/2  dx

Hint:

Hint: Let u ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 1.

1 ⫺ 1x
1 ⫹ 1x

 dx

u ⫽ 1 ⫹ 1x

.

Hint: Let 

49.

√ 2(1 ⫺ √)6 d√

冮 
Hint: Let u ⫽ 1 ⫺ √.

.

In Exercises 51–54, find the function f given that the slope of the
tangent line to the graph of f at any point (x, f(x)) is fⴕ(x) and that
the graph of f passes through the given point.

2

3x 

52.

f  ¿1x2 ⫽

22x3 ⫺ 1

51. f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 512x ⫺ 124; 11, 32
;  11, 12
53. f ⬘1x2 ⫽ ⫺2xe⫺x 2⫹1; 11, 02
; 10, 22

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ 1 ⫺ 2x

2 ⫹ 1

54.

x 

55. CABLE TELEPHONE SUBSCRIBERS The  number  of  cable  tele-
phone subscribers stood at 3.2 million at the beginning of
2004 (t ⫽ 0). For the next 5 years, the number was pro-
jected to grow at the rate of

R1t2 ⫽ 3.36(t ⫹ 1)0.05

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 52

million  subscribers/year.  If  the  projection  held  true,  how
many cable telephone subscribers were there at the begin-
ning of 2008 (t ⫽ 4)?
Source: Sanford C. Bernstein.

56. TV VIEWERS: NEWSMAGAZINE SHOWS The number of viewers
of  a  weekly  TV  newsmagazine  show,  introduced  in  the
2008 season, has been increasing at the rate of

3a 2 ⫹ 1

2

 tb ⫺1/3

    11 ⱕ t ⱕ 62

million viewers/year in its tth year on the air where t ⫽ 1
corresponds  to  2008.  The  number  of  viewers  of  the  pro-
gram  during  its  first  year  on  the  air  is  given  by  9(5/2)2/3
million. Find how many viewers are expected in the 2013
season.

57. STUDENT ENROLLMENT The  registrar  of  Kellogg  University
estimates  that  the  student  enrollment  in  the  Continuing
Education division will grow at the rate of

N⬘1t2 ⫽ 200011 ⫹ 0.2t2 ⫺3/2

11.2 INTEGRATION BY SUBSTITUTION

779

students/year,  t years  from  now.  If  the  current  student
enrollment  is  1000,  find  an  expression  giving  the  enroll-
ment t years from now. What will be the enrollment 5 years
from now?

58. TV ON CELL PHONES The number of people watching TV on

cell phones is expected to grow at the rate of

11 ⫹ 0.91t
N¿1t2 ⫽ 5.4145

        10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

million/year.  The  number  of  people  watching  TV  on  cell
phones at the beginning of 2007 (t ⫽ 0) was 11.9 million.
a. Find an expression giving the number of people watch-

ing TV on cell phones in year t.

b. According  to  this  projection,  how  many  people  will  be

watching TV on cell phones at the beginning of 2011?

Source: International Data Corporation, U.S. forecast.

59. DEMAND:  WOMEN’S BOOTS The  rate  of  change  of  the  unit

price p (in dollars) of Apex women’s boots is given by

p¿1x2 ⫽

⫺250 x
116 ⫹ x 
22 3/2

where x is the quantity demanded daily in units of a hun-
dred. Find the demand function for these boots if the quan-
tity demanded daily is 300 pairs (x ⫽ 3) when the unit price
is $50/pair.

60. POPULATION GROWTH The  population  of  a  certain  city  is

projected to grow at the rate of

r1t2 ⫽ 400a 1 ⫹ 2t

24 ⫹ t 

2b     10 ⱕ t ⱕ 52

people/year,  t years  from  now.  The  current  population  is
60,000. What will be the population 5 years from now?

61. OIL SPILL In calm waters, the oil spilling from the ruptured
hull of a grounded tanker forms an oil slick that is circular in
shape. If the radius r of the circle is increasing at the rate of

r¿1t2 ⫽

3012t ⫹ 4

feet/minute t min after the rupture occurs, find an expres-
sion for the radius at any time t. How large is the polluted
area 16 min after the rupture occurred?
Hint: r(0) ⫽ 0

62. LIFE EXPECTANCY OF A FEMALE Suppose  that  in  a  certain
country, the life expectancy at birth of a female is chang-
ing at the rate of

t¿1t2 ⫽ 5.45218
11 ⫹ 1.09t2 0.9

years/year. Here, t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corre-
sponding to the beginning of 1900. Find an expression t(t)
giving the life expectancy at birth (in years) of a female in
that country if the life expectancy at the beginning of 1900
is  50.02  years.  What  is  the  life  expectancy  at  birth  of  a
female born in 2000 in that country?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

780

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

63. AVERAGE BIRTH HEIGHT OF BOYS Using  data  collected  at
Kaiser  Hospital,  pediatricians  estimate  that  the  average
height of male children changes at the rate of

h¿1t2 ⫽ 52.8706e⫺0.3277t
11 ⫹ 2.449e⫺0.3277t2 2

inches/year,  where  the  child’s  height  h(t)  is  measured  in
inches  and  t,  the  child’s  age,  is  measured  in  years,  with 
t ⫽ 0 corresponding to birth. Find an expression h(t) for the
average height of a boy at age t if the height at birth of an
average child is 19.4 in. What is the height of an average
8-year-old boy?

mg/min, where a is a positive constant associated with the
rate at which excess glucose is eliminated from the blood-
stream and is dependent on the patient’s metabolism rate.
Derive  an  expression  for  the  amount  of  glucose  in  the
bloodstream at time t.
Hint: A(0) ⫽ 0

66. CONCENTRATION OF A DRUG IN AN ORGAN A  drug  is  carried
into an organ of volume V cm3 by a liquid that enters the
organ at the rate of a cm3/sec and leaves it at the rate of 
b cm3/sec.  The  concentration  of  the  drug  in  the  liquid
entering  the  organ  is  c g/cm3.  If  the  concentration  of  the
drug in the organ at time t is increasing at the rate of

64. LEARNING CURVES The  average  student  enrolled  in  the 
20-week Court Reporting I course at the American Insti-
tute of Court Reporting progresses according to the rule

N⬘1t2 ⫽ 6e⫺0.05t

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 202

where  N⬘(t)  measures  the  rate  of  change  in  the  number  of
words/minute of dictation the student takes in machine short-
hand after t weeks in the course. Assuming that the average
student enrolled in this course begins with a dictation speed
of  60  words/minute,  find  an  expression  N(t)  that  gives  the
dictation speed of the student after t weeks in the course.

65. AMOUNT OF GLUCOSE IN THE BLOODSTREAM Suppose a patient
is given a continuous intravenous infusion of glucose at a
constant  rate  of  r mg/min.  Then,  the  rate  at  which  the
amount of glucose in the bloodstream is changing at time t
because of this infusion is given by

A⬘1t2 ⫽ re⫺at

11.2 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

x¿1t2 ⫽ 1

V

 1ac ⫺ bx02e⫺bt/V

g/cm3/sec  and  the  concentration  of  the  drug  in  the  organ
initially is x0 g/cm3, show that the concentration of the drug
in the organ at time t is given by

x1t2 ⫽ ac

b

⫹ a x0 ⫺ ac

b b e⫺bt/V

In Exercises 67 and 68, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an example
to show why it is false.

67. If f is integrable, then 

68. If f is integrable, then 

 冮 f 1x2 dx

冮 xf 1x 22 dx ⫽ 1
冮 f 1ax ⫹ b2 dx ⫽ a 冮 f 1x2 dx

2

.

.

1. Let u ⫽ 2x ⫹ 5. Then, du ⫽ 2 dx, or 
the appropriate substitutions, we have

 dub ⫽ 1

 冮 22x ⫹ 5  dx ⫽ 冮 1u a 1
 a 2
3b u3/2 ⫹ C
 12x ⫹ 52 3/2 ⫹ C

 ⫽ 1
2
 ⫽ 1
3

2

2

2. Let u ⫽ 2x 3 ⫹ 1, so that du ⫽ 6x 2 dx, or x 2
Making the appropriate substitutions, we have

dx ⫽ 1
6

du.

 冮 

2

x 

u 

62 du
3 ⫹ 12 3/2 dx ⫽ 冮 11
12x 
 ⫽ a 1
 ⫽ ⫺1
3

3/2

⫽ 1
6

 冮 u⫺3/2 du
6b1⫺22u⫺1/2 ⫹ C
 12x3 ⫹ 12 ⫺1/2 ⫹ C
322x 
⫹ C

1
3 ⫹ 1

 ⫽ ⫺

dx ⫽ 1
2

du. Making

3. Let u ⫽ 2x 2 ⫺ 1, so that du ⫽ 4x dx, or x

dx ⫽ 1
4

du. Then,

 冮 u1/2 du

 冮 xe2x 

2⫺1 dx ⫽ 1
4
 ⫽ 1
4
 ⫽ 1
4

 冮 eu du

 eu ⫹ C

 e2x 

2⫺1 ⫹ C

4. Let C(t) denote the CO concentration in the air due to auto-

mobile exhaust t years from now. Then,

 C¿1t2 ⫽ f  1t2 ⫽

810.1t ⫹ 12
2 ⫹ 4t ⫹ 642 1/3

30010.2t 
300  10.1t ⫹ 1210.2t 

 ⫽ 8

2 ⫹ 4t ⫹ 642 ⫺1/3

Integrating, we find

8
300

 C1t2 ⫽ 冮 
 ⫽ 8
300

 10.1t ⫹ 1210.2t 
 冮 10.1t ⫹ 1210.2t 

2 ⫹ 4t ⫹ 642 ⫺1/3 dt
2 ⫹ 4t ⫹ 642 ⫺1/3 dt

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Let  u ⫽ 0.2t 2 ⫹ 4t ⫹ 64,  so  that  du ⫽ (0.4t ⫹ 4)  dt ⫽
4(0.1t ⫹ 1) dt, or

where k is an arbitrary constant. To determine the value of
k, we use the condition C(0) ⫽ 0.16, obtaining

11.3 AREA AND THE DEFINITE INTEGRAL

781

 C102 ⫽ 0.16 ⫽ 0.011642 2/3 ⫹ k

 0.16 ⫽ 0.16 ⫹ k

 k ⫽ 0

Therefore,

C1t2 ⫽ 0.0110.2t 2 ⫹ 4t ⫹ 642 2/3

10.1t ⫹ 12 dt ⫽ 1

4

 du

Then,

4b冮 u⫺1/3 du
 a 1
 C1t2 ⫽ 8
300
 ⫽ 1
 a 3
 u2/3b ⫹ k
150
 ⫽ 0.0110.2t 
2 ⫹ 4t ⫹ 642 2/3 ⫹ k

2

11.3 Area and the Definite Integral

An Intuitive Look
Suppose a certain state’s annual rate of petroleum consumption over a 4-year period
is constant and is given by the function

f1t2 ⫽ 1.2

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

where t is measured in years and f(t) in millions of barrels per year. Then, the state’s
total petroleum consumption over the period of time in question is

11.2214 ⫺ 02

(Rate of consumption) (time elapsed)

#

or 4.8 million barrels. If you examine the graph of f shown in Figure 5, you will see
that this total is just the area of the rectangular region bounded above by the graph of
f, below by the t-axis, and to the left and right by the vertical lines t ⫽ 0 (the y-axis)
and t ⫽ 4, respectively.

y

1.2

r
a
e
y

 
r
e
p

 
s
l
e
r
r
a
b

 

n
o
i
l
l
i

M

t = 4

y = f (t) = 1.2

y

r
a
e
y

r
e
p

s
l
e
r
r
a
b
n
o
i
l
l
i

M

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

1

2
3
Years

4

t

1

2
3
Years

4

t

FIGURE 5
The total petroleum consumption is given by
the area of the rectangular region.

FIGURE 6
The daily petroleum consumption is given by
the “area” of the shaded region.

Figure 6 shows the actual petroleum consumption of a certain New England state
over a 4-year period from 1990 (t ⫽ 0) to 1994 (t ⫽ 4). Observe that the rate of con-
sumption is not constant; that is, the function f is not a constant function. What is the
state’s total petroleum consumption over this 4-year period? It seems reasonable to
conjecture that it is given by the “area” of the region bounded above by the graph of
f, below by the t-axis, and to the left and right by the vertical lines t ⫽ 0 and t ⫽ 4,
respectively.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

782

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

This example raises two questions:

1. What is the “area” of the region shown in Figure 6?
2. How do we compute this area?

y

x = a

x = b

y = f (x)

x

a

b

FIGURE 7
The area of the region under the graph of
f on [a, b]

The Area Problem
The preceding example touches on the second fundamental problem in calculus: Cal-
culate  the  area  of  the  region  bounded  by  the  graph  of  a  nonnegative  function  f,  the 
x-axis, and the vertical lines x ⫽ a and x ⫽ b where a ⬍ b (Figure 7). This area is called
the area of the region under the graph of f on the interval [a, b] or from a to b.

Defining Area—Two Examples
Just as we used the slopes of secant lines (quantities that we could compute) to help
us define the slope of the tangent line to a point on the graph of a function, we now
adopt a parallel approach and use the areas of rectangles (quantities that we can com-
pute) to help us define the area under the graph of a function. We begin by looking at
a specific example.

VIDEO

y

= x 2

EXAMPLE 1 Let f(x) ⫽ x 2 and consider the region R under the graph of f on the
interval [0, 1] (Figure 8a). To obtain an approximation of the area of R, let’s con-
struct four nonoverlapping rectangles, except for their edges, as follows: Divide the
interval [0, 1] into four subintervals

c 0, 

1

4d ,  c 1

4

, 

1

2d ,  c 1

2

, 

3

4d ,  c 3

4

, 1d

R

x

1

of equal length  Next, construct four rectangles with these subintervals as bases
and with heights given by the values of the function at the midpoints

1
4.

1
8

,  3
8

,  5
8

,  7
8

of each subinterval. Then, each of these rectangles has width  and height

1
4

f a 1

8b ,  f a 3

8b ,  f a 5

8b ,  f a 7
8b

y = x 2

respectively (Figure 8b).

If we approximate the area A of R by the sum of the areas of the four rect-

y

1

(a)

y

f

( )
7
8

f

f
f

( )
5
8

8( )
3
( )
1
8

1
8

1
4

3
8

1
2

5
8

3
4

7
8

1

x

(b)
FIGURE 8
The area of the region under the graph of
f on [0, 1] in (a) is approximated by the
sum of the areas of the four rectangles 
in (b).

angles, we obtain
 A ⬇ 1
4
 ⫽ 1
4
 ⫽ 1
4
 ⫽ 1
4

4

4

4

 f a 7
 f a 1
8b ⫹ 1
 f a 3
8b ⫹ 1
 f a 5
8b ⫹ 1
8b
8b ⫹ f a 7
8b ⫹ f a 5
8b ⫹ f a 3
 c f a 1
8b d
8b 2d
8b 2
8b 2
8b 2
 c a 1
⫹ a 5
⫹ a 7
⫹ a 3
64b ⫽ 21
⫹ 49
⫹ 25
⫹ 9
 a 1
64
64

64

64

Recall that f(x) ⫽ x 2.

or approximately 0.328125.

Following the procedure of Example 1, we can obtain approximations of the area
of the region R using any number n of rectangles (n ⫽ 4 in Example 1). Figure 9a
shows the approximation of the area A of R using 8 rectangles (n ⫽ 8), and Figure 9b
shows the approximation of the area A of R using 16 rectangles.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

11.3 AREA AND THE DEFINITE INTEGRAL

783

y

1

y = x 2

y

1

y = x 2

FIGURE 9
As n increases, the number of rectangles
increases, and the approximation
improves.

x

1

x

1

(a) n ⫽ 8

(b) n ⫽ 16

These figures suggest that the approximations seem to get better as n increases.
This  is  borne  out  by  the  results  given  in  Table  1,  which  were  obtained  by  using  a 
computer.

TABLE 1
Number of Rectangles, n

4

8

16

32

64

100

200

Approximation of A

0.328125

0.332031

0.333008

0.333252

0.333313

0.333325

0.333331

Our computations seem to suggest that the approximations approach the number
1
as n gets larger and larger. This result suggests that we define the area of the region
3
under the graph of f(x) ⫽ x 2 on the interval [0, 1] to be  .
1
3

In Example 1, we chose the midpoint of each subinterval as the point at which to
evaluate  f(x)  to  obtain  the  height  of  the  approximating  rectangle.  Let’s  consider
another example, this time choosing the left endpoint of each subinterval.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 2 Let R be the region under the graph of f(x) ⫽ 16 ⫺ x 2 on the interval
[1, 3]. Find an approximation of the area A of R using four subintervals of [1, 3] of
equal length and picking the left endpoint of each subinterval to evaluate f(x) to
obtain the height of the approximating rectangle.

Solution The graph of f is sketched in Figure 10a. Since the length of [1, 3] is 2,
we see that the length of each subinterval is 
are

. Therefore, the four subintervals

, or 

2
4

1
2

c 1, 

3

2d ,  c 3

2

, 2d ,  c 2, 

5

2d ,  c 5

2

, 3d

y

y

16

12

8

4

(a)

R

2

1

3

4

x

f (1)
( )
3
f
2
f (2)
2( )
5
f

8

4

(b)

1

3
2

2

5
2

3

4

x

FIGURE 10
The area of R in (a) is approximated 
by the sum of the areas of the four 
rectangles in (b).

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

784

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

The left endpoints of these subintervals are 1,  , 2, and  , respectively, so the
, respectively

heights of the approximating rectangles are f(1), 
(Figure 10b). Therefore, the required approximation is

, f(2), and 

22
f 15

3
2

5
2

2

2

2

f 13
22
 A ⬇ 1
 f a 5
 f 122 ⫹ 1
 f a 3
 f  112 ⫹ 1
2b ⫹ 1
2b
2
 ⫽ 1
2b ⫹ f 122 ⫹ f a 5
 c f 112 ⫹ f a 3
2b d
2
2b 2d
 ⫽ 1
 e 316 ⫺ 112 24 ⫹ c 16 ⫺ a 3
2
2b 2d f
 ⫽ ⫹ 316 ⫺ 122 24 ⫹ c 16 ⫺ a 5
4 b ⫽ 101
 ⫽ 1
2

 a 15 ⫹ 55

⫹ 12 ⫹ 39

4

4

Recall that f(x) ⫽ 16 ⫺ x2.

or approximately 25.25.

Table 2 shows the approximations of the area  A of the region  R of Example 2
when n rectangles are used for the approximation and the heights of the approximat-
ing rectangles are found by evaluating f(x) at the left endpoints.

TABLE 2
Number of Rectangles, n

4

10

100

1,000

10,000

50,000

Approximation of A

25.2500

24.1200

23.4132

23.3413

23.3341

23.3335

100,000

23.3334

Once again, we see that the approximations seem to approach a unique number as
n gets larger and larger. This time, the number is 23 This result suggests that we 
define the area of the region under the graph of f(x) ⫽ 16 ⫺ x 2 on the interval [1, 3]
1
to be 23 .
3

1
3.

Defining Area—The General Case
Examples 1 and 2 point the way to defining the area A of the region R under the graph
of an arbitrary but continuous, nonnegative function f on an interval [a, b] (Figure 11a).

y

y

y = f (x)

y = f (x)

R

FIGURE 11
The area of the region under the graph of
f on [a, b] in (a) is approximated by the
sum of the areas of the n rectangles
shown in (b).

a

(a)

x

b

a

x1

x2

x3

x4

. . .

xn b

x

(b)

Divide the interval [a, b] into n subintervals of equal length ⌬x ⫽ (b ⫺ a)>n. Next,
pick n arbitrary points x1, x2, . . . , and xn, called representative points, from the first,
second, . . . , and nth subintervals, respectively (Figure 11b). Then, approximating the

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

11.3 AREA AND THE DEFINITE INTEGRAL

785

area A of the region R by the n rectangles of width ⌬x and heights f1x 12, f1x 22, . . . ,
f1x n2, so that the areas of the rectangles are f1x 12 ⌬x, f1x 22 ⌬x, . . . , f1x n2 ⌬x, we have

A ⬇ f1x 12 ⌬x ⫹ f1x 22 ⌬x ⫹ . . . ⫹ f1x n2 ⌬x

The sum on the right-hand side of this expression is called a Riemann sum in honor
of  the  German  mathematician  Bernhard  Riemann  (1826–1866).  Now,  as  the  earlier
examples  seem  to  suggest,  the  Riemann  sum  will  approach  a  unique  number  as  n
becomes arbitrarily large.* We define this number to be the area A of the region R.

The Area of the Region Under the Graph of a Function
Let f be a nonnegative continuous function on [a, b]. Then, the area of the region
under the graph of f is

A ⫽ lim
nS⬁

 3   f  1x12 ⫹ f  1x22 ⫹ . . . ⫹ f  1xn24  ¢x

(6)
where x1, x2, . . . , xn are arbitrary points in the n subintervals of [a, b] of equal
width ⌬x ⫽ (b ⫺ a)>n.

The Definite Integral
As we have just seen, the area under the graph of a continuous nonnegative function
f on an interval [a, b] is defined by the limit of the Riemann sum

nS⬁ 3  f 1x12  ¢ x ⫹ f 1x22  ¢ x ⫹ . . . ⫹ f 1xn2  ¢ x4

lim

We now turn our attention to the study of limits of Riemann sums involving func-
tions that are not necessarily nonnegative. Such limits arise in many applications of
calculus.

For example, the calculation of the distance covered by a body traveling along a
straight line involves evaluating a limit of this form. The computation of the total rev-
enue  realized  by  a  company  over  a  certain  time  period,  the  calculation  of  the  total
amount of electricity consumed in a typical home over a 24-hour period, the average
concentration of a drug in a body over a certain interval of time, and the volume of a
solid—all involve limits of this type.

We begin with the following definition.

The Definite Integral
Let f be a function defined on [a, b]. If

 3   f 1x12  ¢ x ⫹ f 1x22  ¢ x ⫹ . . . ⫹ f 1xn2  ¢ x4

lim
nS⬁

exists and is the same for all choices of representative points x1, x2, . . . , xn in
the n subintervals of [a, b] of equal width  ⌬x ⫽ (b ⫺ a)>n, then this limit is

a  f1x2 dx.
兰 b
called the definite integral of f from a to b and is denoted by 
nS⬁ 3  f 1x12  ¢ x ⫹ f 1x22  ¢ x ⫹ . . . ⫹ f 1xn2  ¢ x4

冮 b
 f 1x2 dx ⫽ lim

Thus,

(7)

a

The  number  a is  called  the  lower  limit  of  integration, and  the  number  b is
called the upper limit of integration.

*Even though we chose the representative points to be the midpoints of the subintervals in Example 1 and the left endpoints in
Example 2, it can be shown that each of the respective sums will always approach the same unique number as n approaches
infinity.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

786

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

Notes

1. If f is nonnegative, then the limit in Equation (7) is the same as the limit in (6);

therefore, the definite integral gives the area under the graph of f on [a, b].

2. The limit in Equation (7) is denoted by the integral sign

because, as we will see

later, the definite integral and the antiderivative of a function f are related.

3. It is important to realize that the definite integral

is a number, whereas 
represents a family of functions (the antiderivatives

the indefinite integral
of f ).

兰 f 1x2 dx

兰
a  f 1x2 dx
兰 b

4. If the limit in Equation (7) exists, we say that f is integrable on the interval [a, b].

When Is a Function Integrable?
The following theorem, which we state without proof, guarantees that a continuous
function is integrable.

Integrability of a Function
Let f be continuous on [a, b]. Then, f is integrable on [a, b]; that is, the definite
a  f1x2 dx
兰 b
integral  

exists.

Geometric Interpretation of the Definite Integral
If  f is  nonnegative  and  integrable  on  [a,  b],  then  we  have  the  following  geometric
interpretation of the definite integral

.

a  f 1x2 dx
兰 b

Geometric Interpretation of 

兰 b
a

f(x) dx for f(x) ⱖ 0 on [a, b]

If f is nonnegative and continuous on [a, b], then

冮 b
 f 1x2 dx

a

is equal to the area of the region under the graph of f on [a, b] (Figure 12).

y

a

A =   b
a

 f(x) dx

y = f (x

)

x

b

(8)

Next, let’s extend our geometric interpretation of the definite integral to include
the case where f assumes both positive and negative values on [a, b]. Consider a typ-
ical Riemann sum of the function f,

f1x 12 ⌬x ⫹ f1x 22 ⌬x ⫹ . . . ⫹ f1x n2 ⌬x

corresponding to a partition of [a,  b] into  n subintervals of equal width (b ⫺ a)>n,
where x1, x2, . . . , xn are representative points in the subintervals. The sum consists of
n terms in which a positive term corresponds to the area of a rectangle of height f(xk)
(for some positive integer k) lying above the x-axis and a negative term corresponds

FIGURE 12
If f(x) ⱖ 0 on [a, b], then
兰 b
a
graph of f on [a, b].

f(x) dx ⫽ area of the region under the

Explore & Discuss
Suppose f is nonpositive
[that is, f(x) ⱕ 0] and con-
tinuous on [a, b]. Explain
why the area of the region
below the x-axis and above
the graph of f is given by
⫺兰 b
a

f(x) dx.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

to the negative of the area of a rectangle of height ⫺f1x k2 lying below the x-axis. (See
Figure 13, which depicts a situation with n ⫽ 6.)

11.3 AREA AND THE DEFINITE INTEGRAL

787

y

y = f (x)

x

x4

a

x1

x2

x3

x5

x6

b

As n gets larger and larger, the sums of the areas of the rectangles lying above the
x-axis seem to give a better and better approximation of the area of the region lying
above the x-axis (Figure 14). Similarly, the sums of the areas of those rectangles lying
below  the  x-axis  seem  to  give  a  better  and  better  approximation  of  the  area  of  the
region lying below the x-axis.

y

a

y = f (x)

x

b

These observations suggest the following geometric interpretation of the definite

integral for an arbitrary continuous function on an interval [a, b].

Geometric Interpretation of

冮 b

a

f(x) dx on [a, b]

If f is continuous on [a, b], then

冮 b
 f 1x2 dx

a

is equal to the area of the region above [a, b] minus the area of the region below
[a, b] (Figure 15).

y

R1

a

R2

y = f (x)

R3

x

b

FIGURE 13
The positive terms in the Riemann sum
are associated with the areas of the rect-
angles that lie above the x-axis, and the
negative terms are associated with the
areas of those that lie below the x-axis.

FIGURE 14
As n gets larger, the approximations get
better. Here, n ⫽ 12, and we are approxi-
mating with twice as many rectangles as
in Figure 13.

FIGURE 15
冮 b

a

f(x) dx ⫽ Area of R 1

⫺ Area of R 2 ⫹ Area of R 3

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

788

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

11.3 Self-Check Exercise

Find  an  approximation  of  the  area  of  the  region  R under  the
graph of f(x) ⫽ 2x 2 ⫹ 1 on the interval [0, 3], using four subin-
tervals  of  [0,  3]  of  equal  length  and  picking  the  midpoint  of
each subinterval as a representative point.

The solution to Self-Check Exercise 11.3 can be found on 
page 790.

11.3 Concept Questions

1. Explain how you would define the area of the region under
the  graph  of  a  nonnegative  continuous  function  f on  the
interval [a, b].

for  the  case  in  which  (a)  f is  nonnegative  on  [a,  b]  and  (b)  f
assumes both positive and negative values on [a, b]. Illustrate
your answers graphically.

2. Define the definite integral of a continuous function on the 

interval [a, b]. Give a geometric interpretation of

冮 b

a

 f 1x2 dx

11.3 Exercises

In  Exercises  1  and  2,  find  an  approximation  of  the  area  of  the
region R under the graph of f by computing the Riemann sum of
f corresponding to the partition of the interval into the subinter-
vals  shown  in  the  accompanying  figures.  In  each  case,  use  the
midpoints of the subintervals as the representative points.
1.

2.7

y

2.4

2.5

1.9

1.8

1.5

1

2

3

y = f (x)

x

2.

y

8.0 8.5

4.5

6.0

4.0

3.0 2.5 2.0

1

2

y = f (x)
x

3. Let f(x) ⫽ 3x.

a. Sketch the region R under the graph of f on the interval 

[0, 2], and find its exact area using geometry.

b. Use  a  Riemann  sum  with  four  subintervals  of  equal
length (n ⫽ 4) to approximate the area of R. Choose the
representative  points  to  be  the  left  endpoints  of  the
subintervals.

c. Repeat part (b) with eight subintervals of equal length 

(n ⫽ 8).

d. Compare the approximations obtained in parts (b) and
(c) with the exact area found in part (a). Do the approx-
imations improve with larger n?

4. Repeat Exercise 3, choosing the representative points to be

the right endpoints of the subintervals.

5. Let f(x) ⫽ 4 ⫺ 2x.

a. Sketch the region R under the graph of f on the interval 

[0, 2], and find its exact area using geometry.

b. Use  a  Riemann  sum  with  five  subintervals  of  equal
length (n ⫽ 5) to approximate the area of R. Choose the
representative  points  to  be  the  left  endpoints  of  the
subintervals.

c. Repeat  part  (b)  with  ten  subintervals  of  equal  length 

(n ⫽ 10).

d. Compare the approximations obtained in parts (b) and
(c) with the exact area found in part (a). Do the approx-
imations improve with larger n?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

6. Repeat Exercise 5, choosing the representative points to be

the right endpoints of the subintervals.

7. Let f(x) ⫽ x 2, and compute the Riemann sum of f over the
interval [2, 4], choosing the representative points to be the
midpoints of the subintervals and using
a. Two subintervals of equal length (n ⫽ 2).
b. Five subintervals of equal length (n ⫽ 5).
c. Ten subintervals of equal length (n ⫽ 10).
d. Can you guess at the area of the region under the graph

of f on the interval [2, 4]?

8. Repeat Exercise 7, choosing the representative points to be

the left endpoints of the subintervals.

9. Repeat Exercise 7, choosing the representative points to be

the right endpoints of the subintervals.

10. Let f(x) ⫽ x 3, and compute the Riemann sum of f over the
interval [0, 1], choosing the representative points to be the
midpoints of the subintervals and using
a. Two subintervals of equal length (n ⫽ 2).
b. Five subintervals of equal length (n ⫽ 5).
c. Ten subintervals of equal length (n ⫽ 10).
d. Can you guess at the area of the region under the graph

of f on the interval [0, 1]?

11.3 AREA AND THE DEFINITE INTEGRAL

789

20 ft. Then, using surveyor’s equipment, we measure the
distance from the midpoint of each of these subintervals
to  the  upper  boundary  of  the  property.  These  measure-
ments give the values of f (x) at x ⫽ 10, 30, 50, 70, and
90. What is the approximate area of the lot?

Road

(a)

y (ft)

80

100

110

100

80

10  20  30  40  50  60  70  80  90 100

x (ft)

11. Repeat Exercise 10, choosing the representative points to

be the left endpoints of the subintervals.

(b)

12. Repeat Exercise 10, choosing the representative points to

be the right endpoints of the subintervals.

In  Exercises  13–16,  find  an  approximation  of  the  area  of  the
region R under the graph of the function f on the interval [a, b].
In each case, use n subintervals and choose the representative
points as indicated.

13. f1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 1; 30, 24; n ⫽ 5; midpoints
14. f1x2 ⫽ 4 ⫺ x 2; 3⫺1, 24; n ⫽ 6; left endpoints

15.

f 1x2 ⫽ 1

x

; 31, 34; n ⫽ 4

; right endpoints

16. f1x2 ⫽ e x; 30, 34; n ⫽ 5; midpoints

17. REAL ESTATE Figure (a) shows a vacant lot with a 100-ft
frontage in a development. To estimate its area, we intro-
duce a coordinate system so that the x-axis coincides with
the edge of the straight road forming the lower boundary
of the property, as shown in Figure (b). Then, thinking of
the upper boundary of the property as the graph of a con-
tinuous function f over the interval [0, 100], we see that
the problem is mathematically equivalent to that of find-
ing the area under the graph of f on [0, 100]. To estimate
the  area  of  the  lot  using  a  Riemann  sum,  we  divide  the
interval  [0,  100]  into  five  equal  subintervals  of  length 

18. REAL ESTATE Use the technique of Exercise 17 to obtain an
estimate of the area of the vacant lot shown in the accom-
panying figures.

d
a
o
R

Road

(a)

y (ft)

100

75

80

82.5

10  20  30  40  50  60  70  80

x (ft)

(b)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

790

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

11.3 Solution to Self-Check Exercise

The length of each subinterval is  . Therefore, the four subin-
tervals are

3
4

c 0, 

3

4d ,  c 3

4

, 

3

2d ,  c 3

2

, 

9

4d ,  c 9

4

, 3d

3
15
The representative points are 
8 ,
8,
fore, the required approximation is

9
8,

and 

21
8

, respectively. There-

4  f a 21
8 b
8 b d

4

4

 f a 9
 f a 3
8b ⫹ 3
8b ⫹ 3
 f a 15
8 b ⫹ 3
 A ⫽ 3
4
8 b ⫹ f a 21
8b ⫹ f a 15
8b ⫹ f a 9
 c f a 3
 ⫽ 3
4
8b 2
8b 2
⫹ 1d ⫹ c 2a 9
4e c 2a 3
 ⫽ 3
8 b 2
 ⫽ ⫹ c 2a 21
⫹ 1d f
⫹ 257
⫹ 113
 ⫽ 3
32
32

32 b ⫽ 663

⫹ 473

4a 41

32

32

8 b 2
⫹ 1d ⫹ c 2a 15

⫹ 1d

or approximately 20.72.

11.4 The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus

The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus
In Section 11.3, we defined the definite integral of an arbitrary continuous function on
an interval [a, b] as a limit of Riemann sums. Calculating the value of a definite inte-
gral by actually taking the limit of such sums is tedious and in most cases impractical.
It is important to realize that the numerical results we obtained in Examples 1 and 2
of Section 11.3 were approximations of the respective areas of the regions in question,
even though these results enabled us to conjecture what the actual areas might be. For-
tunately, there is a much better way of finding the exact value of a definite integral.

The following theorem shows how to evaluate the definite integral of a continuous
function provided we can find an antiderivative of that function. Because of its impor-
tance  in  establishing  the  relationship  between  differentiation  and  integration,  this 
theorem—discovered  independently  by  Sir  Isaac  Newton  (1642–1727)  in  England 
and Gottfied Wilhelm Leibniz (1646–1716) in Germany—is called the Fundamental
Theorem of Calculus.

THEOREM 2
The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus
Let f be continuous on [a, b]. Then,

 f 1x2 dx ⫽ F1b2 ⫺ F1a2
where F is any antiderivative of f ; that is, F⬘(x) ⫽ f(x).

a

冮 b

(9)

We will explain why this theorem is true at the end of this section.

In  applying  the  Fundamental  Theorem  of  Calculus,  it  is  convenient  to  use  the

notation

b

F1x2 ` a

⫽ F1b2 ⫺ F1a2

For example, in this notation, Equation (9) is written

冮 b

a

 f 1x2 dx ⫽ F1x2 ` a

b

⫽ F1b2 ⫺ F1a2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.4 THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM OF CALCULUS

791

PORTFOLIO

Molly H. Fisher, David C. Royster, 
and Diandra Leslie-Pelecky

TITLE Professors of Mathematics Education, Mathematics, and Physics
INSTITUTION University of Kentucky (Fisher and Royster); Author, The Physics of NASCAR® 

(Leslie-Pelecky)

The last thing a fan thinks about

at a NASCAR Sprint Cup race is cal-

culus. The Sprint Cup series is NASCAR’s most popular and
most profitable series. During a ten-month season, drivers
compete in 36 races across the United States and Mexico.
Typically, a racing team is made up not only of a driver,

who is the most visible, and mechanics, who are often seen at
the pit stops, but also of many people who work behind the
scenes, away from the track. The last group includes highly
trained engineers and scientists (some of whom hold Ph.D.s
in engineering, mathematics, or physics) who study how each
component of a race car performs under different conditions.

According to Dr. Andrew Randolph, who is a chemical
engineer and the Engine Technical Director of Earnhardt
Childress Racing Engines, “a calculation we do every week is
obtaining the average power over a given speed range to
provide a single engine performance metric for a given
track. The calculation is a simple integral of power versus
speed divided by the speed delta over which the integration
is performed.”

Much of the data available for this purpose is in graphical

form. So recognizing the relationship between the area
under a curve and the corresponding definite integral is
essential to the solution of the problem. Even though there
are many parame-
ters that determine
how an engine in a
race car performs,
the problem ulti-
mately reduces to
one of finding the
average value of a
function as given by
the integral:

1

¢√ 冮√1

√0

 P1√2 d√

This is just one of many examples of how calculus can be
used in a sport that some people think is reserved for speed-
hungry daredevils.

© istockphoto.com/Michael Krinke; (inset) © Doug James/Shutterstock.com

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 1 Let R be the region under the graph of f(x) ⫽ x on the interval [1, 3].
Use the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus to find the area A of R, and verify your
result by elementary means.

Solution The region R is shown in Figure 16a. Since f is nonnegative on [1, 3], the
area of R is given by the definite integral of f from 1 to 3; that is,

A ⫽ 冮 3

 x dx

y

4

3

2

1

FIGURE 16
The area of R can be computed in two
different ways.

1

x = 1

(a)

1

y

4

3

2

1

(b)

y = f (x) = x

x

= 3

3

4

x

R

2

y = f (x) = x

2

R2

R1

2

1

3

4

x

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

792

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

To evaluate the definite integral, observe that an antiderivative of f(x) ⫽ x is
, where C is an arbitrary constant. Therefore, by the Fundamental

2 ⫹ C

F1x2 ⫽ 1
2 x 

Theorem of Calculus, we have

 A ⫽ 冮 3
 ⫽ a 9

2

1

 x  dx ⫽ 1
2

3

 x 2 ⫹ C ` 1

⫹ Cb ⫺ a 1

2

⫹ Cb ⫽ 4

To verify this result by elementary means, refer to Figure 16b. Observe that the area
A is the area of the rectangle R1 (width height) plus the area of the triangle R2
Ó base heightÔ; that is,
1
2

#

#

2112 ⫹ 1

2

 122122 ⫽ 2 ⫹ 2 ⫽ 4

which agrees with the result obtained earlier.

Observe that in evaluating the definite integral in Example 1, the constant of inte-
gration “dropped out.” This is true in general, for if F(x) ⫹ C denotes an antideriva-
tive of some function f, then

b

 F1x2 ⫹ C ` a

⫽ 3F1b2 ⫹ C4 ⫺ 3F1a2 ⫹ C4
 ⫽ F1b2 ⫹ C ⫺ F1a2 ⫺ C
 ⫽ F1b2 ⫺ F1a2

With this fact in mind, we may, in all future computations involving the evaluation of
a definite integral, drop the constant of integration from our calculations.

Finding the Area of a Region Under a Curve
Having seen how effective the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus is in helping us find
the area of simple regions, we now use it to find the area of more complicated regions.

EXAMPLE 2 In Section 11.3, we conjectured that the area of the region R under the
graph of f(x) ⫽ x 2 on the interval [0, 1] was  . Use the Fundamental Theorem of
Calculus to verify this conjecture.

1
3

Solution The region R is reproduced in Figure 17. Observe that f is nonnegative
on [0, 1], so the area of R is given by
f(x) ⫽ x 2 is 
that

. Since an antiderivative of 
, we see, using the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, 

F1x2 ⫽ 1
3 x 3

A ⫽ 兰 1

2 dx

0  x 

 A ⫽ 冮 1
 ⫽ 1
3

0

1

 x 2 dx ⫽ 1
3
 112 ⫺ 1

 x 3 ` 0
 102 ⫽ 1

3

3

as we wished to show.

x

1

Note It is important to realize that the value 
area of R.

1
3

is by definition the exact value of the

y

1

y = x 2

R

FIGURE 17
The area of R is

兰 1
0

 x 

2 dx ⫽ 1
3

.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

6

4

2

x = –1

– 2

R

x

= 2

2

x

FIGURE 18
The area of R is

兰 2
⫺1

(x2 ⫹ 1) dx.

11.4 THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM OF CALCULUS

793

y

y = f (x) = x 2 + 1

EXAMPLE 3 Find the area of the region R under the graph of y ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 1 from 
x ⫽ ⫺1 to x ⫽ 2.

Solution The region R under consideration is shown in Figure 18. Using the Fun-
damental Theorem of Calculus, we find that the required area is

 冮 2

⫺1

 1x 

2

2 ⫹ 12 dx ⫽ a 1
 ⫽ c 1

 x 3 ⫹ xb ` ⫺1
 182 ⫹ 2d ⫺ c 1

3

3

3

 1⫺12 3 ⫹ 1⫺12 d ⫽ 6

Evaluating Definite Integrals
In Examples 4 and 5, we use the rules of integration of Section 11.1 to help us evalu-
ate the definite integrals.

EXAMPLE 4 Evaluate

Solution

冮 3
 13x 

1

2 ⫹ e 

x2 dx

.

 冮 3
 13x 2 ⫹ e 

1

x2 dx ⫽ x 3 ⫹ e 

3

x ` 1

EXAMPLE 5 Evaluate 

Solution

冮 2

1

a 1

x

 ⫽ 127 ⫹ e32 ⫺ 11 ⫹ e2 ⫽ 26 ⫹ e3 ⫺ e
⫺ 1
x 

2b  dx

.

 冮 2

1

a 1

x

2b  dx ⫽ 冮 2

⫺ 1
x 

2

1

x

a 1

⫺ x ⫺2b  dx
 ⫽ ln0 x 0 ⫹ 1
x ` 1
 ⫽ a ln 2 ⫹ 1
2b ⫺ 1ln 1 ⫹ 12
 ⫽ ln 2 ⫺ 1
2

Recall that ln 1 ⫽ 0.

Explore & Discuss
Consider the definite integral

冮 1

 
⫺1

1
2 dx
x 

.

1. Show that a formal application of Equation (9) leads to

冮 1

  

⫺1

1

1

x 2 dx ⫽ ⫺1

x ` ⫺1

⫽ ⫺1 ⫺ 1 ⫽ ⫺2

2. Observe that f(x) ⫽ 1>x 2 is positive at each value of x in [⫺1, 1] where it is defined. So

one might expect that the definite integral with integrand f has a positive value, if it exists.

3. Resolve this apparent contradiction in the result (1) and the observation (2).

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

794

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

The Definite Integral as a Measure of Net Change
In real-world applications, we are often interested in the net change of a quantity over
a period of time. For example, suppose P is a function giving the population P(t) of a
city at time t. Then the net change in the population over the period from t ⫽ a to 
t ⫽ b is given by

P1b2 ⫺ P1a2

Population at t ⫽ b minus population at t ⫽ a

If P has a continuous derivative P⬘ in [a, b], then we can invoke the Fundamental The-
orem of Calculus to write

P1b2 ⫺ P1a2 ⫽ 冮 b

 P¿1t2 dt

a

P is an antiderivative of P⬘.

Thus, if we know the rate of change of the population at any time t, then we can cal-
culate the net change in the population from t ⫽ a to t ⫽ b by evaluating an appro-
priate definite integral.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 6 Population Growth in Clark County As the twentieth
century ended, Clark County in Nevada—dominated by Las Vegas—was 

one of the fastest-growing metropolitan areas in the United States. From 1970
through 2000, the population was growing at the rate of

R1t2 ⫽ 133,680t 2 ⫺ 178,788t ⫹ 234,633

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 32

people per decade, where t ⫽ 0 corresponds to the beginning of 1970. What was
the net change in the population over the decade from 1980 to 1990?
Source: U.S. Census Bureau.
Solution The net change in the population over the decade from 1980 (t ⫽ 1) to
1990 (t ⫽ 2) is given by P(2) ⫺ P(1), where P denotes the population in the
county at time t. But P⬘ ⫽R, so

 P122 ⫺ P112 ⫽ 冮 2
 ⫽ 冮 2

1

 P¿1t2 dt ⫽ 冮 2
 1133,680t 

1

1

 R1t2 dt

2 ⫺ 178,788t ⫹ 234,6332 dt

2

3 ⫺ 89,394t 

2 ⫹ 234,633t ` 1
 ⫽ 44,560t 
 ⫽ 344,560122 3 ⫺ 89,394122 2 ⫹ 234,6331224
 ⫽ ⫺ 344,560 ⫺ 89,394 ⫹ 234,6334
 ⫽ 278,371

and so the net change is 278,371.

More generally, we have the following result. We assume that f has a continu-

ous derivative, even though the integrability of f ⬘ is sufficient.

Net Change Formula
The net change in a function f over an interval [a, b] is given by

f 1b2 ⫺ f 1a2 ⫽ 冮 b

 f  ¿1x2 dx

a

(10)

provided that f ⬘ is continuous on [a, b].

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.4 THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM OF CALCULUS

795

Additional examples of the net change of a function follow.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 7 Production Costs The management of Staedtler 
Office Equipment has determined that the daily marginal cost function 

associated with producing battery-operated pencil sharpeners is given by

C⬘1x2 ⫽ 0.000006x 2 ⫺ 0.006x ⫹ 4

where C⬘(x) is measured in dollars per unit and x denotes the number of 
units produced. Management has also determined that the daily fixed cost
incurred in producing these pencil sharpeners is $100. Find Staedtler’s daily 
total cost for producing (a) the first 500 units and (b) the 201st through 
400th units.

Solution
a. Since C⬘(x) is the marginal cost function, its antiderivative C(x) is the 

total cost function. The daily fixed cost incurred in producing the pencil 
sharpeners is C(0) dollars. Since the daily fixed cost is given as $100, we have
C(0) ⫽ 100. We are required to find C(500). Let’s compute C(500) ⫺ C(0),
the net change in the total cost function C(x) over the interval [0, 500]. Using
the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, we find

 C15002 ⫺ C102 ⫽ 冮 500
 ⫽ 冮 500

0

0

 C¿1x2 dx
 10.000006x 2 ⫺ 0.006x ⫹ 42 dx

500

2 ⫹ 4x ` 0

 ⫽ 0.000002x 3 ⫺ 0.003x 
 ⫽ 30.00000215002 3 ⫺ 0.00315002 2 ⫹ 4150024
 ⫽ ⫺ 30.000002102 3 ⫺ 0.003102 2 ⫹ 41024
 ⫽ 1500

Therefore, C(500) ⫽ 1500 ⫹ C(0) ⫽ 1500 ⫹ 100 ⫽ 1600, so the total cost
incurred daily by Staedtler in producing the first 500 pencil sharpeners is
$1600.

b. The daily total cost incurred by Staedtler in producing the 201st through 

400th units of battery-operated pencil sharpeners is given by

200

 C¿1x2 dx
 10.000006x 2 ⫺ 0.006x ⫹ 42 dx

 C14002 ⫺ C12002 ⫽ 冮 400
 ⫽ 冮 400
 ⫽ 0.000002x 3 ⫺ 0.003x 2 ⫹ 4x ` 200
 ⫽ 30.00000214002 3 ⫺ 0.00314002 2 ⫹ 4140024
 ⫽ ⫺ 30.00000212002 3 ⫺ 0.00312002 2 ⫹ 4120024
 ⫽ 552

200

400

or $552.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

796

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

Since C⬘(x) is nonnegative for x in the interval 30, ⬁), we have the following geo-
metric interpretation of the two definite integrals in Example 7: 
is the 
area of the region under the graph of the function C⬘ from x ⫽ 0 to x ⫽ 500, shown
is the area of the region from x ⫽ 200 to x ⫽ 400,
in Figure 19a, and 
shown in Figure 19b.

200 C¿1x2 dx
兰 400

 C¿1x2 dx

兰 500
0

y

4

3

2

1

R1

y = C'(x)

y

4

3

2

1

R2

y = C'(x)

FIGURE 19

(a) Area of R1 ⫽

500

1000

冮 500

0

C⬘(x) dx

x

1000

200

400

(b) Area of R2 ⫽

冮 400

200

C⬘(x) dx

x

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 8 Assembly Time of Workers An efficiency study 
conducted for Elektra Electronics showed that the rate at which Space 
Commander walkie-talkies are assembled by the average worker t hours after
starting work at 8 A.M. is given by the function 

f1t2 ⫽ ⫺3t 2 ⫹ 12t ⫹ 15

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

Determine how many walkie-talkies can be assembled by the average worker in
the first hour of the morning shift.

Solution Let N(t) denote the number of walkie-talkies assembled by the average
worker during the first t hours after starting work in the morning shift. Then we
have

N⬘1t2 ⫽ f1t2 ⫽ ⫺3t 2 ⫹ 12t ⫹ 15

Therefore, the number of units assembled by the average worker in the first hour
of the morning shift is

 N112 ⫺ N102 ⫽ 冮 1

0

 ⫽ ⫺t 

 N ¿1t2 dt ⫽ 冮 1
2 ⫹ 15t ` 0

3 ⫹ 6t 

0

 1⫺3t 
2 ⫹ 12t ⫹ 152 dt
⫽ ⫺1 ⫹ 6 ⫹ 15

1

 ⫽ 20

or 20 units.

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY

You can demonstrate graphically that 
1. Plot the graphs of 

兰 x
0  t dt ⫽ 1
as follows:
2 x 
y1 ⫽ fnInt 1t, t, 0, x2 ⫽ 兰 x
0  t dt and y2 ⫽ 1
2 x 

set of axes, using the viewing window [⫺5, 5] ⫻ [0, 10].

2

2

on the same

2. Compare the graphs of y1 and y2 and draw the desired conclusion.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

cannot be

Explore & Discuss
⫺3 29 ⫺ x2 dx
The definite integral 
兰 3
evaluated here using the Fun-
damental Theorem of Calcu-
lus because the method of
this section does not enable
us to find an antiderivative of
the integrand. But the inte-
gral can be evaluated by
interpreting it as the area of a
certain plane region. What is
the region? And what is the
value of the integral?

y

y = f (x)

A(t)

x = t

x = b

x

a

t

b

FIGURE 20
A(t) ⫽ area under the graph of f from 
x ⫽ a to x ⫽ t

y

y = f (x)

x = b

x

a

t

t + h

b

FIGURE 21
A(t ⫹ h) ⫺ A(t) ⫽ area under the graph of
f from x ⫽ t to x ⫽ t ⫹ h

11.4 THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM OF CALCULUS

797

APPLIED EXAMPLE 9 Projected Demand for Electricity A certain city’s rate
of electricity consumption is expected to grow exponentially with a growth 

k ⫽ 0.04.

constant of 
hours (kWh) per year, what should be the total production of electricity over the
next 3 years in order to meet the projected demand?

If the present rate of consumption is 40 million kilowatt-

Solution If R(t) denotes the expected rate of consumption of electricity t years
from now, then

R1t2 ⫽ 40e0.04t

C⬘1t2 ⫽ R1t2

0

0

 C¿1t2 dt ⫽ 冮 3
 冮 3
 40e0.04t dt
 ⫽ 40
  e0.04t ` 0
0.04
 ⫽ 10001e0.12 ⫺ 12
 ⬇ 127.5

3

million kWh per year. Next, if C(t) denotes the expected total consumption of
electricity over the next t years, then

Therefore, the total consumption of electricity expected over the next 3 years is
given by

or 127.5 million kWh, the amount that must be produced over the next 3 years to
meet the demand.

Validity of the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus
To demonstrate the plausibility of the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus for the case
in which f is nonnegative on an interval [a, b], let’s define an “area function” A as 
follows. Let A(t) denote the area of the region R under the graph of y ⫽ f(x) from 
x ⫽ a to x ⫽ t, where a ⱕ t ⱕ b (Figure 20).

If h is a small positive number, then A(t ⫹ h) is the area of the region under the

graph of y ⫽ f(x) from x ⫽ a to x ⫽ t ⫹ h. Therefore, the difference

A1t ⫹ h2 ⫺ A1t2

is the area of the region under the graph of y ⫽ f(x) from x ⫽ t to x ⫽ t ⫹ h (Figure 21).
Now, the area of this last region can be approximated by the area of the rect-
angle of width h and height f (t)—that is, by the expression h ⭈ f (t) (see Figure 22
on the next page). Thus,

A1t ⫹ h) ⫺ A1t2 ⬇ h ⭈ f1t2

where the approximations improve as h is taken to be smaller and smaller.

Dividing both sides of the foregoing relationship by h, we obtain

A1t ⫹ h2 ⫺ A1t2

h

⬇ f 1t2

Taking the limit as h approaches zero, we find, by the definition of the derivative, that
the left-hand side is

A1t ⫹ h2 ⫺ A1t2

h

lim
 
hS0

⫽ A¿1t2

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

798

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

y

y = f (x)

f (t)

x

a

b

h

t

t + h

FIGURE 22
The area of the rectangle is h ⭈ f(t).

y

x = a

y = f (x)

R

x = b

The right-hand side, which is independent of h, remains constant throughout the lim-
iting process. Because the approximation becomes exact as h approaches zero, we find
that

A⬘1t2 ⫽ f1t2

Since the foregoing equation holds for all values of t in the interval [a, b], we have
shown that the area function A is an antiderivative of the function f. By Theorem 1 of
Section 11.1, we conclude that A(x) must have the form

A1x2 ⫽ F1x2 ⫹ C
where F is any antiderivative of f and C is a constant. To determine the value of C,
observe that A(a) ⫽ 0. This condition implies that

or C ⫽ ⫺F(a). Next, since the area of the region R is A(b) (Figure 23), we see that the
required area is

A1a2 ⫽ F1a2 ⫹ C ⫽ 0

 A1b2 ⫽ F1b2 ⫹ C

 ⫽ F1b2 ⫺ F1a2

Since the area of the region R is

a
FIGURE 23
The area of R is given by A(b).

b

we have

as we set out to show.

11.4 Self-Check Exercises

1. Evaluate 

冮 2

0

 1x ⫹ e 

x2 dx

.

2. The daily marginal profit function associated with produc-

ing and selling TexaPep hot sauce is

P⬘1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.000006x 2 ⫹ 6

where x denotes the number of cases (each case contains 
24 bottles) produced and sold daily and P⬘(x) is measured
in dollars per unit. The fixed cost is $400.

11.4 Concept Questions

1. State the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus.

2. State the net change formula, and use it to answer the fol-

lowing questions:
a. If a company generates income at the rate of R dollars/day,
measures, where a and b are mea-

explain what 
sured in days with a ⬍ b.

a  R1t2 dt
兰 b

冮 b

a

 f 1x2 dx

冮 b
 f 1x2 dx ⫽ F1b2 ⫺ F1a2

a

a. What  is  the  total  profit  realizable  from  producing  and

selling 1000 cases of TexaPep per day?

b. What is the additional profit realizable if the production
and  sale  of  TexaPep  is  increased  from  1000  to  1200
cases/day?

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 11.4 can be found on 
page 801.

b. If  a  private  jet  airplane  consumes  fuel  at  the  rate  of 
R(t) gal/min, write an integral giving the net fuel con-
sumption by the airplane between times t ⫽ a and t ⫽ b
(a ⬍ b), where t is measured in minutes.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

11.4 Exercises

In Exercises 1–4, find the area of the region under the graph of
the  function  f on  the  interval  [a,  b],  using  the  Fundamental 
Theorem of Calculus. Then verify your result using geometry.

1. f1x2 ⫽ 2; 31, 44
3. f1x2 ⫽ 2x; 31, 34

2. f1x2 ⫽ 4; 3⫺1, 24

4.

f 1x2 ⫽ ⫺1

4

 x ⫹ 1; 31, 44

In Exercises 5–16, find the area of the region under the graph of
the function f on the interval [a, b].

5. f1x2 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3; 3⫺1, 24
7. f1x2 ⫽ ⫺x 2 ⫹ 4; 3⫺1, 24

6. f1x2 ⫽ 4x ⫺ 1; 32, 44
8. f1x2 ⫽ 4x ⫺ x 2; 30, 44

9.

11.

13.

x

f 1x2 ⫽ 1
; 31, 24
f 1x2 ⫽ 1x; 31, 94
f 1x2 ⫽ 1 ⫺ 23 x; 3 ⫺8, ⫺14

15. f1x2 ⫽ e x; 30, 24

10.

f 1x2 ⫽ 1

x 2; 32, 44
12. f1x2 ⫽ x 3; 31, 34
; 31, 94
16. f1x2 ⫽ e x ⫺ x; 31, 24

f 1x2 ⫽ 11x

14.

In Exercises 17–40, evaluate the definite integral.

2 ⫹ 12 dx

3 ⫹ 12 dt

 1x ⫺ 421x ⫺ 12 dx

2 ⫺ 12 2 dx

17.

19.

21.

23.

25.

27.

29.

31.

33.

35.

2

1

1

⫺1

⫺2

 1x 2 ⫺ 12 dx

 12x ⫹ 32 dx

 3 dx

 2x 2 dx

 2x 1/3 dx

冮 4
冮 2
冮 3
冮 2
冮 8
冮 1
冮 4
冮 4
冮 3
 1t 
2 ⫺ t2 2 dt
冮 ⫺1

 1x 3 ⫺ 2x 

 x1x 

1
2 dx
x 

 dx

1
x

  

 

0

1

0

1

2 ⫺ 12 dx

⫺3

 14 ⫺ x2 dx

  2x ⫺3/2 dx

0

1

1

⫺1

⫺1

26.

22.

18.

24.

20.

 ⫺2 dx

 8x 3 dx

冮 2
冮 0
冮 2
 1u du
冮 4
冮 4
冮 2
冮 3
冮 2
冮 1
36. 冮 2

  1x 

 1t 

2
x 3 dx

5 ⫺ t 

34.

28.

30.

32.

 dx

2
x

⫺1

  

 

1

0

1

1

11.4 THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM OF CALCULUS

799

37.

39.

冮 4
冮 4

1

1

a1x ⫺ 11xb  dx

38.

2 ⫹ 4

3x 

3 ⫺ 2x 
2

x 

 dx

40.

 

12x11x ⫹ 122 dx
a 1 ⫹ 1
2b  du

⫹ 1
u 

u

冮 1
冮 2

0

1

41. MARGINAL COST A  division  of  Ditton  Industries  manufac-
tures  a  deluxe  toaster  oven.  Management  has  determined
that the daily marginal cost function associated with pro-
ducing these toaster ovens is given by

C⬘1x2 ⫽ 0.0003x 2 ⫺ 0.12x ⫹ 20

where C⬘(x) is measured in dollars per unit and x denotes
the number of units produced. Management has also deter-
mined that the daily fixed cost incurred in the production is
$800.
a. Find the total cost incurred by Ditton in producing the

first 300 units of these toaster ovens per day.

b. What is the total cost incurred by Ditton in producing

the 201st through 300th units/day?

42. MARGINAL REVENUE The management of Ditton Industries
has determined that the daily marginal revenue function
associated with selling x units of their deluxe toaster ovens
is given by

R⬘1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.1x ⫹ 40

where R⬘(x) is measured in dollars per unit.
a. Find  the  daily  total  revenue  realized  from  the  sale  of 

200 units of the toaster oven.

b. Find the additional revenue realized when the produc-
tion (and sales) level is increased from 200 to 300 units.
43. MARGINAL PROFIT Refer to Exercise 41. The daily marginal
profit function associated with the production and sales of
the deluxe toaster ovens is known to be

P⬘1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.0003x 2 ⫹ 0.02x ⫹ 20
where x denotes the number of units manufactured and sold
daily and P⬘(x) is measured in dollars per unit.
a. Find the total profit realizable from the manufacture and

sale of 200 units of the toaster ovens per day.
Hint: P(200) ⫺ P(0) ⫽
P⬘(x) dx; P(0) ⫽ ⫺800

兰 200
0

b. What is the additional daily profit realizable if the pro-
duction and sales of the toaster ovens are increased from
200 to 220 units/day?

44. INTERNET ADVERTISING U.S.  Internet  advertising  revenue

grew at the rate of

R1t2 ⫽ 0.82t ⫹ 1.14

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

billion dollars/year between 2002 (t ⫽ 0) and 2006 (t ⫽ 4).
The advertising revenue in 2002 was $5.9 billion.
a. Find  an  expression  giving  the  advertising  revenue  in

year t.

b. If the trend continued, what was the Internet advertising

revenue in 2007?

Source: Interactive Advertising Bureau.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

800

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

45. CELL-PHONE AD SPENDING Cell-phone advertising spending

is expected to grow at the rate of

R1t2 ⫽ 0.8256t⫺0.04

11 ⱕ t ⱕ 52

billion dollars/year between 2007 (t ⫽ 1) and 2011 (t ⫽ 5).
The cell-phone ad spending in 2007 was $0.9 billion.
a. Find an expression giving the cell-phone ad spending in

year t.

b. If  the  trend  continued,  what  will  be  the  cell-phone  ad

spending in 2012?

Source: Interactive Advertising Bureau.

46. EFFICIENCY STUDIES Tempco Electronics, a division of
Tempco Toys, manufactures an electronic football game. An
efficiency study showed that the rate at which the games are
assembled by the average worker t hr after starting work at
8 A.M. is

⫺3
2

 t 

2 ⫹ 6t ⫹ 20    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

units/hour.
a. Find the total number of games the average worker can

be expected to assemble in the 4-hr morning shift.

b. How many units can the average worker be expected to
assemble in the first hour of the morning shift? In the
second hour of the morning shift?

47. SPEEDBOAT RACING In  a  recent  pretrial  run  for  the  world
water speed record, the velocity of the Sea Falcon II t sec
after firing the booster rocket was given by

√1t2 ⫽ ⫺t 2 ⫹ 20t ⫹ 440

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 202

feet/second. Find the distance covered by the boat over the 
20-sec period after the booster rocket was activated.
Hint: The distance is given by

√(t) dt.

兰 20
0  

48. NETBOOK COMPUTERS Annual sales (in millions of units) of
a certain brand of netbook computers are expected to grow
in accordance with the function

f1t2 ⫽ 0.18t 2 ⫹ 0.16t ⫹ 2.64

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 62

per year, where t is measured in years. How many netbook
computers were sold over the next 6 years?

49. SINGLE FEMALE-HEADED HOUSEHOLDS WITH CHILDREN The
percentage of families with children that are headed by sin-
gle females grew at the rate of

R1t2 ⫽ 0.8499t2 ⫺ 3.872t ⫹ 5

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 32

households/decade between 1970 (t ⫽ 0) and 2000 (t ⫽ 3).
The number of such households stood at 5.6% of all fami-
lies in 1970.
a. Find  an  expression  giving  the  percentage  of  these

households in the tth decade.

b. If the trend continued, estimate the percentage of these

households in 2010.

c. What  was  the  net  increase  in  the  percentage  of  these

households from 1970 to 2000?

Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

50. AIR PURIFICATION To test air purifiers, engineers ran a puri-
fier in a smoke-filled 10-ft ⫻ 20-ft room. While conduct-
ing a test for a certain brand of air purifier, they determined
that the amount of smoke in the room was decreasing at the
rate of

R1t2 ⫽ 0.00032t 4 ⫺ 0.01872t 3 ⫹ 0.3948t 2
10 ⱕ t ⱕ 202

⫺ 3.83t ⫹ 17.63

percent of the (original) amount of the smoke per minute, 
t min after the start of the test. How much smoke was left
in the room 5 min after the start of the test? Ten min after
the start of the test?
Source: Consumer Reports.

51. SOLAR PANEL PRODUCTION The manager of Sodex Corpora-
tion estimates that t months after it first began production, it
was manufacturing the company’s 140-watt 12-volt nominal
solar panels at the rate of

R1t2 ⫽ 4t

1 ⫹ t 2

⫹ 32t

hundred panels per month. What is the manager’s estimate
of  the  number  of  solar  panels  manufactured  by  the  com-
pany during the second year?

52. CANADIAN OIL-SANDS PRODUCTION The production of oil (in
millions  of  barrels  per  day)  extracted  from  oil  sands  in
Canada is projected to grow according to the function

P1t2 ⫽

4.76

1 ⫹ 4.11e⫺0.22t

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 15)

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
2005. What is the expected total production of oil from oil
sands over the years from 2005 until 2020 (t ⫽ 15)?

Hint: Multiply the integrand by 

e0.22t
e0.22t

.

Source: Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers.

53. SENIOR CITIZENS The  U.S.  population  aged  65  years  and
older (in millions) from 2000 to 2050 is projected to grow
at the rate of

f 1t2 ⫽

85

1 ⫹ 1.859e⫺0.66t

    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 52

where t is measured in decades, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding
to 2000. By how much will the population aged 65 years
and  older  increase  from  the  beginning  of  2000  until  the
beginning of 2030?

Hint: Multiply the integrand by 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

e0.66t
e0.66t

.

54. BLOOD FLOW Consider an artery of length L cm and radius
R cm.  By  using  Poiseuille’s  Law  (page  134),  it  can  be
shown that the rate at which blood flows through the artery
(measured in cubic centimeters per second) is given by

V ⫽ 冮 R

 

0

k
L

 x1R2 ⫺ x 22 dx

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

where k is a constant. Find an expression for V that does
not involve an integral.

55. Find the area of the region bounded by the graph of the func-
tion f(x) ⫽ x4 ⫺ 2x 2 ⫹ 2, the x-axis, and the lines x ⫽ a and
x ⫽ b, where a ⬍ b and a and b are the x-coordinates of the
relative maximum point and a relative minimum point of f,
respectively.

f 1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 12>1x

56. Find the area of the region bounded by the graph of the func-
,  the  x-axis,  and  the  lines  x ⫽  a
tion 
and  x ⫽ b where  a and  b are,  respectively,  the  x-coordi-
nates of the relative minimum point and the inflection point
of f.

11.4 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1.

 冮 2

0

 1x ⫹ e 

2 ⫹ e 

2

x ` 0

 x 

2

x2 dx ⫽ 1
 ⫽ c 1

 ⫽ 2 ⫹ e2 ⫺ 1
 ⫽ e2 ⫹ 1

2  122 2 ⫹ e2d ⫺ c 1

2  102 ⫹ e0d

2. a. We want P(1000), but

 P110002 ⫺ P102 ⫽ 冮 1000

1⫺0.000006x 2 ⫹ 62 dx

0

P¿1x2 dx ⫽ 冮 1000
 ⫽ ⫺0.000002x 3 ⫹ 6x ` 0
 ⫽ ⫺0.000002110002 3 ⫹ 6110002
 ⫽ 4000

1000

0

11.4 THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM OF CALCULUS

801

In Exercises 57–60, determine whether the statement is true or
false. Give a reason for your answer.
⫽ ⫺1
2

2b ⫽ 0

⫺ a ⫺1

57.

1

1

  
⫺1

2x 2 ` ⫺1
` ⫺1

x 3 dx ⫽ ⫺ 1
  dx ⫽ ln0 x 0

冮 1
冮 1
 
⫺1
0  11 ⫺ x2 dx
兰 2
of f(x) ⫽ 1 ⫺ x on the interval [0, 2].

1
x

1

58.

59.

⫽ ln0 1 0 ⫺ ln0 ⫺1 0 ⫽ ln 1 ⫺ ln 1 ⫽ 0

gives the area of the region under the graph 

60. The total revenue realized in selling the first 500 units of a

product is given by

冮 500

0

 R¿1x2 dx ⫽ R15002 ⫺ R102

where R is the total revenue.

So, P(1000) ⫽ 4000 ⫹ P(0) ⫽ 4000 ⫺ 400, or $3600/day
[P(0) ⫽ ⫺fixed cost].

b. The additional profit realizable is given by

 冮 1200

1000

 P¿1x2 dx ⫽ ⫺0.000002x 3 ⫹ 6x ` 1000

1200

 ⫽ 3 ⫺0.000002112002 3 ⫹ 61120024
 ⫽ ⫺ 3 ⫺0.000002110002 3 ⫹ 61100024
 ⫽ 3744 ⫺ 4000
 ⫽ ⫺256

That is, the company’s profit is reduced by $256/day if
production is increased from 1000 to 1200 cases/day.

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Evaluating Definite Integrals
Some graphing utilities have an operation for finding the definite integral of a func-
tion. If your graphing utility has this capability, use it to work through the example
and exercises of this section.

EXAMPLE 1 Use the numerical integral operation of a graphing utility to evaluate

冮 2

  
⫺1

2x ⫹ 4

1x 2 ⫹ 12 3/2 dx

Solution Using the numerical integral operation of a graphing utility, we find

冮 2

  
⫺1

2x ⫹ 4
1x 

2 ⫹ 12 3/2 dx ⫽ fnInt112x ⫹ 42>1x 

2 ⫹ 12^1.5, x, ⫺1, 22 ⬇ 6.92592226

(continued)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

802

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

In Exercises 1–4, find the area of the region under the graph of f
on the interval [a, b]. Express your answer to four decimal places.

2.

1. f1x2 ⫽ 0.002x 5 ⫹ 0.032x 4 ⫺ 0.2x 2 ⫹ 2; 3⫺1.1, 2.24
f 1x2 ⫽ x2x 3 ⫹ 1; 31, 24
f 1x2 ⫽ 1xe⫺x; 30, 34
f 1x2 ⫽ ln x21 ⫹ x 
; 31, 24

4.

3.

2

In Exercises 5–10, evaluate the definite integral.

3 ⫹ 1.2x ⫺ 12 dx

5.

6.

7.

9.

⫺1.2

冮 2.3
冮 3
冮 2
冮 2

  

 

1

0

0

 10.2x 4 ⫺ 0.32x 
 x1x 4 ⫺ 12 3.2 dx
2 ⫹ 1

3x 

3 ⫹ 2x 
2x 

2 ⫹ 3

 dx

x2x 

e 
2 ⫹ 1

 dx

1x ⫹ 1

2x 

2 ⫹ 1
 e⫺x ln1x 

 

8.

10.

冮 2
冮 3

1

1

 dx

2 ⫹ 12 dx

11. Rework Exercise 50, Exercises 11.4.

12. Rework Exercise 53, Exercises 11.4.

11.5 Evaluating Definite Integrals

13. THE GLOBAL EPIDEMIC The number of AIDS-related deaths/

year in the United States is given by the function

 f 1t2 ⫽ ⫺53.254t 

4 ⫹ 673.7t 

3 ⫺ 2801.07t 
2

⫹ 8833.379t ⫹ 20,000    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 92

with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to the beginning of 1988. Find
the  total  number  of  AIDS-related  deaths  in  the  United
States between the beginning of 1988 and the end of 1996.
Source: Centers for  Disease Control and Prevention.

14. MARIJUANA ARRESTS The  number  of  arrests  for  marijuana
sales and possession in New York City grew at the rate of
approximately

f 1t2 ⫽ 0.0125t 

4 ⫺ 0.01389t 

3 ⫹ 0.55417t 
2

⫹ 0.53294t ⫹ 4.95238    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 52

thousand/year,  where  t is  measured  in  years,  with  t ⫽ 0
corresponding to the beginning of 1992. Find the approxi-
mate  number  of  marijuana  arrests  in  the  city  from  the
beginning of 1992 to the end of 1997.
Source: State Division of Criminal Justice Services.

15. POPULATION GROWTH The population of a certain city is pro-
thousand
jected to grow at the rate of 9 
people/year t years from now. If the current population is
800,000, what will be the population 45 years from now?

1t ⫹ 1

1t ⫹ 1

ln 

This section continues our discussion of the applications of the Fundamental Theorem
of Calculus.

Properties of the Definite Integral
Before going on, we list the following useful properties of the definite integral, some
of which parallel the rules of integration of Section 11.1.

Properties of the Definite Integral
Let f and t be integrable functions; then,

1.

冮 a
2. 冮 b

a

a

  f1x2 dx ⫽ 0
  f1x2 dx ⫽ ⫺冮 a

b

 f 1x2 dx

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.5 EVALUATING DEFINITE INTEGRALS

803

a

3.

冮 b 
cf 1x2 dx ⫽ c冮 b
 3  f 1x2 ⫾ t1x24 dx ⫽ 冮 b
冮 b
 f 1x2 dx ⫽ 冮 c
 f 1x2 dx ⫹ 冮 b
5. 冮 b

4.

 f 1x2 dx    1c, a constant2
 t1x2 dx

 f 1x2 dx ⫾ 冮 b
 f 1x2 dx    1a ⬍ c ⬍ b2

a

a

a

c

a

a

a

Property 5 states that if c is a number lying between a and b, so that the interval
[a, b] is divided into the intervals [a, c] and [c, b], then the integral of f over the inter-
val [a, b] may be expressed as the sum of the integral of f over the interval [a, c] and
the integral of f over the interval [c, b].

Property  5  has  the  following  geometric  interpretation  when  f is  nonnegative. 

y

By definition,

y = f (x)

冮 b

a

 f 1x2 dx

a

c

b

x

FIGURE 24

冮 b

冮 c

f(x) dx ⫽ f(x) dx ⫹

a

a

冮 b

c

f(x) dx

is the area of the region under the graph of y ⫽ f(x) from x ⫽ a to x ⫽ b (Figure 24).
Similarly, we interpret the definite integrals

冮 c

a

 f 1x2 dx  and  冮 b

 f 1x2 dx

c

as the areas of the regions under the graph of y ⫽ f(x) from x ⫽ a to x ⫽ c and from
x ⫽ c to x ⫽ b, respectively. Since the two regions do not overlap, we see that

冮 b
 f 1x2 dx ⫽ 冮 c

 f 1x2 dx ⫹ 冮 b

c

 f 1x2 dx

a

a

The Method of Substitution for Definite Integrals
Our first example shows two approaches that are generally used in evaluating a defi-
nite integral using the method of substitution.

EXAMPLE 1 Evaluate 

Solution

 x29 ⫹ x 
冮 4

2 dx
.

0

Method 1 We first find the corresponding indefinite integral:

I ⫽ 冮 x29 ⫹ x 

2 dx

Make the substitution u ⫽ 9 ⫹ x 2, so that

 du ⫽ d
dx

 19 ⫹ x 

22 dx

 ⫽ 2x dx

 x dx ⫽ 1
2

 du

Divide both sides by 2.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

804

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

Then

 I ⫽ 冮 

 ⫽ 1
3

 1u du ⫽ 1
1
2
2
 u3/2 ⫹ C ⫽ 1
3

 冮 u1/2 du
 19 ⫹ x 

22 3/2 ⫹ C

Substitute
9 ⫹ x2 for u.

Using this result, we now evaluate the given definite integral:

0

 x29 ⫹ x 2 dx ⫽ 1
 冮 4
3
 ⫽ 1
3
 ⫽ 1
3

4

 19 ⫹ x 22 3/2 ` 0
 319 ⫹ 162 3/2 ⫺ 93/24
 1125 ⫺ 272 ⫽ 98

3

⫽ 32 2
3

Method 2 Changing the Limits of Integration. As before, we make the substitution

so that

u ⫽ 9 ⫹ x 2

 du ⫽ 2x dx
 x dx ⫽ 1
2

 du

(11)

Next, observe that the given definite integral is evaluated with

respect to x with the range of integration given by the interval [0, 4]. 
If we perform the integration with respect to u via the substitution (11),
then we must adjust the range of integration to reflect the fact that the
integration is being performed with respect to the new variable u. 
To determine the proper range of integration, note that when x ⫽ 0,
Equation (11) implies that 

u ⫽ 9 ⫹ 02 ⫽ 9

which gives the required lower limit of integration with respect to u. Sim-
ilarly, when x ⫽ 4,

u ⫽ 9 ⫹ 16 ⫽ 25

is the required upper limit of integration with respect to u. Thus, the range
of integration when the integration is performed with respect to u is given
by the interval [9, 25]. Therefore, we have

 

1
2

0

 x29 ⫹ x2 dx ⫽ 冮 25
 冮 4
 ⫽ 1
3
 ⫽ 1
3

9

1u du ⫽ 1

冮 25

9

2

 u1/2 du
 1253/2 ⫺ 93/22
⫽ 32 2
3

⫽ 1
3

 u3/2 ` 25
 1125 ⫺ 272 ⫽ 98

9

3

which agrees with the result obtained by using Method 1.

When you use Method 2, make sure you adjust the limits of integration to reflect
integrating with respect to the new variable u.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.5 EVALUATING DEFINITE INTEGRALS

805

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
Refer to Example 1. You can confirm the results obtained there by using a graph-
ing utility as follows:
1. Use the numerical integration operation of the graphing utility to evaluate

冮 4

 x29 ⫹ x 

2 dx

1
2

2. Evaluate 

冮 25
3. Conclude that 冮 4

1u du.
 x29 ⫹ x 

9

0

0

2 dx ⫽ 1
2

 冮 25

1u du.

9

EXAMPLE 2 Evaluate

冮 2
 xe2x2 dx
.

0

du. When x ⫽ 0, u ⫽ 0, 
Solution Let u ⫽ 2x 2, so that du ⫽ 4x dx, or x
and when x ⫽ 2, u ⫽ 8. These give the lower and upper limits of integration with
respect to u. Making the indicated substitutions, we find
⫽ 1
4

 eu du ⫽ 1
4

 1e8 ⫺ 12

dx ⫽ 1
4

冮 2

1
4

 eu ` 0

 

8

0

 xe2x2 dx ⫽ 冮 8
冮 1

x 
3 ⫹ 1

x 

 

0

2

0

EXAMPLE 3 Evaluate 

 dx.

Solution Let u ⫽ x 3 ⫹ 1, so that du ⫽ 3x 2 dx, or x 2
u ⫽ 1, and when x ⫽ 1, u ⫽ 2. These give the lower and upper limits of integration
with respect to u. Making the indicated substitutions, we find
2

du. When x ⫽ 0, 

dx ⫽ 1
3

 冮 1

 

0

x2

x3 ⫹ 1

 dx ⫽ 1
3
 ⫽ 1
3

 

du
u

⫽ 1
3

 冮 2
 ln0 u 0
 1ln 2 ⫺ ln 12 ⫽ 1

1

3

` 1

 ln 2

Finding the Area Under a Curve

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 4 Find the area of the region R under the graph of f(x) ⫽ e(1/2)x from 
x ⫽ ⫺1 to x ⫽ 1.

Solution The region R is shown in Figure 25 (see next page). Its area is given by

A ⫽ 冮 1

 e11/22x dx

To evaluate this integral, we make the substitution

⫺1

u ⫽ 1
2

 x

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

806

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

y

y = e(1/2)x

so that

x = –1

x

= 1

2

1

R

– 2

–1

1

2

3

FIGURE 25

Area of R ⫽ 

冮 1

⫺1

e(1/2)x dx

When x ⫽ ⫺1, 
we obtain

x

 du ⫽ 1
2

 dx

 dx ⫽ 2 du

u ⫽ ⫺1
2

, and when x ⫽ 1, 

u ⫽ 1
2

. Making the indicated substitutions,

 A ⫽ 冮 1
 ⫽ 2eu ` ⫺1/2

⫺1

1/2

 e11/22x dx ⫽ 2冮 1/2

 eu du
⫽ 21e1/2 ⫺ e⫺1/22

⫺1/2

or approximately 2.08.

Explore & Discuss
Let f be the function defined piecewise by the rule

f 1x2 ⫽ •

1x

 

1
x

if 0 ⱕ x ⱕ 1

if 1 ⬍ x ⱕ 2

How would you use Property 5 of definite integrals to find the area of the region under the
graph of f on [0, 2]? What is the area?

Average Value of a Function
The  average  value of  a  function  over  an  interval  provides  us  with  an  application 
of the definite integral. Recall that the average value of a set of n numbers y1, y2, . . . ,
yn is the number

y1 ⫹ y2 ⫹ p ⫹ yn

n

Now, suppose f is a continuous function defined on [a, b]. Let’s divide the inter-

val [a, b] into n subintervals of equal length (b ⫺ a)>n. Choose points x1, x2, . . . , xn
in the first, second, . . . , nth subintervals, respectively. Then, the average value of the
numbers f(x1), f(x2), . . . , f(xn), given by

f 1x12 ⫹ f 1x22 ⫹ p ⫹ f 1xn2

n

is an approximation of the average of all the values of f(x) on the interval [a, b]. This
expression can be written in the form

b ⫺ a
b ⫺ a

 c f 1x12 # 1
 ⫽ 1

n

b ⫺ a

 ⫽ 1

b ⫺ a

n

⫹ p ⫹ f 1xn2 # 1
nd
⫹ f 1x22 # b ⫺ a
⫹ p ⫹ f 1xn2 # b ⫺ a

⫹ f 1x22 # 1
 c f 1x12 # b ⫺ a
 3  f 1x12 ¢x ⫹ f 1x22 ¢x ⫹ p ⫹ f 1xn2 ¢x4

n

n

n

d

(12)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

11.5 EVALUATING DEFINITE INTEGRALS

807

As n gets larger and larger, the expression (12) approximates the average value of
f(x) over [a, b] with increasing accuracy. But the sum inside the brackets in (12) is a
Riemann sum of the function f over [a, b]. In view of this, we have

nS⬁ c f 1x12 ⫹ f 1x22 ⫹ p ⫹ f 1xn2

  lim

n

d

 ⫽ 1

b ⫺ a

 ⫽ 1

b ⫺ a

 3  f  1x12 ¢x ⫹ f 1x22 ¢x ⫹ p ⫹ f 1xn2 ¢x4
f 1x2 dx

 lim
nS⬁

  冮 b

a

This discussion motivates the following definition.

The Average Value of a Function
Suppose f is integrable on [a, b]. Then the average value of f over [a, b] is

1

b ⫺ a

  冮 b

a

 f 1x2 dx

EXAMPLE 5 Find the average value of the function
[0, 4].

f 1x2 ⫽ 1x

over the interval

Solution The required average value is given by

1

 
4 ⫺ 0

 冮 4

0

 x1/2 dx

 冮 4
 x3/2 ` 0

0

4

⫽ 1
6

 143/22

 1x dx ⫽ 1
4
 ⫽ 1
6
 ⫽ 4
3

APPLIED EXAMPLE 6 Automobile Financing The interest rates charged 
by Madison Finance on auto loans for used cars over a certain 6-month 

period are approximated by the function

r1t2 ⫽ ⫺ 1

12

 t 

3 ⫹ 7
8

 t 

2 ⫺ 3t ⫹ 12    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 62

where t is measured in months and r(t) is the annual percentage rate. What is the
average rate on auto loans extended by Madison over the 6-month period?

Solution The average rate over the 6-month period is given by

1

 
6 ⫺ 0

12

a⫺ 1
 a⫺ 1
 c ⫺ 1

48

0

 冮 6
 ⫽ 1
6
 ⫽ 1
6
 ⫽ 9

 t 

 t 

3 ⫹ 7
8
4 ⫹ 7
24

2 ⫺ 3t ⫹ 12b  dt
3 ⫺ 3
2

 t 

 t 

 t 

48  1642 ⫹ 7

24  1632 ⫺ 3

6

2 ⫹ 12tb ` 0
2  1622 ⫹ 12162 d

or 9% per year.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

808

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

VIDEO

y

k

y = f (x)

y = g(x) = k

a

b

FIGURE 26
The average value of f over [a, b] is k.

x

APPLIED EXAMPLE 7 Drug Concentration in a Body The amount of a cer-
tain drug in a patient’s body t days after the drug has been administered is

C1t2 ⫽ 5e⫺0.2t

units. Determine the average amount of the drug present in the patient’s body for
the first 4 days after the drug has been administered.

Solution The average amount of the drug present in the patient’s body for the
first 4 days after it has been administered is given by

1

 
4 ⫺ 0

 冮 4

0

 e⫺0.2t dt

 冮 4
 c a⫺ 1
 1⫺5e⫺0.8 ⫹ 52

4d
0.2b e⫺0.2t  ` 0

0

 5e⫺0.2t dt ⫽ 5
4
 ⫽ 5
4
 ⫽ 5
4
 ⬇ 3.44

or approximately 3.44 units.

We now give a geometric interpretation of the average value of a function f over

an interval [a, b]. Suppose f(x) is nonnegative, so that the definite integral

冮 b

a

 f 1x2 dx

gives the area under the graph of f from x ⫽ a to x ⫽ b (Figure 26). Observe that, in
general, the “height” f(x) varies from point to point. Can we replace f(x) by a constant
function t(x) ⫽ k (which has constant height) such that the areas under each of the two
functions f and t are the same? If so, since the area under the graph of t from x ⫽ a
to x ⫽ b is k(b ⫺ a), we have

 k 1b ⫺ a2 ⫽ 冮 b
 k ⫽ 1

a

 f 1x2 dx
 冮 b

b ⫺ a

a

 f 1x2 dx

so k is the average value of f over [a, b]. Thus, the average value of a function f over
an interval [a, b] is the height of a rectangle with base of length (b ⫺ a) that has the
same area as that of the region under the graph of f from x ⫽ a to x ⫽ b.

11.5 Self-Check Exercises

1. Evaluate

冮 2

0

 12x ⫹ 5 dx.

2. Find the average value of the function f(x) ⫽ 1 ⫺ x 2 over

the interval [⫺1, 2].

3. The  median  price  of  a  house  in  a  southwestern  state
between January 1, 2003, and January 1, 2008, is approxi-
mated by the function

f1t2 ⫽ t 3 ⫺ 7t 2 ⫹ 17t ⫹ 280

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 52

where  f(t)  is  measured  in  thousands  of  dollars  and  t is
expressed in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to the begin-
ning  of  2003.  Determine  the  average  median  price  of  a
house over that time interval.

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 11.5 can be found on 
page 812.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

11.5 Concept Questions

1. Describe two approaches that are used to evaluate a defi-
nite  integral  using  the  method  of  substitution.  Illustrate 
with the integral 兰 1
0  x 

21x3 ⫹ 12 2 dx.

11.5 Exercises

11.5 EVALUATING DEFINITE INTEGRALS

809

2. Define  the  average  value  of  a  function  f over  an  interval 

[a, b]. Give a geometric interpretation.

In Exercises 1–28, evaluate the definite integral.

 x1x2 ⫺ 12 3 dx
 x25x2 ⫹ 4 dx

2.

4.

 x212x3 ⫺ 12 4 dx
 x23x2 ⫺ 2 dx

0

冮 1
冮 3
冮 5
冮 2

1

1

0

 12x ⫺ 12 5/2 dx
x2x2 ⫹ 5

 dx

 

 

6.

8.

 dx

 x21x3 ⫹ 12 3/2 dx
112x ⫹ 1
 13x ⫺ 12 4 dx
12x ⫹ 421x2 ⫹ 4x ⫺ 82 3 dx
 x21x3 ⫹ 12 4 dx
 a x3 ⫹ 3
 x1x ⫺ 1 dx

4b1x4 ⫹ 3x2 ⫺2 dx

14.

1
Hint: Let u ⫽ x ⫺ 1.

1.

3.

5.

7.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

15.

17.

19.

21.

23.

25.

27.

⫺1

0

0

0

0

冮 2
冮 1
冮 2
冮 1
冮 2
冮 2
冮 1
冮 2
冮 5

1

1

1

0

0

冮 2
冮 1
冮 1
冮 6
冮 2
冮 2
冮 2

1

3

1

1

⫺1

冮 4

 x1x ⫹ 1 dx

1
Hint: Let u ⫽ x ⫹ 1.

0

0

1

20.

18.

16.

冮 1
冮 2
冮 4
冮 1
冮 1
冮 2
28. 冮 2

26.

22.

24.

0

0

1

1

 e⫺x dx

t ⫺ e⫺t2  dt
 1e 
e1x1x

 dx

  

 

 

x

1 ⫹ 2x2 dx

x

e 

1 ⫹ e 

x dx

a 1 ⫹ 1

x

⫹ e 

xb  

dx

  

ln  x

x

 dx

 2xe 

x2 dx

 1e2x ⫹ x2 ⫹ 12 dx

 xe 

x2⫹1 dx

 

 

1

x ⫺ 2

 dx

x2 ⫹ 2x

x3 ⫹ 3x2 ⫺ 1

 dx

a 4e2u ⫺ 1
a 2e⫺4x ⫺ 1

ub  du
x2b  dx

In Exercises 29–34, find the area of the region under the graph of
f on [a, b].

29. f1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫹ 2; 3⫺1, 24
30. f1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫹ x; 30, 14
1x ⫹ 1
32. f1x2 ⫽ 2 ⫹
33. f1x2 ⫽ e⫺x/2; 3⫺1, 24

; [0, 34

31. f1x2 ⫽ ; 31, 24

1
x 2

34. f1x2 ⫽

ln x
4x

; 31, 24

In Exercises 35–44, find the average value of the function f over
the indicated interval [a, b].

35. f1x2 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3; 30, 24
37. f1x2 ⫽ 2x 2 ⫺ 3; 31, 34
39. f1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 2x ⫺ 3; 3⫺1, 24
40. f1x2 ⫽ x 3; 3⫺1, 14
42. f1x2 ⫽ e⫺x; 30, 44

36. f1x2 ⫽ 8 ⫺ x; 31, 44
38. f1x2 ⫽ 4 ⫺ x 2; 3⫺2, 34
f 1x2 ⫽ 12x ⫹ 1; 30, 44

41.

43. f1x2 ⫽ xe x 2; 30, 24

44.

f 1x2 ⫽ 1

x ⫹ 1

; 30, 24

45. WORLD PRODUCTION OF COAL A study proposed in 1980 by
researchers from the major producers and consumers of the
world’s coal concluded that coal could and must play an
important role in fueling global economic growth over the
next 20 years. The world production of coal in 1980 was 
3.5  billion  metric  tons.  If  output  increased  at  the  rate  of
3.5e0.05t billion  metric  tons/year  in  year  t (t ⫽ 0  corre-
sponding  to  1980),  determine  how  much  coal  was  pro-
duced worldwide between 1980 and the end of the twenti-
eth century.

46. NEWTON’S LAW OF COOLING A bottle of white wine at room
temperature (68°F) is placed in a refrigerator at 4 P.M. Its
temperature after t hr is changing at the rate of

⫺18e⫺0.6t

°F/hour. By how many degrees will the temperature of the
wine have dropped by 7 P.M.? What will the temperature of
the wine be at 7 P.M.?

47. NET INVESTMENT FLOW The  net  investment  flow  (rate  of
capital formation) of the giant conglomerate LTF incorpo-
rated is projected to be

t B 1

2

 t 

2 ⫹ 1

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

810

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

million dollars/year in year t. Find the accruement on the
company’s capital stock in the second year.
Hint: The amount is given by

冮 2

1

 t B 1

2

 t 

2 ⫹ 1 dt

48. OIL PRODUCTION On the basis of a preliminary report by a
geological  survey  team,  it  is  estimated  that  a  newly  dis-
covered  oil  field  can  be  expected  to  produce  oil  at  the 
rate of

2

R 1t2 ⫽ 600t 

3 ⫹ 32

t 

⫹ 5    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 202

thousand barrels/year, t years after production begins. Find
the  amount  of  oil  that  the  field  can  be  expected  to  yield
during  the  first  5  years  of  production,  assuming  that  the
projection holds true.

49. DEPRECIATION:  DOUBLE DECLINING–BALANCE METHOD Sup-
pose  a  tractor  purchased  at  a  price  of  $60,000  is  to  be
depreciated by the double declining–balance method over
a 10-year period. It can be shown that the rate at which the
book value will be decreasing is given by

R1t2 ⫽ 13388.61e⫺0.22314t

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

dollars/year at year t. Find the amount by which the book
value of the tractor will depreciate over the first 5 years of
its life.

50. VELOCITY OF A CAR A  car  moves  along  a  straight  road  in
such a way that its velocity (in feet per second) at any time
t (in seconds) is given by

 1t2 ⫽ 3t216 ⫺ t 

√

2    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

Find  the  distance  traveled  by  the  car  in  the  4  sec  from 
t ⫽ 0 to t ⫽ 4.

51. CELL-PHONE AD SPENDING Cell-phone ad spending between

2005 (t ⫽ 1) and 2011 (t ⫽ 7) is projected to be

S1t2 ⫽ 0.86t 0.96

11 ⱕ t ⱕ 72

where S(t) is measured in billions of dollars and t is mea-
sured in years. What is the projected average spending per
year on cell-phone ads between 2005 and 2011?
Source: Interactive Advertising Bureau.

52. GLOBAL WARMING The increase in carbon dioxide (CO2) in
the atmosphere is a major cause of global warming. Using
data  obtained  by  Charles  David  Keeling,  professor  at
Scripps Institution of Oceanography, the average amount
of  CO2 in  the  atmosphere  from  1958  through  2010  is
approximated by
A1t2 ⫽ 0.012313t 2 ⫹ 0.7545t ⫹ 313.9

11 ⱕ t ⱕ 532

where A(t) is measured in parts per million volume (ppmv)
and t in years, with t ⫽ 1 corresponding to 1958. Find the
average rate of increase of the average amount of CO2 in
the atmosphere from 1958 through 2010.
Source: Scripps Institution of Oceanography.

53. PROJECTED U.S. GASOLINE USAGE The White House wants to
cut  gasoline  usage  from  140  billion  gallons  per  year  in
2007 to 128 billion gallons per year in 2017. But estimates
by  the  Department  of  Energy’s  Energy  Information
Agency  suggest  that  won’t  happen.  In  fact,  the  agency’s
projection  of  gasoline  usage  from  the  beginning  of  2007
until the beginning of 2017 is given by

A1t2 ⫽ 0.014t 2 ⫹ 1.93t ⫹ 140
where A(t) is measured in billions of gallons/year and t is
in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 2007.
a. According  to  the  agency’s  projection,  what  will  be

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

gasoline consumption at the beginning of 2017?

b. What  will  be  the  average  consumption/year  over  the
period from the beginning of 2007 until the beginning
of 2017?

Source: U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Agency

54. U.S. CITIZENS 65 YEARS AND OLDER The number of U.S. cit-
izens aged 65 years and older from 1900 through 2050 is
estimated to be growing at the rate of

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 152

R1t2 ⫽ 0.063t 2 ⫺ 0.48t ⫹ 3.87
million  people/decade,  where  t is  measured  in  decades,
with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 1900. Show that the average
rate  of  growth  of  U.S.  citizens  aged  65  years  and  older
between  2000  and  2050  will  be  about  twice  the  average
rate between 1950 and 2000.
Source: American Heart Association.

55. FEDERAL LOBBYING The amount of money spent on federal
lobbying in the health industry from 1998 through 2008 is
approximated by the function

f1t2 ⫽ 1.84t 2 ⫹ 12.51t ⫹ 174    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 102

f1t2

where 
is the amount spent (in millions of dollars) in
year  t.  Find  the  approximate  average  amount  of  money
spent by lobbyists per year in the health industry over the
10-year period under consideration.
Source: opensecrets.org.

56. TOTAL KNEE REPLACEMENT PROCEDURES The number of total
knee  replacement  procedures  (in  millions)  performed  in
the United States from the beginning of 1991 through the
end of 2030 is projected to be

f1t2 ⫽ 0.0000846t 3 ⫺ 0.002116t 2 ⫹ 0.03897t ⫹ 0.16
10 ⱕ t ⱕ 402

t ⫽ 0

where 
corresponds  to  1991.  What  will  be  the  pro-
jected  average  number  of  total  knee  replacement  proce-
dures  performed  in  the  United  States  in  the  period  from
1991 through 2030?
Source: American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons.

57. AVERAGE YEARLY SALES The sales of Universal Instruments
in the first t years of its operation are approximated by the
function

S 1t2 ⫽ t20.2t 

2 ⫹ 4

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

where S(t) is measured in millions of dollars. What were
Universal’s  average  yearly  sales  over  its  first  5  years  of 
operation?

58. CABLE TV SUBSCRIBERS The manager of TeleStar Cable Ser-
vice estimates that the total number of subscribers to the
service in a certain city t years from now will be

N 1t2 ⫽ ⫺

40,000

11 ⫹ 0.2t

⫹ 50,000

Find  the  average  number  of  cable  television  subscribers
over the next 5 years if this prediction holds true.

59. CONCENTRATION OF A DRUG IN THE BLOODSTREAM The  con-
centration of a certain drug in a patient’s bloodstream t hr
after injection is

C 1t2 ⫽ 0.2t

2 ⫹ 1

t 

mg/cm3. Determine the average concentration of the drug
in  the  patient’s  bloodstream  over  the  first  4  hr  after  the
drug is injected.

60. SEAT BELT USE According to the U.S. Department of Trans-
portation,  the  percentage  of  drivers  using  seat  belts  from
2001 through 2009 is modeled by the function

f1t2 ⫽ 72.91t ⫹ 12 0.057

where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
the beginning of 2001. What was the average percentage
use of seat belts over the period from the beginning of 2001
through the end of 2009? 
Source: U.S. Department of Transportation.

61. AVERAGE PRICE OF A COMMODITY The price of a certain com-
modity in dollars per unit at time t (measured in weeks) is
given by

p ⫽ 18 ⫺ 3e⫺2t ⫺ 6e⫺t/3

What  is  the  average  price  of  the  commodity  over  the 
5-week period from t ⫽ 0 to t ⫽ 5?

62. FLOW OF BLOOD IN AN ARTERY According  to  a  law  dis-
covered by nineteenth century physician Jean Louis Marie
Poiseuille,  the  velocity  of  blood  (in  centimeters  per  sec-
ond) r cm from the central axis of an artery is given by

√1r2 ⫽ k1R2 ⫺ r 22

where k is a constant and R is the radius of the artery. Find
the average velocity of blood along a radius of the artery
(see the accompanying figure).

 冮 R

0

√1r2 dr

.

Hint: Evaluate 

R

1
R

r

11.5 EVALUATING DEFINITE INTEGRALS

811

63. WASTE DISPOSAL When  organic  waste  is  dumped  into  a
pond, the oxidization process that takes place reduces the
pond’s  oxygen  content.  However,  in  time,  nature  will
restore the oxygen content to its natural level. Suppose that
the  oxygen  content  t days  after  organic  waste  has  been
dumped into a pond is given by

f 1t2 ⫽ 100a t 

t 

2 ⫹ 10t ⫹ 100

2 ⫹ 20t ⫹ 100b

percent  of  its  normal  level.  Find  the  average  content  of
oxygen  in  the  pond  over  the  first  10  days  after  organic
waste has been dumped into it.
Hint: Show that 

t 
t 

2 ⫹ 10t ⫹ 100
2 ⫹ 20t ⫹ 100

⫽ 1 ⫺ 10
t ⫹ 10

⫹ 100
1t ⫹ 102 2

64. VELOCITY OF A FALLING HAMMER During the construction of a
high-rise  apartment  building,  a  construction  worker  acci-
dently drops a hammer that falls vertically a distance of h ft.
The velocity of the hammer after falling a distance of x ft 
is  √
.  Show  that  the  average
velocity of the hammer over this path is √苶
ft/sec.
65. Prove Property 1 of the definite integral.

⫽ 12tx ft/sec 10 ⱕ x ⱕ h2

3 12th

⫽ 2

Hint: Let F be an antiderivative of f, and use the definition of the
definite integral.

66. Prove Property 2 of the definite integral.

Hint: See Exercise 65.

67. Verify by direct computation that

冮 3

1

2 dx ⫽ ⫺冮 1

 x 

 x 

2 dx

3

68. Prove Property 3 of the definite integral.

Hint: See Exercise 65.

69. Verify by direct computation that

冮 9

 21x dx ⫽ 2 冮 9

1x dx

1
70. Verify by direct computation that

1

冮 1

0

 11 ⫹ x ⫺ e 

x2  dx ⫽ 冮 1

0

 dx ⫹ 冮 1

 x dx ⫺ 冮 1

 e 

x dx

0

0

What property of the definite integral is illustrated in this
exercise?

71. Verify by direct computation that

冮 3

0

 11 ⫹ x32  dx ⫽冮 1

0

 11 ⫹ x32  dx ⫹冮 3

1

 11 ⫹ x32  dx

What property of the definite integral is illustrated here?

72. Verify by direct computation that

冮 3

0

 11 ⫹ x32  dx
⫽ 冮 1

0

 11 ⫹ x32  dx ⫹ 冮 2

 11 ⫹ x32  dx ⫹ 冮 3

2

 11 ⫹ x32  dx

1

Blood vessel

hence illustrating that Property 5 may be extended.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

812

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

73. Evaluate 

74. Evaluate 

.

3

 11 ⫹ 1x2e⫺x dx
冮 3
冮 0
 f1x2 dx
冮 2

 f1x2 dx ⫽ ⫺2

3

, given that 

⫺1

0

.

冮 3
 f1x2 dx ⫽ 4
冮 2

 t1x2 dx ⫽ 3

⫺1

and 

75. Given that 

, evaluate

a.

b.

c.

⫺1

冮 2
冮 2
冮 2

⫺1

⫺1

 32f1x2 ⫹ t1x24 dx
 3t1x2 ⫺ f1x24 dx
 32f1x2 ⫺ 3t1x24 dx

76. Given that 

冮 2

 f1x2 dx ⫽ 2

⫺1

a.

冮 0
b. 冮 2

⫺1

0

 f1x2 dx
 f1x2 dx ⫺ 冮 0

⫺1

 f1x2 dx

11.5 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. Let  u ⫽ 2x ⫹ 5.  Then,  du ⫽ 2  dx,  or 

dx ⫽ 1

2  du.

Also, 

when x ⫽ 0, u ⫽ 5, and when x ⫽ 2, u ⫽ 9. Therefore,

0

0

 u1/2 du

 12x ⫹ 5 dx ⫽ 冮 2
 冮 2
 12x ⫹ 52 1/2 dx
 冮 9
 ⫽ 1
2
 u3/2b ` 9
 ⫽ a 1
2b a 2
 ⫽ 1
 393/2 ⫺ 53/24
3
 127 ⫺ 5152
 ⫽ 1
3

3

5

5

and 

冮 2
 f1x2 dx ⫽ 3

0

, evaluate

80. If f ⬘ is continuous on [0, 2], then
(x) dx ⫽ f(2) ⫺ f(0).
81. If  f and  t are  continuous  on  [a,  b]  and  k is  a  constant, 

0  f  ¿
兰 2

then

冮 b

a

 3k f1x2 ⫹ t1x24 dx ⫽ k冮 b

a

 f1x2 dx ⫹ 冮 b

a

 t1x2 dx

In Exercises 77–82, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, explain why or
give an example to show why it is false.

77.

78.

79.

1

2

 

 

 

dx

dx

x ⫺ 2

 dx ⫽ 0

⫽ ⫺冮 1

 ex11 ⫹ x

冮 2
冮 3
 x1x ⫹ 1 dx ⫽ 1x ⫹ 1冮 1
 冮 1
 x 21x ⫹ 1 ` 0

 ⫽ 1
2

x ⫺ 2

0

3

1

0

 x dx

12

2

⫽

82. If f is continuous on [a, b] and a ⬍ c ⬍ b, then
 f1x2 dx

 f1x2 dx ⫺ 冮 b

 f1x2 dx ⫽ 冮 c

冮 c

b

a

a

3. The average median price of a house over the stated time

interval is given by

1

 
5 ⫺ 0

3 ⫺ 7t 

2 ⫹ 17t ⫹ 2802 dt

0

 冮 5
 1t 
 a 1
 ⫽ 1
5
 c 1
 ⫽ 1
5
 ⬇ 295.417

 t 

4

4

4 ⫺ 7
3

 t 

3 ⫹ 17
2

 t 

 152 4 ⫺ 7

3

 152 3 ⫹ 17

2

5

2 ⫹ 280tb` 0
 152 2 ⫹ 280152 d

or approximately $295,417.

2. The required average value is given by

 

1

2 ⫺ 1⫺12  冮 2

⫺1

 11 ⫺ x 

22 dx ⫽ 1
3
 ⫽ 1
3
 ⫽ 1
3

⫺1

 冮 2
 ax ⫺ 1
 c a2 ⫺ 8

 11 ⫺ x 
22 dx
3  x 3b ` 2
3b ⫺ a⫺1 ⫹ 1

⫺1

3b d ⫽ 0

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Evaluating Definite Integrals for Piecewise-Defined Functions
We continue using graphing utilities to find the definite integral of a function. But here
we will make use of Property 5 of the properties of the definite integral (page 803).

11.5 EVALUATING DEFINITE INTEGRALS

813

EXAMPLE 1 Use the numerical integral operation of a graphing utility to evaluate

冮 2

⫺1

 f 1x2 dx

where

1x
f 1x2 ⫽ e ⫺x2

if x ⬍ 0
if x ⱖ 0

Solution Using Property 5 of the definite integral, we can write

冮 2

⫺1

 f 1x2 dx ⫽ 冮 0

⫺1

⫺x2 dx ⫹ 冮 2

 x1/2 dx

0

Using a graphing utility, we find

 冮 2

  f 1x2 dx ⫽ fnInt1⫺x^2, x, ⫺1, 02 ⫹ fnInt1x^0.5, x, 0, 22

 ⬇ ⫺0.333333 ⫹ 1.885618
 ⫽ 1.552285

⫺1

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

In  Exercises  1–4,  use  Property  5  of  the  definite  integral  (page 
803)  to  evaluate  the  definite  integral  accurate  to  five  decimal
places.
⫺1 f 1x2 dx,
兰 2
1.
f 1x2 ⫽ e 2.3x3 ⫺ 3.1x2 ⫹ 2.7x ⫹ 3

⫺1.7x2 ⫹ 2.3x ⫹ 4.3

if x ⬍ 1
if x ⱖ 1

where

1x

2.

3.

4.

0  f 1x2 dx, where f 1x2 ⫽ •
兰 3

1 ⫹ x2
0.5e⫺0.1x2

if 0 ⱕ x ⬍ 1

if x ⱖ 1

⫺2  f 1x2 dx, where f 1x2 ⫽ e x4 ⫺ 2x2 ⫹ 4
兰 2
2 ln 1x ⫹ e 
22
⫺2 f 1x2 dx,
兰 6
f 1x2 ⫽ • 

where
2x 3 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 2

13x ⫹ 4 ⫺ 5

x 2 ⫺ 3x ⫺ 5

if x ⬍ ⫺1
if ⫺1 ⱕ x ⱕ 4
if x ⬎ 4

5. AIDS IN MASSACHUSETTS The number of AIDS cases diag-
nosed in Massachusetts from the beginning of 1989 (t ⫽ 0)
through  the  end  of  1996  (t ⫽ 8)  is  approximated  by  the
function

f 1t2 ⫽ μ 

2 ⫹ 30.16667t ⫹ 1000

69.83333t 
1719
⫺28.79167t 
3 ⫹ 491.37500t 
  ⫺2985.083333t ⫹ 7640

2

if 0 ⱕ t ⬍ 3
if 3 ⱕ t ⬍ 4

if 4 ⱕ t ⱕ 8

if x ⬍ 0
if x ⱖ 0

F 1t2 ⫽ e 62e1.152t

349e⫺1.3241t⫺1.52

if 0 ⱕ t ⬍ 1.5
if 1.5 ⱕ t ⱕ 3

where f(t) is measured in the number of cases per year. Esti-
mate the total number of AIDS cases diagnosed in Massa-
chusetts from the beginning of 1989 through the end of 1996.
Source: Massachusetts Department of Health.

6. CROP YIELD If left untreated on bean stems, aphids (small
insects that suck plant juices) will multiply at an increasing
rate  during  the  summer  months  and  reduce  productivity
and  crop  yield  of  cultivated  crops.  But  if  the  aphids  are
treated in mid-June, the numbers decrease sharply to less
than 100/bean stem, allowing for steep rises in crop yield.
The function

gives the number of aphids on a typical bean stem at time
t, where t is measured in months, t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
the beginning of May. Find the average number of aphids
on a typical bean stem over the period from the beginning
of May to the beginning of August.

7. ABSORPTION OF DRUGS Jane  took  100  mg  of  a  drug  in  the
morning and another 100 mg of the same drug at the same
time the following morning. The amount of the drug (in mg)
in her body t days after the first dose was taken is given by

A1t2 ⫽ e 100e⫺1.4t

10011 ⫹ e1.42e⫺1.4t

if 0 ⱕ t ⬍ 1
if t ⱖ 1

Find the average amount of the drug in Jane’s body over
the first 2 days.

(continued)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

814

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

8. ABSORPTION OF DRUGS The  concentration  of  a  drug  in  an

organ t seconds after it is administered is given by
if 0 ⱕ t ⱕ 20
if t ⬎ 20

C 1t2 ⫽ e 0.3t ⫺ 1811 ⫺ e⫺t/602
18e⫺t/60 ⫺ 12e⫺1t⫺202/60

11.6 Area Between Two Curves

where  C(t)  is  measured  in  grams  per  cubic  centimeter
(g/cm3). Find the average concentration of the drug in the
organ over the first 30 sec after it is administered.

Suppose a certain country’s petroleum consumption is expected to be f(t) million bar-
rels per year, t years from now, for the next 5 years. Then the country’s total petro-
leum consumption over the period of time in question is given by the area of the region
under the graph of f on the interval [0, 5] (Figure 27).
Next, suppose that because of the implementation of certain energy-conservation
measures, the petroleum consumption is expected to be t(t) million barrels per year
instead.  Then,  the  country’s  projected  total  petroleum  consumption  over  the  5-year
period is given by the area of the region under the graph of t on the interval [0, 5] (Fig-
ure 28).
Therefore, the area of the shaded region S lying between the graphs of f and t on
the interval [0, 5] (Figure 29) gives the amount of petroleum that would be saved over
the 5-year period because of the conservation measures.

y

r
a
e
y

r
e
p

s
l
e
r
r
a
b

n
o
i
l
l
i

M

y

r
a
e
y

r
e
p

s
l
e
r
r
a
b

n
o
i
l
l
i

M

y = f (t)

t

5

y

r
a
e
y

r
e
p

s
l
e
r
r
a
b

n
o
i
l
l
i

M

y = g(t)

t

5

y = f (t)

= g(t)

y

S

t

5

Years

FIGURE 27
At a rate of consumption of f(t) million
barrels per year, the total petroleum con-
sumption is given by the area of the
region under the graph of f.

Years

FIGURE 28
At a rate of consumption of g(t) million bar-
rels per year, the total petroleum consump-
tion is given by the area of the region under
the graph of g.

Years

FIGURE 29
The area of S gives the amount of petroleum
that would be saved over the 5-year period.

But the area of S is given by

Area of the region under the graph of f on [a, b] 

⫺ Area of the region under the graph of t on [a, b]
 f 1t2 dt ⫺ 冮 5
 3  f  1t2 ⫺ t1t24 dt

By Property 4, Section 11.5

 t1t2 dt

0

 ⫽ 冮 5
 ⫽ 冮 5

0

0

This example shows that some practical problems can be solved by finding the
area  of  a  region  between  two  curves,  which  in  turn  can  be  found  by  evaluating  an
appropriate definite integral.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

y

y = f (x)

R

y = g(x)

a

b

x

FIGURE 30

冮 b

Area of R ⫽ [ f(x) ⫺ g(x)] dx

a

2

R

x

= 4

– 2

x = –1

y

–4

–8

–12

y = – x 2 + 4x – 8

FIGURE 31

Area of R ⫽

⫺冮 4

⫺1

g(x) dx

11.6 AREA BETWEEN TWO CURVES

815

Finding the Area of the Region Between Two Curves
We now turn our attention to the general problem of finding the area of a plane region
bounded  both  above  and  below  by  the  graphs  of  functions.  First,  consider 
the  situation  in  which  the  graph  of  one  function  lies  above  that  of  another.  More
specifically,  let  R be  the  region  in  the  xy-plane  (Figure  30)  that  is  bounded  above 
by the graph of a continuous function f, below by the graph of a continuous function
t, where f(x) ⱖ t(x) ⱖ 0 on [a, b], and to the left and right by the vertical lines x ⫽ a
and x ⫽ b, respectively. From the figure, we see that 

Area of R ⫽ Area of the region under the graph of f1x2
⫺ Area of the region under the graph of t1x2
 f 1x2 dx ⫺冮 b
 t1x2 dx
 3   f 1x2 ⫺ t1x24 dx

 ⫽ 冮 b
 ⫽ 冮 b

a

a

a

upon using Property 4 of the definite integral.

The Area of the Region Between Two Curves
Let f and t be continuous functions such that f (x) ⱖ t(x) on the interval [a, b].
Then the area of the region bounded above by y ⫽ f (x) and below by y ⫽ t(x)
on [a, b] is given by

冮 b
 3   f  1x2 ⫺ t1x24 dx

a

(13)

Even though we assumed that both f and t were nonnegative in the derivation of
(13), it may be shown that this equation is valid if f and t are not nonnegative (see
Exercise 59). Also, observe that if t(x) is 0 for all x—that is, when the lower bound-
ary of the region R is the x-axis—the integral (13) gives the area of the region under
the curve y ⫽ f(x) from x ⫽ a to x ⫽ b, as we would expect.

EXAMPLE 1 Find the area of the region bounded by the x-axis, the graph of 
y ⫽ ⫺x 2 ⫹ 4x ⫺ 8, and the lines x ⫽ ⫺1 and x ⫽ 4.

Solution The region R under consideration is shown in Figure 31. We can view
R as the region bounded above by the graph of f (x) ⫽ 0 (the x-axis) and below
by the graph of t(x) ⫽ ⫺x 2 ⫹ 4x ⫺ 8 on [⫺1, 4]. Therefore, the area of R is
given by

x

a

⫺1

 冮 b
 3   f  1x2 ⫺ t1x24 dx ⫽ 冮 4
 ⫽ 冮 4
 ⫽ 1
3
 ⫽ c 1
3
 ⫽ 312
3

⫺1

 x 

2 ⫹ 4x ⫺ 824 dx

 30 ⫺ 1⫺x 
 1x 
2 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 82 dx
2 ⫹ 8x ` ⫺1
3 ⫺ 2x 

4

 1642 ⫺ 21162 ⫹ 8142d ⫺ c 1

 1⫺12 ⫺ 2112 ⫹ 81⫺12d

3

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

816

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

y

x = 1

4

2

x = 2

y = x 2 – 4

–4

– 2

R

x

4

y = 2 x – 1

– 4

FIGURE 32

冮 2

Area of R ⫽ [ f(x) ⫺ g(x)] dx

1

VIDEO

y

4

(3, 5)

y

 = x 2 – 4

– 4

R

4

x

(–1, –3)

y = 2 x – 1

– 4

FIGURE 33

Area of R ⫽

⫺冮 3

⫺1

[ f(x) ⫺ g(x)] dx

EXAMPLE 2 Find the area of the region R bounded by the graphs of

f1x2 ⫽ 2x ⫺ 1 and

t1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 4

and the vertical lines x ⫽ 1 and x ⫽ 2.

Solution We first sketch the graphs of the functions f(x) ⫽ 2x ⫺ 1 and 
t(x) ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 4 and the vertical lines x ⫽ 1 and x ⫽ 2, and then we identify the
region R whose area is to be calculated (Figure 32).

Since the graph of f always lies above that of t for x in the interval [1, 2], we see

by integral (13) that the required area is given by

 冮 2

1

1

 3   f  1x2 ⫺ t 1x24 dx ⫽ 冮 2
 ⫽ 冮 2
 ⫽ ⫺1
3
 ⫽ a⫺8

1

3

2 ⫺ 424 dx

 312x ⫺ 12 ⫺ 1x 
 1⫺x 
2 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 32 dx
2 ⫹ 3x ` 1
3 ⫹ x 

 x 

2

⫹ 4 ⫹ 6b ⫺ a⫺1

3

⫹ 1 ⫹ 3b ⫽ 11

3

EXAMPLE 3 Find the area of the region R that is completely enclosed by the graphs
of the functions

f1x2 ⫽ 2x ⫺ 1 and

t1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 4

Solution The region R is shown in Figure 33. First, we find the points of intersec-
tion of the two curves. To do this, we solve the system that consists of the two equa-
tions y ⫽ 2x ⫺ 1 and y ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 4. Equating the two values of y gives

 x2 ⫺ 4 ⫽ 2x ⫺ 1

 x2 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 3 ⫽ 0
 1x ⫹ 121x ⫺ 32 ⫽ 0

so x ⫽ ⫺1 or x ⫽ 3. That is, the two curves intersect when x ⫽ ⫺1 and x ⫽ 3.
Observe that we could also view the region R as the region bounded above by the
graph of the function f (x) ⫽ 2x ⫺ 1, below by the graph of the function t(x) ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 4,
and to the left and right by the vertical lines x ⫽ ⫺1 and x ⫽ 3, respectively.
Next, since the graph of the function f always lies above that of the function t on

[⫺1, 3], we can use integral (13) to compute the desired area:

a

⫺1

 冮 b
 3   f  1x2 ⫺ t1x24 dx ⫽ 冮 3
 312x ⫺ 12 ⫺ 1x 2 ⫺ 424 dx
 ⫽ 冮 3
 1⫺x 
2 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 32 dx
 ⫽ ⫺1
2 ⫹ 3x ` ⫺1
3 ⫹ x 
3
 ⫽ 1⫺9 ⫹ 9 ⫹ 92 ⫺ a 1
 ⫽ 10 2
3

 x 

⫺1

3

3

⫹ 1 ⫺ 3b ⫽ 32

3

EXAMPLE 4 Find the area of the region R bounded by the graphs of the functions

f1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 1 and

t1x2 ⫽ ⫺e x ⫺ 1

and the vertical lines x ⫽ ⫺1 and x ⫽ 1.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

y = x2 – 2x – 1

y

3

x = –1

– 3

y = –ex – 1

R

– 3

x

3

x = 1

FIGURE 34

Area of R ⫽ 

冮 1

[ f(x) ⫺ g(x)] dx

⫺1

y

y = x3

x

= 1

R2

x

1

–1

R1

x = –1

FIGURE 35
Area of R1 ⫽ Area of R2

11.6 AREA BETWEEN TWO CURVES

817

Solution The region R is shown in Figure 34. Since the graph of the function f
always lies above that of the function t, the area of the region R is given by
x ⫺ 124 dx

2 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 12 ⫺ 1⫺e 

 31x 
 1x 
3 ⫺ x 

a

⫺1

 冮 b
 3   f 1x2 ⫺ t1x24 dx ⫽ 冮 1
 ⫽ 冮 1
 ⫽ 1
3
 ⫽ a 1
 ⫽ 2
3

⫺1

 x 

2 ⫺ 2x ⫹ e 

x2 dx
x ` ⫺1

1

2 ⫹ e 

⫺ 1 ⫹ eb ⫺ a⫺1
3
⫹ e ⫺ 1
e

⬇ 3.02

3

⫺ 1 ⫹ e⫺1b

Integral (13), which gives the area of the region between the curves y ⫽ f(x) and
y ⫽ t(x) for a ⱕ x ⱕ b, is valid when the graph of the function f lies above that of the
function t over the interval [a, b]. Example 5 shows how to use Equation (13) to find
the area of a region when this condition does not hold.

EXAMPLE 5 Find the area of the region bounded by the graph of the function 
f(x) ⫽ x 3, the x-axis, and the lines x ⫽ ⫺1 and x ⫽ 1.

Solution The region R under consideration can be thought of as being composed
of the two subregions R1 and R2, as shown in Figure 35.

Recall that the x-axis is represented by the function t(x) ⫽ 0. Since t(x) ⱖ f(x) on

[⫺1, 0], we see that the area of R1 is given by

To find the area of R2, we observe that f(x) ⱖ t(x) on [0, 1], so it is given by

 冮 b
 3t1x2 ⫺ f  1x24 dx ⫽ 冮 0
 ⫽ ⫺1
4

⫺1

a

 冮 b
 3   f 1x2 ⫺ t1x24 dx ⫽ 冮 1
 ⫽ 1
4

0

a

⫺1

 x3 dx
4b ⫽ 1

4

0

 10 ⫺ x32  dx ⫽ ⫺冮 0
⫽ 0 ⫺ a⫺1
 x4 ` ⫺1
3 ⫺ 02 dx ⫽ 冮 1
 1x 
⫽ a 1
4 ` 0

 x 

0

1

4b ⫺ 0 ⫽ 1

4

 x 

3 dx

Therefore, the area of R is 

By making use of symmetry, we could have obtained the same result by computing

1
4

.

⫹ 1

4, or 1
2
⫺2冮 0

 x 

3 dx

or

2冮 1

 x 

3 dx

as you may verify.

⫺1

0

Explore & Discuss
A function is even if it satisfies the condition f(⫺x) ⫽ f(x), and it is odd if it satisfies the condi-
tion f(⫺x) ⫽ ⫺f(x). Show that the graph of an even function is symmetric with respect to the
y-axis while the graph of an odd function is symmetric with respect to the origin. Explain why

and

⫺a  f 1x2 dx ⫽ 2兰 a
 兰 a

0   f 1x2 dx

if f is even

⫺a  f 1x2 dx ⫽ 0
 兰 a

if f is odd

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

818

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

y

y = x + 3

y

= x3 – 3x + 3

(2, 5)

R1

5

3

1

R2

(–2, 1)

– 3  

–1

1

3

FIGURE 36
Area of R1 ⫹ Area of R2
冮 0

⫽

[ f(x) ⫺ g(x)] dx

⫺2

冮 2

0

⫹ 

[ g(x) ⫺ f(x)] dx

EXAMPLE 6 Find the area of the region completely enclosed by the graphs of the
functions

f1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 3 and

t1x2 ⫽ x ⫹ 3

Solution First, we sketch the graphs of y ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 3 and y ⫽ x ⫹ 3, and we
then identify the required region R. We can view the region R as being composed of 
the two subregions R1 and R2, as shown in Figure 36. By solving the equations 
y ⫽ x ⫹ 3 and y ⫽ x 3 ⫺3x ⫹ 3 simultaneously, we find the points of intersection 
of the two curves. Equating the two values of y, we have

x

 x3 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 3 ⫽ x ⫹ 3
 x3 ⫺ 4x ⫽ 0
2 ⫺ 42 ⫽ 0
 x1x 
 x1x ⫹ 221x ⫺ 22 ⫽ 0

 x ⫽ 0, ⫺2, 2

 冮 0

Hence, the points of intersection of the two curves are (⫺2, 1), (0, 3), and (2, 5).
For ⫺2 ⱕ x ⱕ 0, we see that the graph of the function f lies above that of the
function t, so the area of the region R1 is, by virtue of Equation (13),
3 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 32 ⫺ 1x ⫹ 324 dx ⫽ 冮 0
 1x 
3 ⫺ 4x2 dx
 ⫽ 1
2 ` ⫺2
4 ⫺ 2x 
4
 ⫽ ⫺14 ⫺ 82
 ⫽ 4

 31x 

 x 

⫺2

⫺2

0

For 0 ⱕ x ⱕ 2, the graph of the function t lies above that of the function f, and the
area of R2 is given by

 冮 2

0

 31x ⫹ 32 ⫺ 1x 

3 ⫺ 3x ⫹ 324 dx ⫽ 冮 2
 ⫽ ⫺1
4

0

 1⫺x 
3 ⫹ 4x2 dx
2 ` 0
4 ⫹ 2x 

 x 

2

 ⫽ ⫺4 ⫹ 8
 ⫽ 4

Therefore, the required area is the sum of the areas of the two regions R1 and R2—
that is, 4 ⫹ 4, or 8.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 7 Conservation of Oil In a 2004 study for a developing
country’s Economic Development Board, government economists and 

energy experts concluded that if the Energy Conservation Bill were implemented
in 2005, the country’s oil consumption for the next 5 years is expected to grow in
accordance with the model

R1t2 ⫽ 20e0.05t

R11t2 ⫽ 20e0.08t

where t is measured in years (t ⫽ 0 corresponding to the year 2005) and R(t) in
millions of barrels per year. Without the government-imposed conservation mea-
sures, however, the expected rate of growth of oil consumption would be given by

million barrels per year. Using these models, determine how much oil would have
been saved from 2005 through 2010 if the bill had been implemented.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

11.6 AREA BETWEEN TWO CURVES

819

Solution Under the Energy Conservation Bill, the total amount of oil that
would have been consumed between 2005 and 2010 is given by

冮 5

0

 R 1t2 dt ⫽ 冮 5

0

 20e0.05t dt

(14)

Without the bill, the total amount of oil that would have been consumed between
2005 and 2010 is given by

冮 5

0

 R11t2 dt ⫽ 冮 5

0

 20e0.08t dt

(15)

The first integral in (14) may be interpreted as the area of the region under the
curve y ⫽ R(t) from t ⫽ 0 to t ⫽ 5. Similarly, we interpret the integrals in (15) as
giving the area of the region under the curve y ⫽ R1(t) from t ⫽ 0 to t ⫽ 5. Fur-
thermore, note that the graph of y ⫽ R1(t) ⫽ 20e0.08t always lies on or above the
graph of y ⫽ R(t) ⫽ 20e0.05t (t ⱖ 0). Thus, the area of the shaded region S in Fig-
ure 37 shows the amount of oil that would have been saved from 2005 to 2010 if
the Energy Conservation Bill had been implemented. But the area of the region S
is given by

 冮 5

0

0

 3R11t2 ⫺ R 1t24 dt ⫽ 冮 5
 ⫽ 20冮 5
 ⫽ 20a e0.08t
 ⫽ 20c a e0.4
 ⬇ 9.3

 120e0.08t ⫺ 20e0.05t2  dt
1e0.08t ⫺ e0.05t2  dt
⫺ e0.05t
0.05b ` 0
⫺ e0.25
0.05b ⫺ a 1

0.08

0.08

5

0

⫺ 1
0.05b d

0.08

Thus, the amount of oil that would have been saved is 9.3 million barrels.

y

y = R1(t)

= 20e0.08t

S

y = R(t

)

= 20e0.05t

30

25

20

1

2

3

4

5

t

FIGURE 37

冮 5

0

Area of S ⫽ [R1(t) ⫺ R(t)] dt

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
Refer to Example 7. Suppose we want to construct a mathematical model giving
the amount of oil saved from 2005 through the year (2005 ⫹ x), where x ⱖ 0. In
Example 7, for instance, we take x ⫽ 5.
1. Show that this model is given by

 F 1x2 ⫽ 冮 x

0

 3R11t2 ⫺ R 1t24 dt

 ⫽ 250e0.08x ⫺ 400e0.05x ⫹ 150

Hint: You may find it helpful to use some of the results of Example 7.

2. Use  a  graphing  utility  to  plot  the  graph  of  F,  using  the  viewing  window 

[0, 10] ⫻ [0, 50].

3. Find F(5) and thus confirm the result of Example 7.
4. What is the main advantage of this model?

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

820

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

11.6 Self-Check Exercises

1. Find  the  area  of  the  region  bounded  by  the  graphs  of 
f(x) ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 2 and t(x) ⫽ 1 ⫺ x and the vertical lines x ⫽ 0
and x ⫽ 1.

2. Find  the  area  of  the  region  completely  enclosed  by  the

graphs of f(x) ⫽ ⫺x 2 ⫹ 6x ⫹ 5 and t(x) ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 5.

3. The  management  of  Kane  Corporation,  which  operates  a
chain  of  hotels,  expects  its  profits  to  grow  at  the  rate  of 
1 ⫹ t 2/3 million dollars/year t years from now. However,

with renovations and improvements of existing hotels and
proposed  acquisitions  of  new  hotels,  Kane’s  profits  are
expected  to  grow  at  the  rate  of 
million 
dollars/year in the next decade. What additional profits are
expected  over  the  next  10  years  if  the  group  implements
the proposed plans?

t ⫺ 21t ⫹ 4

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 11.6 can be found on 
page 824.

11.6 Concept Questions
1. Suppose f and t are continuous functions such that 

f (x) ⱖ t(x) on the interval [a, b]. Write an integral giving
the area of the region bounded above by the graph of f,
below by the graph of t, and on the left and right by the
lines x ⫽ a and x ⫽ b.

y

y ⫽ f (x)

y ⫽ g(x)

2. Write  an  expression  in  terms  of  definite  integrals  giving

a

b

c

d

x

the area of the shaded region in the figure.

11.6 Exercises

In Exercises 1–8, find the area of the shaded region.
1.

y

y = 0

y = x3 – 6x2

x

6

2.

y

2

1

–1

–1

y = x 4 – 2x 3

y = 0

x

2

3.

4.

y

y

1
2

1
2

1
2

1
2

y = x 1 – x2

œ

x

1

y = 0

y =

2x

x 2 + 4

x

1

x = 2

y = 0

–1

x = – 2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

5.

6.

7.

8.

y

–1

y

2

1

–1

– 2

y = x – 2œx

4

y = x – 2

y = œx

2

3

4

x

x

y

1

–1

y = x2

y = x1/3

x

x = –1

x = 1

y

y = x3

y = x + 6

8

– 6   – 5   – 4   – 3   – 2

1

4

x

y = – 1 x2

In  Exercises  9–16,  sketch  the  graph,  and  find  the  area  of  the
region bounded below by the graph of each function and above
by the x-axis from x ⫽ a to x ⫽ b.

9. f1x2 ⫽ ⫺x 2; a ⫽ ⫺1, b ⫽ 2
10. f1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 4; a ⫽ ⫺2, b ⫽ 2
11. f1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 5x ⫹ 4; a ⫽ 1, b ⫽ 3
12. f1x2 ⫽ x 3; a ⫽ ⫺1, b ⫽ 0
13. f 1x2 ⫽ ⫺1 ⫺ 1x; a ⫽ 0, b ⫽ 9

11.6 AREA BETWEEN TWO CURVES

821

2

14.

f 1x2 ⫽ 1

 x ⫺ 1x; a ⫽ 0, b ⫽ 4
15. f1x2 ⫽ ⫺ex /2; a ⫽ ⫺2, b ⫽ 4
16. f1x2 ⫽ ⫺xe⫺x2; a ⫽ 0, b ⫽ 1

In  Exercises  17–26,  sketch  the  graphs  of  the  functions  f and  g,
and find the area of the region enclosed by these graphs and the
vertical lines x ⫽ a and x ⫽ b.

17. f1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 3, t1x2 ⫽ 1; a ⫽ 1, b ⫽ 3
18. f1x2 ⫽ x ⫹ 2, t1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 4; a ⫽ ⫺1, b ⫽ 2
19. f1x2 ⫽ ⫺x 2 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 3, t1x2 ⫽ ⫺x ⫹ 3; a ⫽ 0, b ⫽ 2
20. f1x2 ⫽ 9 ⫺ x 2, t1x2 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3; a ⫽ ⫺1, b ⫽ 1

 x3; a ⫽ ⫺1, b ⫽ 2

 x ⫺ 1; a ⫽ 1, b ⫽ 4

21.

22.

23.

3

2 ⫹ 1, t1x2 ⫽ 1
f 1x2 ⫽ x 
f 1x2 ⫽ 1x, t1x2 ⫽ ⫺1
f 1x2 ⫽ 1

2

x

, t1x2 ⫽ 2x ⫺ 1; a ⫽ 1, b ⫽ 4
2, t1x2 ⫽ 1
x, t1x2 ⫽ 1

x2; a ⫽ 1, b ⫽ 3

; a ⫽ 1, b ⫽ 2

x

24.

f 1x2 ⫽ x 

25.

f 1x2 ⫽ e 

26. f1x2 ⫽ x, t1x2 ⫽ e2x; a ⫽ 1, b ⫽ 3

In  Exercises  27–34,  sketch  the  graph,  and  find  the  area  of  the
region  bounded  by  the  graph  of  the  function  f and  the  lines 
y ⫽ 0, x ⫽ a, and x ⫽ b.

27. f1x2 ⫽ x; a ⫽ ⫺1, b ⫽ 2
28. f1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 2x; a ⫽ ⫺1, b ⫽ 1
29. f1x2 ⫽ ⫺x 2 ⫹ 4x ⫺ 3; a ⫽ ⫺1, b ⫽ 2
30. f1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ x 2; a ⫽ ⫺1, b ⫽ 1
31. f1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 4x 2 ⫹ 3x; a ⫽ 0, b ⫽ 2
32. f1x2 ⫽ 4x1/3 ⫹ x 4/3; a ⫽ ⫺1, b ⫽ 8
33. f1x2 ⫽ e x ⫺ 1; a ⫽ ⫺1, b ⫽ 3
34. f1x2 ⫽ xex 2; a ⫽ 0, b ⫽ 2

In  Exercises  35–42,  sketch  the  graph,  and  find  the  area  of  the
region completely enclosed by the graphs of the given functions
f and g.

35. f1x2 ⫽ x ⫹ 2 and t1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 4
36. f1x2 ⫽ ⫺x 2 ⫹ 4x and t1x2 ⫽ 2x ⫺ 3

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

822

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

37. f1x2 ⫽ x 2 and t1x2 ⫽ x 3
38. f1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫹ 2x 2 ⫺ 3x and t1x2 ⫽ 0
39. f1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 6x 2 ⫹ 9x and t1x2 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 3x

f 1x2 ⫽ 1x and t1x2 ⫽ x2
f 1x2 ⫽ x29 ⫺ x2 and t1x2 ⫽ 0
f 1x2 ⫽ 2x and t1x2 ⫽ x1x ⫹ 1

40.

41.

42.

43. EFFECT OF ADVERTISING ON REVENUE In  the  accompanying
figure, the function f gives the rate of change of Odyssey
Travel’s revenue with respect to the amount x it spends on
advertising  with  their  current  advertising  agency.  By
engaging the services of a different advertising agency, it
is  expected  that  Odyssey’s  revenue  will  grow  at  the  rate
given by the function t. Give an interpretation of the area
A of the region S and find an expression for A in terms of
a definite integral involving f and t.

S

R = g(x)

R = f(x)

r
a
l
l
o
d
/
s
r
a
l
l
o
D

R

0

y (billions of barrels)

y = f(t)

y = f(t)

y = g(t)

60

50

40

30

20

10

1990

2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050

t (year)

46. AIR PURIFICATION To study the effectiveness of air purifiers
in removing smoke, engineers ran each purifier in a smoke-
filled 10-ft ⫻ 20-ft room. In the accompanying figure, the
function f gives the rate of change of the smoke level per 
minute, t min after the start of the test, when a Brand A puri-
fier is used. The function t gives the rate of change of the
smoke level per minute when a Brand B purifier is used.
a. Give an interpretation of the area of the region S.
b. Find an expression for the area of S in terms of a defi-

nite integral involving f and t.

Dollars

x

b

y (%/min)

44. PULSE RATE DURING EXERCISE In  the  accompanying  figure,
the function f gives the rate of increase of an individual’s
pulse rate when he walked a prescribed course on a tread-
mill 6 months ago. The function t gives the rate of increase
of  his  pulse  rate  when  he  recently  walked  the  same  pre-
scribed course. Give an interpretation of the area A of the
region S, and find an expression for A in terms of a definite
integral involving f and t.

d
n
o
c
e
s
 
r
e
p

 
s
t
a
e
B

y

0

y = f(t)

S

y = g(t)

t

b

Seconds

45. OIL PRODUCTION SHORTFALL Energy experts disagree about
when global oil production will begin to decline. In the fol-
lowing figure, the function f gives the annual world oil pro-
duction in billions of barrels from 1980 to 2050, according
to  the  Department  of  Energy  projection.  The  function  t
gives the world oil production in billions of barrels per year
over  the  same  period,  according  to  longtime  petroleum
geologist Colin Campbell. Find an expression in terms of
the definite integrals involving f and t giving the shortfall
in the total oil production over the period in question heed-
ing Campbell’s dire warnings.
Sources: U.S. Department of Energy; Colin Campbell.

a

b

S

t (min)

y = f (t)
y = g(t)

47. Two cars start out side by side and travel along a straight
road. The velocity of Car 1 is f(t) ft/sec over the interval 
[0, T], the velocity of Car 2 is t(t) ft/sec, and 0 ⬍ T1 ⬍ T.
Furthermore, suppose the graphs of f and t are as depicted
in the accompanying figure. Let A1 and A2 denote the areas
of the regions (shown shaded).

y (ft/sec)

y = f(t)

A1

y = g(t)

A2

T1

T

t (sec)

a. Write the number

冮 T
 3t1t2 ⫺  f1t24 dt ⫺ 冮 T1

0

T1

 3  f1t2 ⫺ t1t24 dt

in terms of A1 and A2.

b. What does the number obtained in part (a) represent?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

48. The rate of change of the revenue of Company A over the
(time) interval [0, T ] is f(t) dollars/week, whereas the rate of
change of the revenue of Company B over the same period is
t(t) dollars/week. The graphs of f and t are depicted in the 
accompanying figure. Find an expression in terms of definite
integrals involving f and t giving the additional revenue that
Company B will have over Company A in the period [0, T].

y ($/week)

y = g (t)

y = f (t)

T1

T

t (week)

49. MEXICO’S HEDGING TACTIC Agustin  Carstens,  the  Mexican
finance minister, hedged all his country’s oil sales for 2009
at $70/barrel, in effect gambling that prices would stay low
that year. The figure below shows the U.S. crude oil price,
(in dollars per
barrel) from the beginning of January 2009 
through
the end of the year. Write, in terms of definite integrals, the
oil profits that Mexico realized in 2009 using this tactic.
Sources: Thomson Reuters Datastream; Financial Times research.

, and Mexico’s hedge level, 

f1t2

t1t2 ⫽ 70,

1t ⫽ 02

y ($/barrel)

80

70

60

50

40

y = f (t)

y = g (t)

1 2 3

4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11

12

t (months)

50. TURBO-CHARGED ENGINE VERSUS STANDARD ENGINE In  tests
conducted by Auto Test Magazine on two identical models
of the Phoenix Elite—one equipped with a standard engine
and the other with a turbo-charger—it was found that the
acceleration of the former is given by

a ⫽ f1t2 ⫽ 4 ⫹ 0.8t

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 122

ft/sec/sec,  t sec  after  starting  from  rest  at  full  throttle,
whereas the acceleration of the latter is given by

a ⫽ t1t2 ⫽ 4 ⫹ 1.2t ⫹ 0.03t 2

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 122

ft/sec/sec.  How  much  faster  is  the  turbo-charged  model
moving than the model with the standard engine at the end
of a 10-sec test run at full throttle?

11.6 AREA BETWEEN TWO CURVES

823

51. ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SOURCES Because  of  the  increasingly
important role played by coal as a viable alternative energy
source, the production of coal has been growing at the rate of

3.5e0.05t

billion  metric  tons/year,  t years  from  1980  (which  corre-
sponds to t ⫽ 0). Had it not been for the energy crisis, the
rate of production of coal since 1980 might have been only

3.5e0.01t

billion metric tons/year, t years from 1980. Determine how
much  additional  coal  was  produced  between  1980  and
2000 as an alternative energy source.

52. EFFECT OF TV ADVERTISING ON CAR SALES Carl Williams, the
proprietor of Carl Williams Auto Sales, estimates that with
extensive  television  advertising,  car  sales  over  the  next
several years could be increasing at the rate of

5e0.3t

thousand cars/year, t years from now, instead of at the cur-
rent rate of

5 ⫹ 0.5t 3/2

thousand cars/year, t years from now. Find how many more
cars  Carl  expects  to  sell  over  the  next  5  years  by  imple-
menting his advertising plans.

53. POPULATION GROWTH In  an  endeavor  to  curb  population
growth in a Southeast Asian island state, the government
has decided to launch an extensive propaganda campaign.
Without curbs, the government expects the rate of popula-
tion growth to have been

60e0.02t

thousand  people/year,  t years  from  now,  over  the  next 
5 years. However, successful implementation of the proposed
campaign is expected to result in a population growth rate of

⫺t 2 ⫹ 60

thousand  people/year,  t years  from  now,  over  the  next 
5  years.  Assuming  that  the  campaign  is  mounted,  how
many  fewer  people  will  there  be  in  that  country  5  years
from now than there would have been if no curbs had been
imposed?

54. BRITISH DEFICIT The  projected  public  spending  by  the
British  government  for  the  years  2010–2011  (t ⫽ 0)
through 2014–2015 (t ⫽ 4) is 692 billion pounds/year. The
projected public revenue for the same period is

f1t2 ⫽ 292.6t ⫹ 134.4

t ⫹ 6.9

⫺ 500

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

Find the projected deficit for the period in question.
Source: Thomson Reuters Datastream.

(continued)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

824

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

In Exercises 55–58, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
55. If f and t are continuous on [a, b] and either f(x) ⱖ t(x) for
all x in [a, b] or f(x) ⱕ t(x) for all x in [a, b], then the area
of the region bounded by the graphs of f and t and the verti-
a   |  f 1x2 ⫺ t1x2| dx
兰 b
cal lines x ⫽ a and x ⫽ b is given by 
.
56. The  area  of  the  region  bounded  by  the  graphs  of  f(x)  ⫽
2 ⫺ x and t(x) ⫽ 4 ⫺ x 2 and the vertical lines x ⫽ 0 and 
x ⫽ 2 is given by 

57. If A denotes the area bounded by the graphs of f and t on 

0  3   f 1x2 ⫺ t1x24 dx
兰 2

.

[a, b], then

A2 ⫽ 冮 b

 3 f 1x2 ⫺ t1x24 2 dx
兰 b
a

a

58. If f and t are continuous on [a, b] and 

then f(t) ⱖ t(t) for all t in [a, b].

[ f(t) ⫺ t(t)] dt ⬎ 0,

Hint: The validity of the formula was verified earlier for the case
in which both f and t were nonnegative. Now, let f and t be two
functions such that f(x) ⱖ t(x) for a ⱕ x ⱕ b. Then there exists
some nonnegative constant c such that the translated curves 
y ⫽ f(x) ⫹ c and y ⫽ t(x) ⫹ c lie entirely above the x-axis. The
region R⬘ has the same area as the region R (see the accompany-
ing figures). Show that the area of R⬘ is given by

 53   f 1x2 ⫹ c4 ⫺ 3t1x2 ⫹ c46 dx ⫽ 冮 b

a

 3   f 1x2 ⫺ t1x24 dx

冮 b

a

y

a

R

y = f (x)

b
y = g(x)

x

y

y = f (x) + c

R'

a

b
y = g(x) + c

x

59. Show  that  the  area  of  a  region  R bounded  above  by  the
graph of a function f and below by the graph of a function
t from x ⫽ a to x ⫽ b is given by

冮 b

 3  f 1x2 ⫺ t1x24 dx
where f and t are continuous functions.

a

11.6 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. The region in question is shown in the accompanying fig-
ure. Since the graph of the function f lies above that of the
function t for 0 ⱕ x ⱕ 1, we see that the required area is
given by

 冮 1

0

 31x 

0

2 ⫹ 22 ⫺ 11 ⫺ x24 dx ⫽ 冮 1
 ⫽ 1
3
 ⫽ 1
3
 ⫽ 11
6

 1x 
2 ⫹ x ⫹ 12 dx
3 ⫹ 1
2 ⫹ x ` 0
2

 x 

1

 x 

⫹ 1
2

⫹ 1

y

5

y = x2 + 2

y = 1 – x

– 2 –1

1

2

x

2. The region in question is shown in the accompanying fig-
ure. To find the points of intersection of the two curves, we
solve the equations

2 ⫹ 5

 ⫺x 

 2x 

2 ⫹ 6x ⫹ 5 ⫽ x 
2 ⫺ 6x ⫽ 0
 2x1x ⫺ 32 ⫽ 0

giving x ⫽ 0 or x ⫽ 3. Therefore, the points of intersection
are (0, 5) and (3, 14).

y

14

10

y = –x2 + 6x + 5

y = x2 + 5

–1

–2

1 

x

5

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

11.6 AREA BETWEEN TWO CURVES

825

Since the graph of f always lies above that of t for 
0 ⱕ x ⱕ 3, we see that the required area is given by
 31⫺x 

2 ⫹ 6x ⫹ 52 ⫺ 1x 

2 ⫹ 524 dx ⫽ 冮 3
 ⫽ ⫺2
3

0

2 ⫹ 6x2 dx

 1⫺2x 
3 ⫹ 3x 

 x 

3

2 ` 0

 冮 3

0

 ⫽ ⫺18 ⫹ 27
 ⫽ 9

3. The additional profits realizable over the next 10 years are

given by

 冮 10

0

0

1/2 ⫹ 3 ⫺ t 

 31t ⫺ 21t ⫹ 42 ⫺ 11 ⫹ t 
 ⫽ 冮 10
 ⫽ 1
2
 ⫽ 1
2
 ⬇ 9.99

 1t ⫺ 2t 
2 ⫺ 4
3

 1102 2 ⫺ 4

 t 

 t 

3

 t 

3/2 ⫹ 3t ⫺ 3
5
 1102 3/2 ⫹ 31102 ⫺ 3

5

2/324  dt
2/32  dt
5/3 ` 0

10

 1102 5/3

or approximately $10 million.

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Finding the Area Between Two Curves
The numerical integral operation can be used to find the area between two curves. We
do this by using the numerical integral operation to evaluate an appropriate definite
integral  or  the  sum  (difference)  of  appropriate  definite  integrals.  In  the  following
example, the intersection operation is also used to advantage to help us find the limits
of integration.

EXAMPLE 1 Use a graphing utility to find the area of the smaller region R that is
completely enclosed by the graphs of the functions

f1x2 ⫽ 2x 3 ⫺ 8x2 ⫹ 4x ⫺ 3 and

t1x2 ⫽ 3x 2 ⫹ 10x ⫺ 11

Solution The graphs of f and t in the viewing window [⫺3, 4] ⫻ [⫺20, 5] are
shown in Figure T1.

Using the intersection operation of a graphing utility, we find the x-coordinates
of the points of intersection of the two graphs to be approximately ⫺1.04 and 0.65,
respectively. Since the graph of f lies above that of t on the interval [⫺1.04, 0.65],
we see that the area of R is given by

2 ⫹ 10x ⫺ 1124 dx

 A ⬇ 冮 0.65
 ⫽ 冮 0.65

⫺1.04

⫺1.04

 312x 
 12x 

3 ⫺ 8x 

3 ⫺ 11x 

2 ⫹ 4x ⫺ 32 ⫺ 13x 
2 ⫺ 6x ⫹ 82 dx

Using the numerical integration function of a graphing utility, we find A ⬇ 9.87, so
the area of R is approximately 9.87.

4

_3

5

_20

FIGURE T1
The region R is completely enclosed by
the graphs of f and g.

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

In Exercises 1–6, (a) plot the graphs of the functions f and g, and
(b) find the area of the region enclosed by these graphs and the
vertical lines x ⫽ a and x ⫽ b. Express your answers accurate to
four decimal places.

1. f1x2 ⫽ x 31x ⫺ 52 4, t1x2 ⫽ 0; a ⫽ 1, b ⫽ 3
2. f 1x2 ⫽ x ⫺ 21 ⫺ x 
2, t1x2 ⫽ 0; a ⫽ ⫺1

, b ⫽ 1
2

2

3. f1x2 ⫽ x1/31x ⫹ 12 1/2, t1x2 ⫽ x⫺1; a ⫽ 1.2, b ⫽ 2
4. f1x2 ⫽ 2, t1x2 ⫽ ln11 ⫹ x 22 ; a ⫽ ⫺1, b ⫽ 1
f 1x2 ⫽ 1x, t1x2 ⫽ x 
, t1x2 ⫽ x 
6. f 1x2 ⫽ 4

4; a ⫽ ⫺1, b ⫽ 1

; a ⫽ 0, b ⫽ 3

2 ⫺ 3
2 ⫹ 1

5.

2 ⫹ 1

x 

x 

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(continued)

826

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

In Exercises 7–12, (a) plot the graphs of the functions f and g, and
(b) find the area of the region totally enclosed by the graphs of
these functions.

7. f1x2 ⫽ 2x 3 ⫺ 8x 2 ⫹ 4x ⫺ 3 and t1x2 ⫽ ⫺3x 2 ⫹ 10x ⫺ 10
8. f1x2 ⫽ x 4 ⫺ 2x 2 ⫹ 2 and t1x2 ⫽ 4 ⫺ 2x 2
9. f1x2 ⫽ 2x 3 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 5 and t1x2 ⫽ e2x ⫺ 3

10.

11.

2

 x2 ⫺ 3 and t1x2 ⫽ ln  x
f 1x2 ⫽ 1
f 1x2 ⫽ xe⫺x and t1x2 ⫽ x ⫺ 21x

12. f1x2 ⫽ e⫺x 2 and t1x2 ⫽ x 4

13. Refer to Example 1. Find the area of the larger region that is
completely enclosed by the graphs of the functions f and t.

11.7 Applications of the Definite Integral to Business and Economics

p

p

p = D(x)

x

FIGURE 38
D(x) is a demand function.

In this section, we consider several applications of the definite integral in the fields of
business and economics.

Consumers’ and Producers’ Surplus
We  begin  by  deriving  a  formula  for  computing  the  consumers’  surplus.  Suppose 
p ⫽ D(x) is the demand function that relates the unit price p of a commodity to the
quantity x demanded of it. Furthermore, suppose a fixed unit market price p苶 has been
established  for  the  commodity  and  corresponding  to  this  unit  price  the  quantity
demanded is x苶 units (Figure 38). Then those consumers who would be willing to pay
a unit price higher than p苶 for the commodity would in effect experience a savings. This
difference between what the consumers would be willing to pay for x苶 units of the com-
modity and what they actually pay for them is called the consumers’ surplus.

To  derive  a  formula  for  computing  the  consumers’  surplus,  divide  the  interval 

[0, x苶] into n subintervals, each of length ⌬x ⫽ x苶>n, and denote the right endpoints of
these subintervals by x1, x2, . . . , xn ⫽ x苶 (Figure 39).

x

p

r1

r2

D(x1)
D(x2)

p

rn

p = p

FIGURE 39
Approximating consumers’ surplus by 
the sum of the areas of the rectangles 
r1, r2, . . . , rn

x1

x2

. . .

xn = x

xn – 1

x

We observe in Figure 39 that there are consumers who would pay a unit price of

at least D1x 12 dollars for the first ⌬x units of the commodity instead of the market
price of p苶 dollars per unit. The savings to these consumers is approximated by

D1x 12 ⌬x ⫺ p苶 ⌬x ⫽ 3D1x 12 ⫺ p苶4 ⌬x

which is the area of the rectangle r1. Pursuing the same line of reasoning, we find that
the savings to the consumers who would be willing to pay a unit price of at least D1x 22
dollars for the next ⌬x units (from x1 through x2) of the commodity, instead of the
market price of p苶 dollars per unit, is approximated by

D1x 22 ⌬x ⫺ p苶 ⌬x ⫽ 3D1x 22 ⫺ p苶4 ⌬x

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

11.7 APPLICATIONS OF THE DEFINITE INTEGRAL TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS

827

Continuing, we approximate the total savings to the consumers in purchasing x苶 units
of the commodity by the sum

 3D1x12 ⫺ p4 ¢x ⫹ 3D1x22 ⫺ p4 ¢x ⫹ p ⫹ 3D1xn2 ⫺ p4 ¢x

 ⫽ 3D1x12 ⫹ D1x22 ⫹ p ⫹ D1xn24  ¢x ⫺ 3p ¢x ⫹ p ¢x ⫹ p ⫹ p ¢x4
 ⫽ 3D1x12 ⫹ D1x22 ⫹ p ⫹ D1xn24  ¢x ⫺ np ¢x
 ⫽ 3D1x12 ⫹ D1x22 ⫹ p ⫹ D1xn24  ¢x ⫺ p x

(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:5)

n terms

Now, the first term in the last expression is the Riemann sum of the demand function
p ⫽ D(x) over the interval [0, x苶] with representative points x1, x2, . . . , xn. Letting n
approach infinity, we obtain the following formula for the consumers’ surplus CS.

Consumers’ Surplus
The consumers’ surplus is given by

CS ⫽ 冮 x

0

 D1x2 dx ⫺ p x

(16)

where D is the demand function, p苶 is the unit market price, and x苶 is the quantity
sold.

p

p

p = D(x)

x

FIGURE 40
Consumers’ surplus

p

p

p = S(x)

x

FIGURE 41
S(x) is a supply function.

x

x

The  consumer’s  surplus  is  given  by  the  area  of  the  region  bounded  above  by  the
demand curve p ⫽ D(x) and below by the horizontal line p ⫽ p苶 from x ⫽ 0 to x ⫽ x苶
(Figure 40). We can also see this if we rewrite Equation (16) in the form

CS ⫽ 冮 x

 3D1x2 ⫺ p4 dx

and interpret the result geometrically.

0

Analogously, we can derive a formula for computing the producers’ surplus. Sup-
pose p ⫽ S(x) is the supply equation that relates the unit price p of a certain com-
modity  to  the  quantity  x that  the  supplier  will  make  available  in  the  market  at  that
price.

Again, suppose a fixed market price p苶 has been established for the commodity,
and, corresponding to this unit price, a quantity of x苶 units will be made available in the
market by the suppliers (Figure 41). Then the suppliers who would be willing to make
the commodity available at a lower price stand to gain from the fact that the market
price is set at p苶. The difference between what the suppliers actually receive and what
they would be willing to receive is called the producers’ surplus. Proceeding in a
manner similar to the derivation of the equation for computing the consumers’ sur-
plus, we find that the producers’ surplus PS is defined as follows:

Producers’ Surplus
The producers’ surplus is given by

PS ⫽ p x ⫺冮 x

 S 1x2 dx

0

(17)

where S(x) is the supply function, p苶 is the unit market price, and x苶 is the quan-
tity supplied.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

828

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

p

p

FIGURE 42
Producers’ surplus

p = S(x)

Geometrically,  the  producers’  surplus  is  given  by  the  area  of  the  region  bounded
above  by  the  horizontal  line  p ⫽ p苶 and  below  by  the  supply  curve  p ⫽ S(x)  from 
x ⫽ 0 to x ⫽ x苶 (Figure 42).

We can also show that the last statement is true by converting Equation (17) to the

x

x

form

PS ⫽ 冮 x

0

 3  p ⫺ S 1x24 dx

and interpreting the definite integral geometrically.

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 1 The demand function for a certain make of ten-speed bicycle is given by

p ⫽ D1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.001x 2 ⫹ 250

where p is the unit price in dollars and x is the quantity demanded in thousands of
units. The supply function for these bicycles is given by

p ⫽ S1x2 ⫽ 0.0006x 2 ⫹ 0.02x ⫹ 100

where p stands for the unit price in dollars and x stands for the number of bicycles
that the supplier will put on the market, in units of a thousand. Determine the con-
sumers’ surplus and the producers’ surplus if the market price of a bicycle is set at
the equilibrium price.

p

CS

PS

250

200

150

100

50

p = p = 160
p

= 

100  200  300  400  500

x

FIGURE 43
Consumers’ surplus and producers’ 
surplus when market price ⫽ equilibrium
price

Solution Recall that the equilibrium price is the unit price of the commodity when
market equilibrium occurs. We determine the equilibrium price by solving for the
point of intersection of the demand curve and the supply curve (Figure 43). To solve
the system of equations

2

 p ⫽ ⫺0.001x 
 p ⫽ 0.0006x 

  ⫹ 250
2 ⫹ 0.02x ⫹ 100

we simply substitute the second equation into the first, obtaining
2 ⫹ 250

 0.0006x 
 0.0016x 
 16x 

2 ⫹ 0.02x ⫹ 100 ⫽ ⫺0.001x 
2 ⫹ 0.02x ⫺ 150 ⫽ 0
2 ⫹ 200x ⫺ 1,500,000 ⫽ 0
2 ⫹ 25x ⫺ 187,500 ⫽ 0
 2x 

Factoring this last equation, we obtain

12x ⫹ 62521x ⫺ 3002 ⫽ 0

Thus, x ⫽ ⫺625>2 or x ⫽ 300. The first number lies outside the interval of interest,
so we are left with the solution x ⫽ 300, with a corresponding value of

p ⫽ ⫺0.00113002 2 ⫹ 250 ⫽ 160

Thus, the equilibrium point is (300, 160); that is, the equilibrium quantity is
300,000, and the equilibrium price is $160. Setting the market price at $160 per unit
and using Formula (16) with p苶 ⫽ 160 and x苶 ⫽ 300, we find that the consumers’ sur-
plus is given by

0

 CS ⫽ 冮 300
 ⫽ a ⫺ 1
3000
 ⫽ ⫺ 3003
3000
 ⫽ 18,000

 1⫺0.001x 

2 ⫹ 2502 dx ⫺ 1160213002

⫺ 48,000

300

 x 

3 ⫹ 250xb ` 0
⫹ 1250213002 ⫺ 48,000

or $18,000,000. (Recall that x is measured in units of a thousand.) 

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

11.7 APPLICATIONS OF THE DEFINITE INTEGRAL TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS

829

Next, using Equation (17), we find that the producers’ surplus is given by

 10.0006x 

 PS ⫽ 1160213002 ⫺ 冮 300
 ⫽ 48,000 ⫺ 10.0002x 
 ⫽ 48,000 ⫺ 310.0002213002 3 ⫹ 10.01213002 2 ⫹ 100130024
 ⫽ 11,700

2 ⫹ 0.02x ⫹ 1002 dx
 2 ⫹ 100x2 ` 0

3 ⫹ 0.01x 

300

0

or $11,700,000.

The Future and Present Value of an Income Stream
Suppose a firm generates a stream of income over a period of time—for example, the
revenue generated by a large chain of retail stores over a 5-year period. As the income
is realized, it is reinvested and earns interest at a fixed rate. The accumulated future
income stream over the 5-year period is the amount of money the firm ends up with
at the end of that period.

The definite integral can be used to determine this accumulated, or total, future
income stream over a period of time. The total future value of an income stream gives
us a way to measure the value of such a stream. To find the total future value of an
income stream, suppose that

R1t2 ⫽ Rate of income generation at any time t
r ⫽ Interest rate compounded continuously
T ⫽ Term

In dollars per year

In years

Let’s  divide  the  time  interval  [0,  T]  into  n subintervals  of  equal  length  ⌬t ⫽ T>n
and denote the right endpoints of these intervals by t1, t2, . . . , tn ⫽ T, as shown in Fig-
ure 44.

If R is a continuous function on [0, T ], then R(t) will not differ by much from
R(t1) in the subinterval [0, t1] provided that the subinterval is small (which is true 
if  n is  large).  Therefore,  the  income  generated  over  the  time  interval  [0,  t1]  is
approximately

R1t 12 ⌬t

Constant rate of income length of time

#

dollars. The future value of this amount, T years from now, calculated as if it were
earned at time t1, is

3R1t 12 ⌬t4 er (T⫺t1)

Equation (5), Section 4.1

dollars. Similarly, the income generated over the time interval [t1, t2] is approximately
R(t2) ⌬t dollars and has a future value, T years from now, of approximately

3R1t 22 ⌬t4 er (T⫺t2)

dollars. Therefore, the sum of the future values of the income stream generated over
the time interval [0, T ] is approximately

R1t 12er(T⫺t1) ⌬t ⫹ R1t 22er(T⫺t2) ⌬t ⫹ ⫹ R1tn2 er(T⫺tn) ⌬t

⫽ erT3R1t 12e⫺r t1 ⌬t ⫹ R1t 22e⫺rt2 ⌬t ⫹ ⫹ R1tn2 e⫺r tn ⌬t4

p

p

t2

t3

t1

. . .

tn – 1

0
FIGURE 44
The time interval [0, T ] is partitioned into
n subintervals.

tn = T

dollars. But this sum is just the Riemann sum of the function erTR(t)e⫺rt over the inter-
val [0, T ] with representative points t1, t2, . . . , tn. Letting n approach infinity, we
obtain the following result.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

830

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

Accumulated or Total Future Value of an Income Stream
The accumulated, or total, future value after T years of an income stream of R(t)
dollars per year, earning interest at the rate of r per year compounded continu-
ously, is given by

A ⫽ e 

rT冮 T

0

 R 1t2e⫺rt dt

(18)

APPLIED EXAMPLE 2 Income Stream Crystal Car Wash recently bought
an automatic car-washing machine that is expected to generate $40,000 in 

revenue per year, t years from now, for the next 5 years. If the income is rein-
vested in a business earning interest at the rate of 12% per year compounded con-
tinuously, find the total accumulated value of this income stream at the end of 
5 years.

Solution We are required to find the total future value of the given income
stream after 5 years. Using Equation (18) with R(t) ⫽ 40,000, r ⫽ 0.12, and 
T ⫽ 5, we see that the required value is given by

 e0.12152冮 5

 40,000e⫺0.12t dt

0

40,000
0.12
40,000e0.6

 ⫽ e0.6a⫺
 ⫽ ⫺

5

 e⫺0.12tb ` 0
 1e⫺0.6 ⫺ 12 ⬇ 274,039.60

0.12

Integrate using the 
substitution u ⫽ ⫺0.12t.

or approximately $274,040.

Another way of measuring the value of an income stream is by considering its
present value. The present value of an income stream of R(t) dollars per year over a
term of T years, earning interest at the rate of r per year compounded continuously, is
the principal P that will yield the same accumulated value as the income stream itself
when P is invested today for a period of T years at the same rate of interest. In other
words,

PerT ⫽ erT冮 T

 R 1t2e⫺rt dt

0

Dividing both sides of the equation by erT gives the following result.

Present Value of an Income Stream
The present value of an income stream of R(t) dollars per year, earning interest
at the rate of r per year compounded continuously, is given by

PV ⫽ 冮 T

0

 R 1t2e⫺rt dt

(19)

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 3 Investment Analysis The owner of a local cinema is
considering two alternative plans for renovating and improving the theater.

Plan A calls for an immediate cash outlay of $250,000, whereas Plan B requires

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.7 APPLICATIONS OF THE DEFINITE INTEGRAL TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS

831

an immediate cash outlay of $180,000. It has been estimated that adopting Plan A
would result in a net income stream generated at the rate of

f1t2 ⫽ 630,000

t1t2 ⫽ 580,000

dollars per year, whereas adopting Plan B would result in a net income stream
generated at the rate of

dollars per year for the next 3 years. If the prevailing interest rate for the next 
3 years is 10% per year, which plan will generate the higher net income by the
end of 3 years?

Solution Since the initial outlay is $250,000, we find—using Equation (19)
with R(t) ⫽ 630,000, r ⫽ 0.1, and T ⫽ 3—that the present value of the net
income under Plan A is given by

 冮 3
 630,000e⫺0.1t dt ⫺ 250,000

0

 ⫽

630,000
⫺0.1

3

 e⫺0.1t ` 0

⫺ 250,000

Integrate using the 
substitution u ⫽ ⫺0.1t.

 ⫽ ⫺6,300,000e⫺0.3 ⫹ 6,300,000 ⫺ 250,000
 ⬇ 1,382,845
or approximately $1,382,845.

To find the present value of the net income under Plan B, we use Equation

(19) with R(t) ⫽ 580,000, r ⫽ 0.1, and T ⫽ 3, obtaining

冮 3

 580,000e⫺0.1t dt ⫺ 180,000

0

dollars. Proceeding as in the previous computation, we see that the required value
is $1,323,254 (see Exercise 12, page 836).

Comparing the present value of each plan, we conclude that Plan A would

generate the higher total net income over the 3 years.

Note The function R in Example 3 is a constant function. If R is not a constant func-
tion, then we may need more sophisticated techniques of integration to evaluate the
integral in (19).

The Amount and Present Value of an Annuity
An annuity is a sequence of payments made at regular time intervals. The time period
in which these payments are made is called the term of the annuity. Although the pay-
ments need not be equal in size, they are equal in many important applications, and
we will assume that they are equal in our discussion. Examples of annuities are regu-
lar  deposits  to  a  savings  account,  monthly  home  mortgage  payments,  and  monthly
insurance payments.

The amount of an annuity is the sum of the payments plus the interest earned. A
formula for computing the amount of an annuity A can be derived with the help of
Equation (18). Let

P ⫽ Size of each payment in the annuity
r ⫽ Interest rate compounded continuously
T ⫽ Term of the annuity (in years)
m ⫽ Number of payments per year

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

832

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

Assume that the payments into the annuity constitute a constant income stream of

R(t) ⫽ mP dollars per year. With this value of R(t), Equation (18) yields

 R 1t2e⫺rt dt ⫽ erT冮 T

0

 A ⫽ erT冮 T
 ⫽ mPerTc⫺e⫺rt
r d ` 0
 ⫽ mP
 1erT ⫺ 12
r

T

0

 mPe⫺rt dt
⫽ mPerT c⫺e⫺rT

r

⫹ 1
r d

Since erT ⭈ e⫺rT ⫽ 1

This leads us to the following formula.

Amount of an Annuity
The amount of an annuity is

A ⫽ mP
r

 1erT ⫺ 12

(20)

where P, r, T, and m are as defined earlier.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 4 IRAs On January 1, 1996, Marcus Chapman
deposited $2000 into an Individual Retirement Account (IRA) paying 

interest at the rate of 5% per year compounded continuously. Assuming that he
deposited $2000 annually into the account, how much did he have in his IRA at
the beginning of 2012?

Solution We use Equation (20), with P ⫽ 2000, r ⫽ 0.05, T ⫽ 16, and m ⫽ 1,
obtaining

 1e0.8 ⫺ 12

 A ⫽ 2000
0.05
 ⬇ 49,021.64

Thus, Marcus had approximately $49,022 in his account at the beginning of 
2012.

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
Refer to Example 4. Suppose Marcus wished to know how much he would have
in his IRA at any time in the future, not just at the beginning of 2012, as you
were asked to compute in the example.
1. Using  Formula  (18)  and  the  relevant  data  from  Example  4,  show  that  the

required amount at any time x (x measured in years, x ⬎ 0) is given by

A ⫽ f1x2 ⫽ 40,0001e0.05x ⫺ 12

2. Use  a  graphing  utility  to  plot  the  graph  of  f,  using  the  viewing  window 

[0, 30] ⫻ [0, 200,000].

3. Using ZOOM and TRACE, or using the function evaluation capability of your
graphing utility, use the result of part 2 to verify the result obtained in Exam-
ple 4. Comment on the advantage of the mathematical model found in part 1.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.7 APPLICATIONS OF THE DEFINITE INTEGRAL TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS

833

Using Equation (19), we can derive the following formula for the present value of an

annuity.

Present Value of an Annuity
The present value of an annuity is given by

 PV ⫽ mP
r

 11 ⫺ e⫺rT2

(21)

where P, r, T, and m are as defined earlier.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 5 Sinking Funds Tomas Perez, the proprietor of a
hardware store, wants to establish a fund from which he will withdraw 

$1000 per month for the next 10 years. If the fund earns interest at the rate of 6%
per year compounded continuously, how much money does he need to establish the
fund?

Solution We want to find the present value of an annuity with P ⫽ 1000, 
r ⫽ 0.06, T ⫽ 10, and m ⫽ 12. Using Equation (21), we find

12,000
0.06

 11 ⫺ e⫺10.062 11022

 PV ⫽

 ⬇ 90,237.70

Therefore, Tomas needs approximately $90,238 to establish the fund.

Lorenz Curves and Income Distributions
One method used by economists to study the distribution of income in a society is
based  on  the  Lorenz  curve, named  after  American  statistician  M.O.  Lorenz.  To
describe the Lorenz curve, let f(x) denote the proportion of the total income received
by  the  poorest  100x%  of  the  population  for  0  ⱕ x ⱕ 1.  Using  this  terminology, 
f(0.3) ⫽ 0.1 simply states that the lowest 30% of the income recipients receive 10%
of the total income.

The function f has the following properties:

y

1

y = f (x)

1. The domain of f is [0, 1].
2. The range of f is [0, 1].
3. f(0) ⫽ 0 and f(1) ⫽ 1.
4. f(x) ⱕ x for every x in [0, 1].
5. f is increasing on [0, 1].

x

1

The first two properties follow from the fact that both x and f(x) are fractions of a
whole. Property 3 is a statement that 0% of the income recipients receive 0% of the
total income and 100% of the income recipients receive 100% of the total income.
Property 4 follows from the fact that the lowest 100x% of the income recipients can-
not receive more than 100x% of the total income. A typical Lorenz curve is shown in
Figure 45. 

FIGURE 45
A Lorenz curve

APPLIED EXAMPLE 6 Lorenz Curves A developing country’s income dis-
tribution is described by the function

f 1x2 ⫽ 19

20

 x 

2 ⫹ 1
20

 x

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

834

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

y

1

0.5

y = f (x)

a. Sketch the Lorenz curve for the given function.
b. Compute f(0.2) and f(0.8), and interpret your results.

Solution

a. The Lorenz curve is shown in Figure 46.

b.

f 10.22 ⫽ 19

20

 10.22 2 ⫹ 1

20

 10.22 ⫽ 0.048

0.5

1

x

FIGURE 46
The Lorenz curve f(x) ⫽ x2 ⫹

19
20

1
20

x

Thus, the lowest 20% of the people receive 4.8% of the total income.

f 10.82 ⫽ 19

20

 10.82 2 ⫹ 1

20

 10.82 ⫽ 0.648

Thus, the lowest 80% of the people receive 64.8% of the total income.

y

1

y = x

x

1

FIGURE 47
The closer the Lorenz curve is to the line,
the more equitable the income
distribution.

Next,  let’s  consider  the  Lorenz  curve  described  by  the  function  y ⫽ f(x)  ⫽ x.
Since exactly 100x% of the total income is received by the lowest 100x% of income
recipients, the line y ⫽ x is called the line of complete equality. For example, 10%
of the total income is received by the lowest 10% of income recipients, 20% of the
total income is received by the lowest 20% of income recipients, and so on. Now, it is
evident that the closer a Lorenz curve is to this line, the more equitable the income dis-
tribution is among the income recipients. But the proximity of a Lorenz curve to the
line of complete equality is reflected by the area between the Lorenz curve and the line
y ⫽ x (Figure 47). The closer the curve is to the line, the smaller the enclosed area.

This observation suggests that we may define a number, called the coefficient of
inequality  of  a  Lorenz  curve,  as  the  ratio  of  the  area  between  the  line  of  complete
equality and the Lorenz curve to the area under the line of complete equality. Since
the area under the line of complete equality is  we see that the coefficient of inequal-
ity is given by the following formula.

1
2,

Coefficient of Inequality of a Lorenz Curve
The coefficient of inequality, or Gini index, of a Lorenz curve is

 3x ⫺ f 1x24 dx

(22)

L ⫽ 2冮 1

0

The coefficient of inequality is a number between 0 and 1. For example, a coefficient
of zero implies that the income distribution is perfectly uniform.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 7 Income Distributions In a study conducted by a cer-
tain country’s Economic Development Board with regard to the income 

distribution of certain segments of the country’s workforce, it was found that the
Lorenz curves for the distributions of incomes of medical doctors and of movie
actors are described by the functions

f 1x2 ⫽ 14

15

 x 

2 ⫹ 1
15

 x  and  t1x2 ⫽ 5

8

 x 

4 ⫹ 3
8

 x

respectively. Compute the coefficient of inequality for each Lorenz curve. 
Which profession has the more equitable income distribution?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

11.7 APPLICATIONS OF THE DEFINITE INTEGRAL TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS

835

Solution The required coefficients of inequality are, respectively,
 x ⫺ 14
15

2 ⫹ 1
15

 x 

 x 

2b  

dx

 xb d  dx ⫽ 2冮 1
a 14
 a 1
2 ⫺ 1
3b ` 0
3

15
1

 x 

 x 

2

0

22  dx ⫽ 28

15

0

0

15

 L1 ⫽ 2冮 1
 c x ⫺ a 14
 冮 1
 ⫽ 28
 1x ⫺ x 
15
 ⫽ 14
⬇ 0.311
45
 L 2 ⫽ 2冮 1
 c x ⫺ a 5
 冮 1
 ⫽ 5
 1x ⫺ x 
4
0
 ⫽ 15
⫽ 0.375
40

8

0

 x 

4 ⫹ 3
8

42  dx ⫽ 5

4

 xb d  dx ⫽ 2冮 1
a 5
 a 1
2 ⫺ 1
5b ` 0
5

8
1

 x 

 x 

2

0

 x ⫺ 5
8

 x 

4b  

dx

We conclude that in this country, the incomes of medical doctors are more 
evenly distributed than the incomes of movie actors.

11.7 Self-Check Exercise

The demand function for a certain make of exercise bicycle that
is sold exclusively through cable television is

p ⫽ d 1x2 ⫽ 19 ⫺ 0.02x

where  p is  the  unit  price  in  hundreds  of  dollars  and  x is  the
quantity demanded per week. The corresponding supply func-
tion is given by

11.7 Concept Questions

p ⫽ s 1x2 ⫽ 11 ⫹ 0.02x

where p has the same meaning as before and x is the number of
exercise  bicycles  the  supplier  will  make  available  at  price  p.
Determine the consumers’ surplus and the producers’ surplus if
the unit price is set at the equilibrium price.

The solution to Self-Check Exercise 11.7 can be found on 
page 838.

1. a. Define consumers’ surplus. Give a formula for comput-

3. Define the amount of an annuity. Give a formula for com-

ing it.

b. Define producers’ surplus. Give a formula for comput-

ing it.

2. a. Define  the  accumulated  (future)  value  of  an  income

stream. Give a formula for computing it.

b. Define the present value of an income stream. Give a

formula for computing it.

11.7 Exercises

puting it.

4. Explain the following terms: (a) Lorenz curve and (b) coef-

ficient of inequality of a Lorenz curve.

1. CONSUMERS’  SURPLUS The  demand  function  for  a  certain
make of replacement cartridges for a water purifier is given
by

p ⫽ ⫺0.01x 2 ⫺ 0.1x ⫹ 6

where  p is  the  unit  price  in  dollars  and  x is  the  quantity
demanded  each  week,  measured  in  units  of  a  thousand.
Determine the consumers’ surplus if the market price is set
at $4/cartridge.

2. CONSUMERS’  SURPLUS The  demand  function  for  a  certain

brand of CD is given by

p ⫽ ⫺0.01x 2 ⫺ 0.2x ⫹ 8

where  p is  the  unit  price  in  dollars  and  x is  the  quantity
demanded  each  week,  measured  in  units  of  a  thousand.
Determine the consumers’ surplus if the market price is set
at $5/disc.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

836

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

3. CONSUMERS’  SURPLUS It 

the  quantity
demanded of a certain make of portable hair dryer is x hun-
dred units/week and the corresponding unit price is

is  known 

that 

p ⫽ 1225 ⫺ 5x

dollars.  Determine  the  consumers’  surplus  if  the  market
price is set at $10/unit.

4. PRODUCERS’ SURPLUS The supplier of the portable hair dry-
ers in Exercise 3 will make x hundred units of hair dryers
available in the market when the unit price is

p ⫽ 136 ⫹ 1.8x

dollars.  Determine  the  producers’  surplus  if  the  market
price is set at $9/unit.

5. PRODUCERS’  SURPLUS The  supply  function  for  the  CDs  of

Exercise 2 is given by

p ⫽ 0.01x 2 ⫹ 0.1x ⫹ 3

where  p is  the  unit  price  in  dollars  and  x stands  for  the
quantity  that  will  be  made  available  in  the  market  by 
the  supplier,  measured  in  units  of  a  thousand.  Determine
the producers’ surplus if the market price is set at the equi-
librium price.

6. CONSUMERS’  SURPLUS The  demand  function  for  a  certain

brand of mattress is given by 

9. PRODUCERS’  SURPLUS The  manufacturer  of  the  Blu-ray
players in Exercise 8 will make x thousand units available
in the market per week when the unit price is

p ⫽ 100a 0.5x ⫹ 0.4

1 ⫹ xb

dollars. What is the producers’ surplus if the selling price
is set at $160/unit?

10. CONSUMERS’ AND PRODUCERS’ SURPLUS The management of
the Titan Tire Company has determined that the quantity
demanded x of their Super Titan tires per week is related to
the unit price p by the relation

p ⫽ 144 ⫺ x 2

where p is measured in dollars and x is measured in units
of a thousand. Titan will make x units of the tires available
in the market if the unit price is
p ⫽ 48 ⫹ 1

2   x2

dollars. Determine the consumers’ surplus and the produc-
ers’ surplus when the market unit price is set at the equi-
librium price.

11. CONSUMERS’  AND PRODUCERS’  SURPLUS The  quantity  de-
manded  x (in  units  of  a  hundred)  of  the  Mikado  miniature
cameras per week is related to the unit price p (in dollars) by

p ⫽ 600e⫺0.04x

p ⫽ ⫺0.2x 2 ⫹ 80

where p is the unit price in dollars and x (in units of a hun-
dred) is the quantity demanded per month. 
a. Find the number of mattresses demanded per month if

the unit price is set at $400/mattress.

b. Use the results of part (a) to find the consumers’ surplus

if the selling price is set at $400 per mattress.

7. PRODUCERS’  SURPLUS The  manufacturer  of  the  brand  of
mattresses of Exercise 6 will make x hundred units avail-
able in the market when the unit price is

p ⫽ 100 ⫹ 80e0.05x

dollars.
a. Find  the  number  of  mattresses  the  manufacturer  will
make available in the market place if the unit price is set
at $250/mattress. 

b. Use the result of part (a) to find the producers’ surplus

if the unit price is set at $250/mattress.

8. CONSUMERS’  SURPLUS The  demand  function  for  a  certain

model of Blu-ray player is given by

p ⫽ 600

0.5x ⫹ 2

where  p is  the  unit  price  in  dollars  and  x (in  units  of  a
thousand)  is  the  quantity  demanded  per  week.  What  is
the  consumers’  surplus  if  the  selling  price  is  set  at
$200/unit?

and the quantity x (in units of a hundred) that the supplier
is willing to make available in the market is related to the
unit price p (in dollars) by

p ⫽ 0.1x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 40

If the market price is set at the equilibrium price, find the
consumers’ surplus and the producers’ surplus.

12. Refer to Example 3, page 830. Verify that

冮 3

580,000e⫺0.1t dt ⫺ 180,000 ⬇ 1,323,254

0

13. PRESENT VALUE OF AN INVESTMENT Suppose an investment is

expected to generate income at the rate of

R1t2 ⫽ 200,000

dollars/year for the next 5 years. Find the present value of
this  investment  if  the  prevailing  interest  rate  is  8%/year
compounded continuously.

14. FRANCHISES Camille  purchased  a  15-year  franchise  for  a
computer outlet store that is expected to generate income at
the rate of

R1t2 ⫽ 400,000

dollars/year.  If  the  prevailing  interest  rate  is  8%/year
compounded  continuously,  find  the  present  value  of  the
franchise.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.7 APPLICATIONS OF THE DEFINITE INTEGRAL TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS

837

15. THE AMOUNT OF AN ANNUITY Find the amount of an annuity
if $250/month is paid into it for a period of 20 years, earn-
ing  interest  at  the  rate  of  8%/year  compounded  con-
tinuously.

16. THE AMOUNT OF AN ANNUITY Find the amount of an annuity
if $400/month is paid into it for a period of 20 years, earn-
ing  interest  at  the  rate  of  6%/year  compounded  con-
tinuously.

17. THE AMOUNT OF AN ANNUITY Aiso deposits $150/month in a
savings  account  paying  6%/year  compounded  continu-
ously. Estimate the amount that will be in his account after
15 years.

18. CUSTODIAL ACCOUNTS The  Armstrongs  wish  to  establish  a
custodial account to finance their children’s education. If
they  deposit  $200  monthly  for  10  years  in  a  savings
account  paying  6%/year  compounded  continuously,  how
much will their savings account be worth at the end of this
period?

19. IRA  ACCOUNTS Refer  to  Example  4,  page  832.  Suppose
Marcus made his IRA payment on April 1, 1996, and annu-
ally  thereafter.  If  interest  is  paid  at  the  same  initial  rate,
approximately how much did Marcus have in his account
at the beginning of 2012?

20. PRESENT VALUE OF AN ANNUITY Estimate the present value of
an annuity if payments are $800 monthly for 12 years and
the  account  earns  interest  at  the  rate  of  5%/year  com-
pounded continuously.

21. PRESENT VALUE OF AN ANNUITY Estimate the present value of
an annuity if payments are $1200 monthly for 15 years and
the  account  earns  interest  at  the  rate  of  6%/year  com-
pounded continuously.

22. LOTTERY PAYMENTS A  state  lottery  commission  pays  the
winner  of  the  “Million  Dollar”  lottery  20  annual  install-
ments  of  $50,000  each.  If  the  prevailing  interest  rate  is
6%/year compounded continuously, find the present value
of the winning ticket.

23. REVERSE ANNUITY MORTGAGES Sinclair  wishes  to  supple-
ment  his  retirement  income  by  $300/month  for  the  next 
10  years.  He  plans  to  obtain  a  reverse  annuity  mortgage
(RAM) on his home to meet this need. Estimate the amount
of  the  mortgage  he  will  require  if  the  prevailing  interest
rate is 8%/year compounded continuously.

24. REVERSE ANNUITY MORTGAGE Refer  to  Exercise  23.  Leah 
wishes to supplement her retirement income by $400/month

for  the  next  15  years  by  obtaining  a  RAM.  Estimate  the
amount  of  the  mortgage  she  will  require  if  the  prevailing
interest rate is 6%/year compounded continuously.

25. LORENZ CURVES A certain country’s income distribution is

described by the function

f 1x2 ⫽ 15

16

 x 2 ⫹ 1
16

 x

a. Sketch the Lorenz curve for this function.
b. Compute f(0.4) and f(0.9) and interpret your results.

26. LORENZ CURVES A certain country’s income distribution is

described by the function

f 1x2 ⫽ 14

15

 x 2 ⫹ 1
15

 x

a. Sketch the Lorenz curve for this function.
b. Compute f(0.3) and f(0.7).

27. LORENZ CURVES In a study conducted by a certain country’s
Economic  Development  Board,  it  was  found  that  the
Lorenz  curve  for  the  distribution  of  income  of  college
teachers was described by the function

f 1x2 ⫽ 13

14

 x 2 ⫹ 1
14

 x

and that of lawyers by the function
 x 4 ⫹ 2
11

t1x2 ⫽ 9

11

 x

a. Compute the coefficient of inequality for each Lorenz

curve.

b. Which profession has a more equitable income distribu-

tion?

28. LORENZ CURVES In a study conducted by a certain country’s
Economic  Development  Board,  it  was  found  that  the
Lorenz curve for the distribution of income of stockbrokers
was described by the function 

f 1x2 ⫽ 11

12

 x 2 ⫹ 1
12

 x

and that of high school teachers by the function

t1x2 ⫽ 5

6

 x 2 ⫹ 1
6

 x

a. Compute the coefficient of inequality for each Lorenz

curve.

b. Which  profession  has  a  more  equitable  income  distri-

bution?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

838

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

11.7 Solution to Self-Check Exercise

We find the equilibrium price and equilibrium quantity by solv-
ing the system of equations

 p ⫽ 29 ⫺ 0.02x
 p ⫽ 21 ⫹ 0.02x

simultaneously. Substituting the first equation into the second,
we have

29 ⫺ 0.02x ⫽ 21 ⫹ 0.02x

Squaring both sides of the equation then leads to

Therefore,

 9 ⫺ 0.02x ⫽ 1 ⫹ 0.02x

 x ⫽ 200

 p ⫽ 29 ⫺ 0.0212002
 ⫽ 25 ⬇ 2.24

The equilibrium price is $224, and the equilibrium quantity is
200. The consumers’ surplus is given by

29 ⫺ 0.02x dx ⫺ 12.24212002
 19 ⫺ 0.02x2 1/2 dx ⫺ 448
 a 2
3b19 ⫺ 0.02x2 3/2 ` 0
 153/2 ⫺ 93/22 ⫺ 448

200

0

0

 CS ⬇ 冮 200
 ⫽ 冮 200
 ⫽ ⫺ 1
0.02
 ⫽ ⫺ 1
0.03
 ⬇ 79.32

⫺ 448

Integrate by 
substitution.

or approximately $7932.

Next, the producers’ surplus is given by

21 ⫹ 0.02x dx

 PS ⫽ 12.24212002 ⫺ 冮 200
 ⫽ 448 ⫺ 冮 200
 ⫽ 448 ⫺ 1

0.02a 2

0

0

 ⫽ 448 ⫺ 1
0.03
 ⬇ 108.66

 11 ⫹ 0.02x2 1/2 dx
3b11 ⫹ 0.02x2 3/2 ` 0
 153/2 ⫺ 12

200

USING

TECHNOLOGY

or approximately $10,866.

Business and Economic Applications/Technology Exercises
1. Re-solve Example 1, Section 11.7, using a graphing utility.

Hint: Use the intersection operation to find the equilibrium quantity and the equilibrium price. Use the
numerical integral operation to evaluate the definite integral.

2. Re-solve Exercise 11, Section 11.7, using a graphing utility.

Hint: See Exercise 1.

3. The demand function for a certain brand of travel alarm clocks is given by

p ⫽ ⫺0.01x 2 ⫺ 0.3x ⫹ 10

where p is the unit price in dollars and x is the quantity demanded each month,
measured in units of a thousand. The supply function for this brand of clocks is
given by

p ⫽ ⫺0.01x 2 ⫹ 0.2x ⫹ 4

where p has the same meaning as before and x is the quantity, in thousands, the
supplier  will  make  available  in  the  marketplace  per  month.  Determine  the  con-
sumers’ surplus and the producers’ surplus when the market unit price is set at the
equilibrium price.

4. The quantity demanded of a certain make of compact disc organizer is x thousand

units per week when the corresponding unit price is

p ⫽ 1400 ⫺ 8x

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SUMMARY OF PRINCIPAL FORMULAS AND TERMS

839

dollars. The supplier of the organizers will make x thousand units available in the
market when the unit price is

p ⫽ 0.02x 2 ⫹ 0.04x ⫹ 5

dollars.  Determine  the  consumers’  surplus  and  the  producers’  surplus  when  the
market unit price is set at the equilibrium price.

5. Investment A is expected to generate income at the rate of

R11t2 ⫽ 50,000 ⫹ 10,0001t

dollars/year over the 5 years, and Investment B is expected to generate income at
the rate of

R21t2 ⫽ 50,000 ⫹ 6000t

dollars/year over the same period of time. If the prevailing interest rate for the next
5 years is 10%/year, which investment will generate the higher net income over of
5 years?

6. Investment A is expected to generate income at the rate of

R11t2 ⫽ 40,000 ⫹ 5000t ⫹ 100t 2

dollars/year for the next 10 years, and Investment B is expected to generate income
at the rate of

R21t2 ⫽ 60,000 ⫹ 2000t

dollars/year over the same period of time. If the prevailing interest rate for the next
10 years is 8%/year, which investment will generate the higher net income over the
10 years?

CHAPTER 11

Summary of Principal Formulas and Terms

FORMULAS

1. Indefinite integral of a constant

2. Power Rule

3. Constant Multiple Rule

4. Sum Rule

5. Indefinite integral of the exponential

function

6. Indefinite integral of  

f 1u2 ⫽ 1

u

7. Method of substitution

⫹ C      1n ⫽ ⫺12

n⫹1

n ⫹ 1

冮 k du ⫽ ku ⫹ C
冮 u 
n du ⫽ u 
冮 k f 1u2 du ⫽ k 冮 f 1u2 du
冮 3  f 1u2 ⫾ t1u24 du

(k, a constant)

⫽ 冮  f 1u2 du ⫾ 冮 t1u2 du

u ⫹ C
u du ⫽ e 
⫽ ln0 u 0 ⫹ C

冮 e 
冮 
du
u
冮 F¿1t1x22t¿1x2 dx ⫽ 冮 F¿1u2 du

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

840

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

8. Definite integral as the limit of a sum

9. Fundamental Theorem of Calculus

10. Average value of f over [a, b]

11. Area between two curves

12. Consumers’ surplus

13. Producers’ surplus

14. Accumulated (future) value of an

income stream

15. Present value of an income stream

16. Amount of an annuity

17. Present value of an annuity

18. Coefficient of inequality of a Lorenz 

curve

TERMS

antiderivative (758)
antidifferentiation (760)
integration (760)
indefinite integral (760)
integrand (760)

冮 b
 f 1x2 dx ⫽ lim

nS⬁

 Sn,

a

where Sn is a Riemann sum

a

冮 b
 f 1x2 dx ⫽ F1b2 ⫺ F1a2,
where F⬘1x2 ⫽ f1x2
 冮 b

 f 1x2 dx

b ⫺ a

1

a

a

0

0

CS ⫽ 冮 x
PS ⫽ p x ⫺ 冮 x
A ⫽ erT冮 T
PV ⫽ 冮 T
A ⫽ mP
r

冮 b
 3   f 1x2 ⫺ t1x24 dx,
where f1x2 ⱖ t1x2
 D1x2 dx ⫺ p x
 S1x2 dx
 R1t2e⫺rt dt
 R1t2e⫺rt dt
 1e rT ⫺ 12
 11 ⫺ e⫺rT2
 3x ⫺ f 1x24 dx

PV ⫽ mP
r
L ⫽ 2冮 1

0

0

0

constant of integration (760)
differential equation (764)
initial-value problem (764)
Riemann sum (785)
definite integral (785)

lower limit of integration (785)
upper limit of integration (785)
Lorenz curve (833)
line of complete equality (834)

CHAPTER 11

Concept Review Questions

Fill in the blanks.
1. a. A function F is an antiderivative of f on an interval I

if _____ for all x in I.

b. If F is an antiderivative of f on an interval I, then every

antiderivative of f on I has the form _____.

2. a.
b.

兰 cf 1x2 dx ⫽
兰 3  f 1x2 ⫾ t1x24 dx ⫽

_____

_____

3. a. A differential equation is an equation that involves the

derivative or differential of a/an _____ function.

b. A solution of a differential equation on an interval I is

any _____ that satisfies the differential equation.

4. If we let u ⫽ t(x), then du ⫽ _____, and the substitution
into the integral

兰  f 1t1x22t¿1x2 dx

transforms the integral
_____ involving only u.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

REVIEW EXERCISES

841

8. If f and t are continuous on [a, b] and f (x) ⱖ t(x) for all x
in [a, b], then the area of the region between the graphs of
f and t and the vertical lines x ⫽ a and x ⫽ b is A ⫽ _____.

9. a. The consumers’ surplus is given by CS ⫽ _____.
b. The producers’ surplus is given by PS ⫽ _____.

10. a. The  accumulated  value  after  T years  of  an  income
stream  of  R(t)  dollars/year,  earning  interest  of  r/year
compounded continuously, is given by A ⫽ _____.

b. The  present  value  of  an  income  stream  is  given  by 

PV ⫽ _____.

11. The amount of an annuity is A ⫽ _____.

12. The coefficient of inequality of a Lorenz curve is 

L ⫽ _____.

5. a. If f is continuous and nonnegative on an interval [a, b],
then  the  area  of  the  region  under  the  graph  of  f on 
[a, b] is given by _____.

b. If f is continuous on an interval [a, b], then

is
equal  to  the  areas  of  the  regions  lying  above  the 
x-axis and bounded by the graph of f on [a, b] _____ the
areas of the regions lying below the x-axis and bounded
by the graph of f on [a, b].

a  f 1x2 dx
兰 b

6. a. The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus states that if f is
_____, where F

a  f 1x2 dx ⫽
兰 b

continuous on [a, b], then
is a/an _____ of f.

b. The net change in a function f over an interval [a, b] is
given by f (b) ⫺ f (a) ⫽ _____, provided that f ⬘ is con-
tinuous on [a, b].

7. a. If f is continuous on [a, b], then the average value of f

over [a, b] is the number _____.

b. If f is a continuous and nonnegative function on [a, b],
then the average value of f over [a, b] may be thought
of as the _____ of the rectangle with base lying on the
interval [a, b] and having the same _____ as the region
under the graph of f on [a, b].

CHAPTER 11

Review Exercises

In Exercises 1–20, find each indefinite integral.

In Exercises 21–32, evaluate each definite integral.

2b  dx

⫹ 5b  dx

3 ⫹ 2x 

冮 1x 
2 ⫺ x2 dx
冮 a x 
3 ⫹ 1
4 ⫺ 2x 
x 
冮 x12x 
2 ⫹ x1/22 dx
冮 a x 
2 ⫺ x ⫹ 2
x
冮 12x ⫹ 1 dx
冮 13x ⫺ 1213x 
冮 x 
21x 
3 ⫹ 22 10 dx
冮 2e⫺2x dx

1.

3.

5.

7.

8.

9.

10.

12.

2 ⫺ 2x ⫹ 12 1/3 dx
冮 

11.

冮 

14.

e⫺x ⫺ 1
1e⫺x ⫹ x2 2 dx

2

 dx

ln x 
x

冮 
冮 x 1x ⫹ 1 dx

16.

18.

20. 冮 

3x1x ⫹ 1

 dx

2.

4.

6.

3 ⫺ 2x 

冮 a 1
2 ⫹ 8b  dx
3   x 
冮 1x1/3 ⫺ 1x ⫹ 42 dx
2 ⫹ 1211x ⫺ 12 dx
冮 1x 

x ⫺ 1

x2 ⫺ 2x ⫹ 5

 dx

13.

15.

17.

19.

2b ex2⫹x⫹1 dx

冮 a x ⫹ 1
冮 1ln x2 5

x

 dx

2 ⫹ 12 10 dx

冮 x 
31x 
x1x ⫺ 2

冮 

 dx

2 ⫹ 12 dx
2 ⫹ 2x ⫺ 12 dx

3 ⫺ 3x 

3 ⫺ 9x 

 12x 
 14x 
 11x ⫹ x⫺3/22 dx
 121x 
2 ⫺ 2x21x 
 x1x ⫺ 3 dx

3 ⫺ 3x 

21.

22.

23.

25.

26.

28.

30.

32.

⫺1

0

1

0

冮 1
冮 2
冮 4
冮 0
冮 7
冮 1
冮 2
冮 e

0

0

4

1

dx

 

15 ⫺ 2x2 2
 xe 1⫺1/22x2 dx

  

ln x
x

 dx

24.

冮 1

0

 20x12x 

2 ⫹ 12 4 dx

 

x 

27.

2 ⫹ 12 3 dx
冮 2
冮 2
冮 0

29.

31.

 

0

0

  
⫺1

x

 dx

2 ⫹ 1

2

 dx

4x21 ⫹ 2x 
11 ⫹ e⫺x2 2 dx

e⫺x

In Exercises 33–36, find the function f given that the slope of the
tangent line to the graph at any point (x, f(x)) is fⴕ(x) and that the
graph of f passes through the given point.

33. f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 3x 2 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 1; 11, 12
34. f  ¿1x2 ⫽

; 10, 12

x2x 

2 ⫹ 1

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

842

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

35. f ⬘1x2 ⫽ 1 ⫺ e⫺x; 10, 22
; 11, ⫺22

f  ¿1x2 ⫽ ln x

36.

x

In Exercises 37 and 38, refer to the following figure.

y

y = f (t)

y = g (t)

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

t

37. MOTION OF TWO CARS Suppose 

(both  mea-
sured in feet per second) give the velocities of Car A and
Car B, respectively, t seconds after starting side by side on
a straight road.
a. Give a physical interpretation of the integral

and 

f1t2

t1t2

冮 T

0

3 f1t2 ⫺ t1t24 dt

10 ⬍ t ⬍ 142

b. At what time is the distance between the two cars great-

est? Write an integral giving this distance.

f1t2

t1t2

38. REVENUES OF COMPANIES Suppose 

give the rate
of change of the revenues (measured in dollars per week)
of two new branches, A and B, of an office supply company
t weeks after their simultaneous grand opening.
a. Give an interpretation of the integral

and 

冮 T

0

3 f1t2 ⫺ t1t24 dt

10 ⬍ t ⬍ 142

b. At what time over the first two weeks since opening is
the difference between the revenues of the two branches
greatest? Write an integral giving this difference.

39. Let f(x) ⫽ ⫺2x 2 ⫹ 1, and compute the Riemann sum of f
over the interval [1, 2] by partitioning the interval into five
subintervals of the same length (n ⫽ 5), where the points 
pi (1  ⱕ i ⱕ 5) are taken to be the right endpoints of the
respective subintervals.

40. MARGINAL COST FUNCTIONS The  management  of  National
Electric has determined that the daily marginal cost func-
tion  associated  with  producing  their  automatic  drip  cof-
feemakers is given by

C⬘1x2 ⫽ 0.00003x 2 ⫺ 0.03x ⫹ 20

where C⬘(x) is measured in dollars/unit and x denotes the
number  of  units  produced.  Management  has  also  deter-
mined that the daily fixed cost incurred in producing these
coffeemakers  is  $500.  What  is  the  total  cost  incurred  by
National in producing the first 400 coffeemakers/day?

41. MARGINAL REVENUE FUNCTIONS Refer to Exercise 40. Man-
agement has also determined that the daily marginal rev-
enue function associated with producing and selling their
coffeemakers is given by

R⬘1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.03x ⫹ 60

where x denotes the number of units produced and sold and
R⬘(x) is measured in dollars/unit.
a. Determine  the  revenue  function  R(x)  associated  with

producing and selling these coffeemakers.

b. What is the demand equation relating the unit price to

the quantity of coffeemakers demanded?

42. COMPUTER RESALE VALUE Franklin National Life Insurance
Company  purchased  new  computers  for  $200,000.  If  the
rate at which the computers’ resale value changes is given
by the function 

V⬘1t2 ⫽ 38001t ⫺ 102

where t is the length of time since the purchase date and
V ⬘(t)  is  measured  in  dollars  per  year,  find  an  expression
V(t)  that  gives  the  resale  value  of  the  computers  after 
t years.  How  much  would  the  computers  sell  for  after 
6 years?

43. MEASURING TEMPERATURE The temperature on a certain day
as measured at the airport of a city is changing at the rate
of 

T ⬘1t2 ⫽ 0.15t 2 ⫺ 3.6t ⫹ 14.4

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

°F/hour,  where  t is  measured  in  hours,  with  t ⫽ 0  corre-
sponding to 6 A.M. The temperature at 6 A.M. was 24°F.
a. Find an expression giving the temperature T at the air-

port at any time between 6 A.M. and 10 A.M.

b. What was the temperature at 10 A.M.?

44. DVD SALES The total number of DVDs sold to U.S. deal-
ers for rental and sale from 1999 through 2003 grew at the
rate of approximately

R1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.03t 2 ⫹ 0.218t ⫺ 0.032
billion units/year, where t is measured in years, with t ⫽ 0
corresponding to 1999. The total number of DVDs sold as
of 1999 was 0.1 billion units.
a. Find  an  expression  giving  the  total  number  of  DVDs

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

sold by year t (0 ⱕ t ⱕ 4).

b. How many DVDs were sold in 2003?
Source: Adams Media.

45. AIR POLLUTION On an average summer day, the level of car-
bon  monoxide  (CO)  in  a  city’s  air  is  2  parts  per  million
(ppm).  An  environmental  protection  agency’s  study  pre-
dicts that, unless more stringent measures are taken to pro-
tect the city’s atmosphere, the CO concentration present in
the air will increase at the rate of

C ⬘1t2 ⫽ 0.003t 2 ⫹ 0.06t ⫹ 0.1

ppm/year, t years from now. If no further pollution-control
efforts are made, what will be the CO concentration on an
average summer day 5 years from now?

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

46. PROJECTION TV SALES The  marketing  department  of  Vista
Vision forecasts that total sales of their new line of projec-
tion television systems will grow at the rate of

3000 ⫺ 2000e⫺0.04t

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 242

units/month once they are introduced into the market. Find
an  expression  giving  the  total  number  of  the  projection
television  systems  that  Vista  may  expect  to  sell  in  the 
t months after they are put on the market. How many units
of the television systems can Vista expect to sell during the
first year?

47. COMMUTER TRENDS Because of the increasing cost of fuel,
the  manager  of  the  City  Transit  Authority  estimates  that
the  number  of  commuters  using  the  city  subway  system
will increase at the rate of

300011 ⫹ 0.4t2 ⫺1/2

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 362

per month, t months from now. If 100,000 commuters are
currently using the system, find an expression giving the
total number of commuters who will be using the subway t
months from now. How many commuters will be using the
subway 6 months from now?

48. SALES: LOUDSPEAKERS Sales of the Acrosonic model F loud-

speaker systems have been growing at the rate of

f ⬘1t2 ⫽ 200013 ⫺ 2e⫺t2

units/year, where t denotes the number of years these loud-
speaker systems have been on the market. Determine the
number of loudspeaker systems that were sold in the first 
5 years after they appeared on the market.

49. SUPPLY:  WOMEN’S BOOTS The  rate  of  change  of  the  unit

price p (in dollars) of Apex women’s boots is given by

p¿1x2 ⫽ 240
15 ⫺ x2 2

where x is the number of pairs in units of a hundred that the
supplier will make available in the market daily when the
unit price is $p/pair. Find the supply equation for these boots
if the quantity the supplier is willing to make available is
200 pairs daily (x ⫽ 2) when the unit price is $50/pair.

50. MARGINAL COST FUNCTIONS The management of a division
of Ditton Industries has determined that the daily marginal
cost function associated with producing their hot-air corn
poppers is given by

C ⬘1x2 ⫽ 0.00003x 2 ⫺ 0.03x ⫹ 10

where C⬘(x) is measured in dollars/unit and x denotes the
number  of  units  manufactured.  Management  has  also
determined that the daily fixed cost incurred in producing
these corn poppers is $600. Find the total cost incurred by
Ditton in producing the first 500 corn poppers.

51. U.S. CENSUS The number of Americans aged 45–54 years
(which stood at 25 million at the beginning of 1990) grew
at the rate of

R1t2 ⫽ 0.00933t 3 ⫹ 0.019t 2 ⫺ 0.10833t ⫹ 1.3467

REVIEW EXERCISES

843

million  people/year,  t years  from  the  beginning  of  1990.
How  many  Americans  aged  45  to  54  were  added  to  the
population between 1990 and 2000?
Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

52. ONLINE RETAIL SALES Since the inception of the Web, online
commerce  has  enjoyed  phenomenal  growth.  But  growth,
led by such major sectors as books, tickets, and office sup-
plies,  is  expected  to  slow  in  the  coming  years.  The  pro-
jected growth of online retail sales is given by

R1t2 ⫽ 15.82e⫺0.176t

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 42

where t is measured in years with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to
2007 and R(t) is measured in billions of dollars per year.
Online retail sales in 2007 were $116 billion.
a. Find an expression for online retail sales in year t.
b. If  the  projection  holds  true,  what  will  be  online  retail

sales in 2011?

Source: Jupiter Research.

53. Find  the  area  of  the  region  under  the  curve  y ⫽ 3x 2 ⫹

2x ⫹ 1 from x ⫽ ⫺1 to x ⫽ 2.

54. Find the area of the region under the curve y ⫽ e2x from 

x ⫽ 0 to x ⫽ 2.

55. Find the area of the region bounded by the graph of the func-

tion y ⫽ 1>x 2, the x-axis, and the lines x ⫽ 1 and x ⫽ 3.

56. Find the area of the region bounded by the curve 

y ⫽ ⫺x 2 ⫺ x ⫹ 2 and the x-axis.

57. Find the area of the region bounded by the graphs of the
functions f(x) ⫽ ex and t(x) ⫽ x and the vertical lines 
x ⫽ 0 and x ⫽ 2.

58. Find the area of the region that is completely enclosed by

the graphs of f(x) ⫽ x 4 and t(x) ⫽ x.

59. Find the area of the region between the curve 

y ⫽ x(x ⫺ 1)(x ⫺ 2) and the x-axis.

60. OIL PRODUCTION On  the  basis  of  current  production  tech-
niques,  the  rate  of  oil  production  from  a  certain  oil  well 
t years from now is estimated to be

R11t2 ⫽ 100e0.05t

thousand  barrels/year.  On  the  basis  of  a  new  production
technique, however, it is estimated that the rate of oil pro-
duction from that oil well t years from now will be

R21t2 ⫽ 100e0.08t

thousand barrels/year. Determine how much additional oil
will  be  produced  over  the  next  10  years  if  the  new  tech-
nique is adopted.

61. Find the average value of the function

f 1x2 ⫽

x2x 

2 ⫹ 16

over the interval [0, 3].

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

844

CHAPTER 11 INTEGRATION

62. AVERAGE TEMPERATURE The temperature (in degrees Fahren-
heit) in Boston over a 12-hr period on a certain December
day was given by

T ⫽ ⫺0.05t3 ⫹ 0.4t2 ⫹ 3.8t ⫹ 5.6

10 ⱕ t ⱕ 122

where t is measured in hours, with t ⫽ 0 corresponding to 
6 A.M. Determine the average temperature on that day over
the 12-hr period from 6 A.M. to 6 P.M.

63. AVERAGE VELOCITY OF A TRUCK A  truck  traveling  along  a
straight road has a velocity (in feet per second) at time t (in
seconds) given by

√

1t2 ⫽ 1

12

 t 

2 ⫹ 2t ⫹ 44    10 ⱕ t ⱕ 52

What  is  the  average  velocity  of  the  truck  over  the  time
interval from t ⫽ 0 to t ⫽ 5?

64. MEMBERSHIP IN CREDIT UNIONS Credit unions in Massachu-
setts  have  grown  remarkably  in  recent  years.  Their  tax-
exempt status allows them to offer deposit and loan rates
that are often more favorable than those offered by banks.
The  membership  in  Massachusetts  credit  unions  grew  at
the rate of

R1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.0039t 2 ⫹ 0.0374t ⫹ 0.0046
10 ⱕ t ⱕ 92
million  members/year  between  1994  (t ⫽ 0)  and  2003 
(t ⫽ 9). Find the average rate of growth of membership in
Massachusetts credit unions over the period in question.
Source: Massachusetts Credit Union League.

65. DEMAND FOR DIGITAL CAMCORDER TAPES The demand func-
tion for a brand of blank digital camcorder tapes is given
by

p ⫽ ⫺0.01x 2 ⫺ 0.2x ⫹ 23

where  p is  the  unit  price  in  dollars  and  x is  the  quantity
demanded  each  week,  measured  in  units  of  a  thousand.
Determine  the  consumers’  surplus  if  the  unit  price  is
$8/tape.

66. CONSUMERS’  AND PRODUCERS’  SURPLUS The  quantity  de-
manded x (in units of a hundred) of the Sportsman 5 ⫻ 7
tents, per week, is related to the unit price p (in dollars) by
the relation

p ⫽ ⫺0.1x 2 ⫺ x ⫹ 40

CHAPTER 11

Before Moving On . . .

1. Find 

冮 a 2x3 ⫹ 1x ⫹ 2

x

⫺ 21xb  dx

.

2. Find f if f ⬘(x) ⫽ ex ⫹ x and f (0) ⫽ 2.

3. Find 

冮 

x2x 

2 ⫹ 1

 dx

.

The quantity x (in units of a hundred) that the supplier is
willing to make available in the market is related to the unit
price by the relation

p ⫽ 0.1x 2 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 20

If the market price is set at the equilibrium price, find the
consumers’ surplus and the producers’ surplus.

67. RETIREMENT ACCOUNT SAVINGS Chi-Tai  plans  to  deposit
$4000/year in his Keogh Retirement Account. If interest is
compounded  continuously  at  the  rate  of  8%/year,  how
much will he have in his retirement account after 20 years?

68. INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS Glenda  sold  her  house  under  an
installment  contract  whereby  the  buyer  gave  her  a  down
payment of $20,000 and agreed to make monthly payments
of $925/month for 30 years. If the prevailing interest rate is
6%/year compounded continuously, find the present value
of the purchase price of the house.

69. PRESENT VALUE OF A FRANCHISE Alicia purchased a 10-year
franchise  for  a  health  spa  that  is  expected  to  generate
income at the rate of

R1t2 ⫽ 80,000

dollars/year.  If  the  prevailing  interest  rate  is  10%/year
compounded  continuously,  find  the  present  value  of  the
franchise.

70. INCOME DISTRIBUTION OF A COUNTRY A  certain  country’s

income distribution is described by the function

f 1x2 ⫽ 17

18

 x 

2 ⫹ 1
18

 x

a. Sketch the Lorenz curve for this function.
b. Compute f(0.3) and f(0.6), and interpret your results.
c. Compute  the  coefficient  of  inequality  for  this  Lorenz

curve.

71. POPULATION GROWTH The  population  of  a  certain  Sunbelt
city, currently 80,000, is expected to grow exponentially in
the next 5 years with a growth constant of 0.05. If the pre-
diction comes true, what will be the average population of
the city over the next 5 years?

4. Evaluate 

冮 1

 x22 ⫺ x 

2 dx

.

0

5. Find  the  area  of  the  region  completely  enclosed  by  the

graphs of y ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 1 and y ⫽ 1 ⫺ x.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12

CALCULUS OF 
SEVERAL VARIABLES

NIE JIANJIANG/Xinhua/Landov

UP TO NOW, we have dealt with functions involving one

variable. However, many situations involve functions of

two or more variables. For example, the Consumer Price Index

(CPI) compiled by the Bureau of Labor Statistics depends on the

price of more than 95,000 consumer items. To study such

relationships, we need the notion of a function of several variables,

the first topic in this chapter. Next, generalizing the concept of the

derivative of a function of one variable, we study the partial

derivatives of a function of two or more variables. Using partial

derivatives, we study the rate of change of a function with respect

to one variable while holding all other variables constant. We then

learn how to find the extremum values of a function of several

variables. For example, we will learn how a manufacturer can

maximize her profits by producing the optimal quantity of her

Suppose the government of a certain

country wishes to increase the country’s

productivity at a certain time. Should

products.

the government encourage capital

investment or an increase in the

expenditure on labor at that time? In

Applied Example 4, page 862, you will

see how we can use the production

function for the country to answer this

question.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

845

846

CHAPTER 12 CALCULUS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

12.1 Functions of Several Variables

Up to now, our study of calculus has been restricted to functions of one variable. In
many practical situations, however, the formulation of a problem results in a mathe-
matical model that involves a function of two or more variables. For example, suppose
Ace Novelty determines that the profits are $6, $5, and $4 for three types of souvenirs
it produces. Let x, y, and z denote the number of type-A, type-B, and type-C souvenirs
to be made; then the company’s profit is given by

P ⫽ 6x ⫹ 5y ⫹ 4z
and P is a function of the three variables, x, y, and z.

Functions of Two Variables
Although this chapter deals with real-valued functions of several variables, most of
our definitions and results are stated in terms of a function of two variables. One rea-
son for adopting this approach, as you will soon see, is that there is a geometric inter-
pretation for this special case, which serves as an important visual aid. We can then
draw  upon  the  experience  gained  from  studying  the  two-variable  case  to  help  us
understand the concepts and results connected with the more general case, which, by
and large, is just a simple extension of the lower-dimensional case.

A Function of Two Variables
A real-valued function of two variables f consists of
1. A  set  A of  ordered  pairs  of  real  numbers  (x,  y)  called  the  domain of  the 

function.

2. A rule that associates with each ordered pair in the domain of f one and only

one real number, denoted by z ⫽ f(x, y).

The variables x and y are called independent variables, and the variable z, which

is dependent on the values of x and y, is referred to as a dependent variable.

As in the case of a real-valued function of one real variable, the number z ⫽ f(x, y) is
called the value of f at the point (x, y). And, unless specified, the domain of the function
f will be taken to be the largest possible set for which the rule defining f is meaningful.

EXAMPLE 1 Let f be the function defined by

f1x, y2 ⫽ x ⫹ xy ⫹ y 2 ⫹ 2

Compute f(0, 0), f(1, 2), and f(2, 1).

Solution We have

f10, 02 ⫽ 0 ⫹ 102102 ⫹ 02 ⫹ 2 ⫽ 2
f11, 22 ⫽ 1 ⫹ 112122 ⫹ 22 ⫹ 2 ⫽ 9
f12, 12 ⫽ 2 ⫹ 122112 ⫹ 12 ⫹ 2 ⫽ 7

The domain of a function of two variables f(x, y) is a set of ordered pairs of real

numbers and may therefore be viewed as a subset of the xy-plane.

EXAMPLE 2 Find the domain of each of the following functions.

a. f1x, y2 ⫽ x 2 ⫹ y 2

b.

t1x, y2 ⫽ 2

x ⫺ y

c. h 1x, y2 ⫽ 21 ⫺ x 

2 ⫺ y 

2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Solution

12.1 FUNCTIONS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

847

a. f(x, y) is defined for all real values of x and y, so the domain of the function f is
b. t(x, y) is defined for all x ⫽ y, so the domain of the function t is the set of all

the set of all points (x, y) in the xy-plane.

points in the xy-plane except those lying on the line y ⫽ x (Figure 1a).

c. We require that 1 ⫺ x 2 ⫺ y 2 ⱖ 0 or x 2 ⫹ y 2 ⱕ 1, which is just the set of all
points (x, y) lying on and inside the circle of radius 1 with center at the origin
(Figure 1b).

y

y

1

–1

x

1

x

–1

FIGURE 1

(a) Domain of g

(b) Domain of h

APPLIED EXAMPLE 3 Revenue Functions Acrosonic manufactures a book-
shelf loudspeaker system that may be bought fully assembled or in a kit. 

The demand equations that relate the unit prices, p and q, to the quantities
demanded weekly, x and y, of the assembled and kit versions of the loudspeaker
systems are given by

p ⫽ 300 ⫺ 1
4

 x ⫺ 1
8

 y  and  q ⫽ 240 ⫺ 1
8

 x ⫺ 3
8

 y

a. What is the weekly total revenue function R(x, y)?
b. What is the domain of the function R?

Solution

a. The weekly revenue realizable from the sale of x units of the assembled speaker

systems at p dollars per unit is given by xp dollars. Similarly, the weekly rev-
enue realizable from the sale of y units of the kits at q dollars per unit is given
by yq dollars. Therefore, the weekly total revenue function R is given by

 R 1x, y2 ⫽ xp ⫹ yq

 ⫽ x a 300 ⫺ 1
4
 ⫽ ⫺1
2 ⫺ 3
4
8

 x 

 x ⫺ 1
8
2 ⫺ 1
4

 y 

 yb ⫹ y a 240 ⫺ 1

8

 x ⫺ 3
8

 yb

(x2)

See page 10.

 xy ⫹ 300x ⫹ 240y

b. To find the domain of the function R, let’s observe that the quantities x, y, p,
and q must be nonnegative. This observation leads to the following system of
linear inequalities:

 300 ⫺ 1
4
 240 ⫺ 1
8

 x ⫺ 1
8
 x ⫺ 3
8

 y ⱖ 0

 y ⱖ 0

 x ⱖ 0
 y ⱖ 0

(1)

(2)

(3)
(4)

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

848

CHAPTER 12 CALCULUS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

y

2000

1000

30 –

0 

1 x 
4

–

1 y = 0
8

240 

–

1 x 
8

–

3 y = 0
8

D

1000 

2000

x

FIGURE 2
The domain of R(x, y)

This system of linear inequalities defines a region D in the xy-plane that is the

domain of R. To sketch D, we first draw the line defined by the equation

300 ⫺ 1
4

 x ⫺ 1
8

 y ⫽ 0

obtained from Inequality (1) by replacing it by an equality (see Figure 2). Observe
that this line divides the plane into two half-planes. To find the half-plane deter-
mined by Inequality (1), we pick a point lying in one of the half-planes. For sim-
plicity, we pick the origin, (0, 0). This test point satisfies Inequality (1), since

300 ⫺ 1
4

 102 ⫺ 1

8

 102 ⱖ 0

This shows that the lower half-plane (the half-plane containing the test point) is the
half-plane described by Inequality (1). Note that the line itself is included in the
graph of the inequality, since equality is also allowed in Inequality (1). 

Similarly, we can show that Inequality (2) defines the lower half-plane deter-

mined by the equation

240 ⫺ 1
8

 x ⫺ 3
8

 y ⫽ 0

obtained from replacing Inequality (2) by an equation. Once again, the line itself is
included in the graph.

Finally, Inequalities (3) and (4) together define the first quadrant with the pos-
itive x- and y-axis. Therefore, the region D is obtained by taking the intersection of
the two half-planes in the first quadrant. 

The domain D of the function R is sketched in Figure 2.

Explore & Discuss
Suppose the total profit of a two-product company is given by P(x, y), where x denotes the
number of units of the first product produced and sold and y denotes the number of units of
the second product produced and sold. Fix x ⫽ a, where a is a positive number such that 
(a, y) is in the domain of P. Describe and give an economic interpretation of the function
f(y) ⫽ P(a, y). Next, fix y ⫽ b, where b is a positive number such that (x, b) is in the
domain of P. Describe and give an economic interpretation of the function t(x) ⫽ P(x, b).

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 4 Home Mortgage Payments The monthly payment
that amortizes a loan of A dollars in t years when the interest rate is r per 

year compounded monthly is given by

P ⫽ f 1A, r, t2 ⫽

Ar

1231 ⫺ 11 ⫹ r

122 ⫺12t4

Find the monthly payment for a home mortgage of $270,000 to be amortized over
30 years when the interest rate is 6% per year, compounded monthly.

Solution Letting A ⫽ 270,000, r ⫽ 0.06, and t ⫽ 30, we find the required
monthly payment to be

 P ⫽ f 1270,000, 0.06, 302 ⫽

270,00010.062
1231 ⫺ 11 ⫹ 0.06

12 2 ⫺3604

 ⬇ 1618.79

or approximately $1618.79.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

z

O

2

2

⫺2

⫺2

2

⫺2

x

FIGURE 3
The three-dimensional Cartesian coordi-
nate system

12.1 FUNCTIONS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

849

Graphs of Functions of Two Variables
To graph a function of two variables, we need a three-dimensional coordinate system.
This is readily constructed by adding a third axis to the plane Cartesian coordinate sys-
tem in such a way that the three resulting axes are mutually perpendicular and inter-
sect at O. Observe that, by construction, the zeros of the three number scales coincide
at the origin of the three-dimensional Cartesian coordinate system (Figure 3).

A point in three-dimensional space can now be represented uniquely in this coor-
dinate system by an ordered triple of numbers (x, y, z), and, conversely, every ordered
triple of real numbers (x, y, z) represents a point in three-dimensional space (Figure 4a).
For example, the points A(2, 3, 4), B(1, ⫺2, ⫺2), C(2, 4, 0), and D(0, 0, 4) are shown
in Figure 4b.

y

z

z

D(0, 0, 4)

A(2, 3, 4)

P(x, y, z)

(x, y)

y

x

x

y

C(2, 4, 0)

(a) A point in three-dimensional space

FIGURE 4

B(1, ⫺2, ⫺2)
(b) Some sample points in three-
dimensional space

Now, if f(x, y) is a function of two variables x and y, the domain of f is a subset
of the xy-plane. If we denote f(x, y) by z, then the totality of all points (x, y, z), that is,
(x, y, f(x, y)), makes up the graph of the function f and is, except for certain degener-
ate cases, a surface in three-dimensional space (Figure 5).

z

(x, y, z)

z ⫽ f(x, y)

0

y

x

(x, y)

FIGURE 5
The graph of a function in three-
dimensional space

In interpreting the graph of a function f(x, y), one often thinks of the value z ⫽
f(x, y) of the function at the point (x, y) as the “height” of the point (x, y, z) on the
graph of f. If f(x, y) ⬎ 0, then the point (x, y, z) is f(x, y) units above the xy-plane; if
f(x, y) ⬍ 0, then the point (x, y, z) is 兩 f(x, y)兩 units below the xy-plane.

In general, it is quite difficult to draw the graph of a function of two variables.
But techniques have been developed that enable us to generate such graphs with a
minimum of effort, using a computer. Figure 6 shows the computer-generated graphs
of some functions of two variables.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

850

CHAPTER 12 CALCULUS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

z

z

y

x

(a) f(x, y) ⫽ x3 ⫺ 3y2x

x

y

(b) f(x, y) ⫽

cos1x2 ⫹ 2y22

1 ⫹ x2 ⫹ 2y2

z

z

FIGURE 6
Four computer-generated 
graphs of functions of 
two variables

x

(c) f(x, y) ⫽

x2y2e⫺x2⫺y2

x

(d) f(x, y) ⫽ ln(x2 ⫹ 2y2 ⫹ 1)

y

y

Level Curves
We can visualize the graph of a function of two variables by using level curves. To
define the level curve of a function  of two variables, let 
and consider the
( , a constant), as shown in Figure 7a. If we project this
trace of 
k
trace onto the 
, called a level
curve of  (Figure 7b).

z ⫽ f1x, y2
f1x, y2 ⫽ k

in the plane 

z ⫽ k

xy

-plane, we obtain a curve  with equation 

C

f

f

f

z ⫽ f(x, y)

z ⫽ k

y

f(x, y) ⫽ k

C

z

0

x

y

f(x, y) ⫽ k

C

0

(a) The level curve C with equation f (x, y) ⫽ k
is the projection of the trace of f in the 
plane z ⫽ k onto the xy-plane.

(b) The level curve C

x

FIGURE 7

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

12.1 FUNCTIONS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

851

Level Curves
The level curves of a function f of two variables are the curves with equations

f1x, y2 ⫽ k, where k is a constant in the range of f.

f

f1x, y2 ⫽ k

z ⫽ f1x, y2

Notice that the level curve with equation 

is the set of all points in
having the
the domain of  corresponding to the points on the surface 
.  By  drawing  the  level  curves  corresponding  to  several
same  height  or  depth 
k
, we obtain a contour map. The map enables us to visualize
admissible values of 
k
the surface represented by the graph of 
: We simply lift or depress the
level curve to see the “cross sections” of the surface. Figure 8a shows a hill, and
Figure 8b shows a contour map associated with that hill.

z ⫽ f 1x, y2

z

y

800
600
400
200
0

FIGURE 8

x

(a) A hill

600

400

200

0

y

0

(b) A contour map of the hill

x

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 5 Sketch a contour map for the function f(x, y) ⫽ x 2 ⫹ y 2.
Solution The level curves are the graphs of the equation x 2 ⫹ y 2 ⫽ k for nonnega-
tive numbers k. Taking k ⫽ 0, 1, 4, 9, and 16, for example, we obtain

k ⫽ 0:
k ⫽ 1:
k ⫽ 4:
k ⫽ 9:
k ⫽ 16:

x 2 ⫹ y 2 ⫽ 0
x 2 ⫹ y 2 ⫽ 1
x 2 ⫹ y 2 ⫽ 4 ⫽ 22
x 2 ⫹ y 2 ⫽ 9 ⫽ 32
x 2 ⫹ y 2 ⫽ 16 ⫽ 42

The five level curves are concentric circles with center at the origin and radius 
given by r ⫽ 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively (Figure 9a). A sketch of the graph of 
f(x, y) ⫽ x 2 ⫹ y 2 is included for your reference in Figure 9b.

y

z

z ⫽ x2 ⫹ y2

k ⫽ 0
  k ⫽ 1
    k ⫽ 4
      k ⫽ 9
        k ⫽ 16

x

0

y

x

FIGURE 9

(a) Contour map for f(x, y) ⫽ x2 ⫹ y2

(b) The graph of f(x, y) ⫽ x2 ⫹ y2

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

852

CHAPTER 12 CALCULUS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

k = – 2
k = –1
k = 0

EXAMPLE 6 Sketch the level curves for the function f(x, y) ⫽ 2x 2 ⫺ y correspond-
ing to z ⫽ ⫺2, ⫺1, 0, 1, and 2.

Solution The level curves are the graphs of the equation 2x 2 ⫺ y ⫽ k or y ⫽ 2x 2 ⫺ k
for k ⫽ ⫺2, ⫺1, 0, 1, and 2. The required level curves are shown in Figure 10.

y

4

k = 2

k = 1

2

x

– 2

– 2

FIGURE 10
Level curves for f(x, y) ⫽ 2x2 ⫺ y

Level curves of functions of two variables are found in many practical applica-
tions. For example, if f(x, y) denotes the temperature at a location within the conti-
nental United States with longitude x and latitude y at a certain point in time, then the
temperature at the point (x, y) is given by the “height” of the surface, represented by
z ⫽ f(x, y). In this situation, the level curve f(x, y) ⫽ k is a curve superimposed on a
map of the United States, connecting points having the same temperature at a given
time (Figure 11). These level curves are called isotherms.

Similarly, if f(x, y) gives the barometric pressure at the location (x, y), then the
level curves of the function f are called isobars, lines connecting points having the
same barometric pressure at a given time.

As a final example, suppose P(x, y, z) is a function of three variables x, y, and z that
gives the profit realized when x, y, and z units of three products, A, B, and C, respectively,
are produced and sold. Then, the equation P(x, y, z) ⫽ k, where k is a constant, represents
a surface in three-dimensional space called a level surface of P. In this situation, the level
surface represented by P(x, y, z) ⫽ k represents the product mix that results in a profit of
exactly k dollars. Such a level surface is called an isoprofit surface.

50

40

30

60

70

80

30

40

50

60
70

80

FIGURE 11
Isotherms: curves connecting points that
have the same temperature

80

70

80

12.1 Self-Check Exercises
2 ⫺ 3xy ⫹ 1x ⫹ y

1. Let 

.  Compute  f11,  32 and

f1x, y2 ⫽ x 

f1⫺1, 1). Is the point 1⫺1, 02 in the domain of f ?

2. Find the domain of 

f1x, y2 ⫽ 1

x

⫹ 1

x ⫺ y

⫺ e 

x⫹y

.

3. Odyssey Travel Agency has a monthly advertising budget
of $20,000. Odyssey’s management estimates that if they
spend x dollars on newspaper advertising and y dollars on

12.1 Concept Questions

television advertising, then the monthly revenue will be

f1x, y2 ⫽ 30x 1/4y 3/4

dollars.  What  will  be  the  monthly  revenue  if  Odyssey
spends $5000/month on newspaper ads and $15,000/month
on  television  ads?  If  Odyssey  spends  $4000/month  on
newspaper ads and $16,000/month on television ads?

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 12.1 can be found on 
page 856.

1. What is a function of two variables? Give an example of a
function of two variables and state its rule of definition and
domain.

2. If f is a function of two variables and (a, b) is in the domain

of f and c ⫽ a and d ⫽ b, what can you say about the rela-
tionship between f (a, b) and f (c, d)?

3. Define (a) the graph of f (x, y) and (b) a level curve of f.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

2

1

1

2
2

1
1

5. Let 

1

2

1
1

1
1

2

1

2

1

1
1
1

2
2
2

12.1 Exercises
1. Let  f1x,  y2 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3y ⫺ 4.  Compute  f 0,  0 ,  f 1,  0 , 
2
1
1
2
f 0, 1 , f 1, 2 , and f 2, ⫺1 .
2. Let t1x, y2 ⫽ 2x 2 ⫺ y 2. Compute t 1, 2 , t 2, 1 , t 1, 1 ,
2
t ⫺1, 1 , and t 2, ⫺1 .
1
2
3. Let f1x, y2 ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 2xy ⫺ x ⫹ 3. Compute f 1, 2 , f 2, 1 ,
2
2
1
f ⫺1, 2 , and f 2, ⫺1 .
4. Let h1x, y2 ⫽ 1x ⫹ y2>(x ⫺ y2. Compute h 0, 1 , h ⫺1, 1 , 
2
1
2
2
h 2, 1 , and h p, ⫺p .
t1s, t2 ⫽ 3s1t ⫹ t1s ⫹ 2
. Compute t 1, 42, t 4, 1 , 
2
t 0, 4 , and t 4, 9 .
2
1
2
6. Let  f1x,  y2 ⫽ xyex 2⫹y 2.  Compute  f 0,  0 ,  f 0,  1 ,  f 1,  1 ,
2
7. Let h1s, t2 ⫽ s ln t ⫺ t ln s. Compute h 1, e , h e, 1 , and 
1
8. Let f1u, √2 ⫽ 1u2 ⫹ √ 2 eu√ 2. Compute f 0, 1 , f ⫺1, ⫺1 , 
2
1
1
9. Let t1r,  s,  t2 ⫽ res/t.  Compute t 1,  1,  1 , t 1,  0,  1 ,  and 
t ⫺1, ⫺1, ⫺1 .
1
2
10. Let t1u, √, w2 ⫽ 1ue√w ⫹ √euw ⫹ weu√ > u2 ⫹ √2 ⫹ w2 .
2
Compute t 1, 2, 3 and t 3, 2, 1 .
2

1
1
2
and f ⫺1, ⫺1 .

f a, b , and f b, a .

2
1
1

1
2
2

2
1
1

2
2
1

2

2

2
1

2

1
1

2

2

h e, e .

1

1

1

2

1

12.1 FUNCTIONS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

853

In Exercises 27 and 28, match the graph of the surface with one
of the contour maps labeled (a) and (b).
(a)

(b)

y

y

x

27. f1x, y2 ⫽ x ⫹ y2

z

28. f1x, y2 ⫽ e 1⫺2x2⫺4y2

z

y

x

x

x

y

29. Can two level curves of a function f of two variables x and

In Exercises 11–18, find the domain of the function.

11. f1x, y2 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3y
h1u, √2 ⫽ u√
u ⫹ √
t1r, s2 ⫽ 1rs

13.

15.

17. h1x, y2 ⫽ ln(x ⫹ y ⫹ 5) 18.

12. t1x, y, z2 ⫽ x 2 ⫹ y 2 ⫹ z2

2

14.

2 ⫹ t 

f1s, t2 ⫽ 2s 
16. f1x, y2 ⫽ e⫺xy
h1u, √2 ⫽ 24 ⫺ u 

2 ⫺ √ 

2

y intersect? Explain.

30. A level set of f is the set 
k is in the range of f. Let

, where

S ⫽ 51x, y2 0 f 1x, y2 ⫽ k6
if x 2 ⫹ y2 ⬍ 1
if x 2 ⫹ y2 ⱖ 1

f 1x, y2 ⫽ e 0

x 2 ⫹ y2 ⫺ 1

Sketch the level set of f for k ⫽ 0 and 3.

31. The volume of a cylindrical tank of radius r and height h is

given by

V ⫽ f1r, h2 ⫽ pr 2h

Find the volume of a cylindrical tank of radius 1.5 ft and
height 4 ft.

32. IQS The IQ (intelligence quotient) of a person whose men-
tal age is m years and whose chronological age is c years is
defined as

f 1m, c2 ⫽ 100m

c

What is the IQ of a 9-year-old child who has a mental age
of 13.5 years?

33. BODY MASS INDEX The body mass index (BMI) is used to
identify, evaluate, and treat overweight and obese adults.
The BMI value for an adult of weight w (in kilograms) and
height h (in meters) is defined to be

M ⫽ f 1w, h2 ⫽ w

2
h 

In Exercises 19–24, sketch the level curves of the function corre-
sponding to each value of z.

19. f1x, y2 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3y; z ⫽ ⫺2, ⫺1, 0, 1, 2
20. f1x, y2 ⫽ y 2 ⫺ x 2; z ⫽ ⫺2, ⫺1, 0, 1, 2
21. f1x, y2 ⫽ 2x 2 ⫹ y; z ⫽ ⫺2, ⫺1, 0, 1, 2
22. f1x, y2 ⫽ xy; z ⫽ ⫺4, ⫺2, 2, 4

f1x, y2 ⫽ 216 ⫺ x 

23.

24. f1x, y2 ⫽ e x ⫺ y; z ⫽ ⫺2, ⫺1, 0, 1, 2

2 ⫺ y 

2; z ⫽ 0, 1, 2, 3, 4

25. Find an equation of the level curve of f(x, y) ⫽

that contains the point (3, 4).

2x 2 ⫹ y 2

26. Find an equation of the level surface of f(x, y, z) ⫽ 2x2 ⫹

3y2 ⫺ z that contains the point (⫺1, 2, ⫺3).

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

854

CHAPTER 12 CALCULUS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

According to federal guidelines, an adult is overweight if
he or she has a BMI value greater than 25 but less than 30
and is “obese” if the value is greater than or equal to 30.
a. What is the BMI of an adult who weighs in at 80 kg and

stands 1.8 m tall?

b. What  is  the  maximum  weight  for  an  adult  of  height 

1.8 m, who is not classified as overweight or obese?

34. POISEUILLE’S LAW Poiseuille’s Law states that the resistance
R of blood flowing in a blood vessel of length l and radius
r is given by

R ⫽ f 1l, r2 ⫽ kl

4

r 

where  k is  a  constant  that  depends  on  the  viscosity  of
blood. What is the resistance, in terms of k, of blood flow-
ing through an arteriole 4 cm long and of radius 0.1 cm?

35. REVENUE FUNCTIONS Country Workshop manufactures both
finished  and  unfinished  furniture  for  the  home.  The  esti-
mated quantities demanded each week of its rolltop desks in
the finished and unfinished versions are x and y units when
the corresponding unit prices are

p ⫽ 200 ⫺ 1
5
q ⫽ 160 ⫺ 1
10

 x ⫺ 1
10
 x ⫺ 1
4

 y

 y

dollars, respectively.
a. What is the weekly total revenue function R(x, y)?
b. Find the domain of the function R.

36. For the total revenue function R(x, y) of Exercise 35, com-

pute R(100, 60) and R(60, 100). Interpret your results.

37. REVENUE FUNCTIONS Weston Publishing publishes a deluxe
edition and a standard edition of its English language dic-
tionary. Weston’s management estimates that the number
of deluxe editions demanded is x copies/day and the num-
ber of standard editions demanded is y copies/day when the
unit prices are

p ⫽ 20 ⫺ 0.005x ⫺ 0.001y
q ⫽ 15 ⫺ 0.001x ⫺ 0.003y

dollars, respectively.
a. Find the daily total revenue function R(x, y).
b. Find the domain of the function R.

38. For the total revenue function R(x, y) of Exercise 37, com-

pute R(300, 200) and R(200, 300). Interpret your results.

39. VOLUME OF A GAS The volume of a certain mass of gas is

related to its pressure and temperature by the formula

V ⫽ 30.9T
P

where the volume V is measured in liters, the temperature
T is  measured  in  kelvins  (obtained  by  adding  273  to  the
Celsius  temperature),  and  the  pressure  P is  measured  in
millimeters of mercury pressure.

a. Find the domain of the function V.
b. Calculate the volume of the gas at standard temperature
and pressure—that is, when T ⫽ 273 K and P ⫽ 760 mm
of mercury.

40. SURFACE AREA OF A HUMAN BODY An empirical formula by
E. F. Dubois relates the surface area S of a human body (in
square meters) to its weight W (in kilograms) and its height
H (in centimeters). The formula, given by

S ⫽ 0.007184W 0.425H 0.725

is used by physiologists in metabolism studies.
a. Find the domain of the function S.
b. What is the surface area of a human body that weighs 

70 kg and has a height of 178 cm?

41. PRODUCTION FUNCTION Suppose  the  output  of  a  certain

country is given by

f1x, y2 ⫽ 100x 3/5y 2/5

billion  dollars  if  x billion  dollars  are  spent  on  labor  and 
y billion dollars are spent on capital. Find the output if the
country  spent  $32  billion  on  labor  and  $243  billion  on 
capital.

42. PRODUCTION FUNCTION Economists have found that the out-
put of a finished product, f(x, y), is sometimes described by
the function

f1x, y2 ⫽ ax by1⫺b

where  x stands  for  the  amount  of  money  expended  on
labor, y stands for the amount expended on capital, and a
and b are positive constants with 0 ⬍ b ⬍ 1.
a. If p is a positive number, show that f(px, py) ⫽ pf(x, y).
b. Use  the  result  of  part  (a)  to  show  that  if  the  amount  of
money expended for labor and capital are both increased
by r%, then the output is also increased by r%.

43. ARSON FOR PROFIT A  study  of  arson  for  profit  was  con-
ducted by a team of paid civilian experts and police detec-
tives appointed by the mayor of a large city. It was found
that the number of suspicious fires in that city in 2012 was
very closely related to the concentration of tenants in the
city’s public housing and to the level of reinvestment in the
area in conventional mortgages by the ten largest banks. In
fact, the number of fires was closely approximated by the
formula

N 1x, y2 ⫽

10011000 ⫹ 0.03x 
15 ⫹ 0.2y2 2

2y2 1/2

(0 ⱕ x ⱕ 150; 5 ⱕ y ⱕ 35)

where x denotes the number of persons/census tract and y
denotes the level of reinvestment in the area in cents/dollar
deposited. Using this formula, estimate the total number of
suspicious  fires  in  the  districts  of  the  city  where  the  con-
centration  of  public  housing  tenants  was  100/census  tract
and the level of reinvestment was 20 cents/dollar deposited.

44. CONTINUOUSLY COMPOUNDED INTEREST If  a  principal  of  P
dollars  is  deposited  in  an  account  earning  interest  at  the

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

rate of r/year compounded continuously, then the accumu-
lated amount at the end of t years is given by

A ⫽ f1P, r, t2 ⫽ Pert

dollars. Find the accumulated amount at the end of 3 years
if  a  sum  of  $10,000  is  deposited  in  an  account  earning
interest at the rate of 6%/year.

45. HOME MORTGAGES The monthly payment that amortizes a
loan of A dollars in t years when the interest rate is r per
year, compounded monthly, is given by

P ⫽ f 1A, r, t2 ⫽

Ar

1231 ⫺ 11 ⫹ r

122 ⫺12t4

a. What is the monthly payment for a home mortgage of
$300,000 that will be amortized over 30 years with an
interest rate of 6%/year? An interest rate of 8%/year?

b. Find  the  monthly  payment  for  a  home  mortgage  of
$300,000 that will be amortized over 20 years with an
interest rate of 8%/year.

46. HOME MORTGAGES Suppose a home buyer secures a bank
loan  of  A dollars  to  purchase  a  house.  If  the  interest 
rate charged is r/year compounded monthly and the loan
is to be amortized in t years, then the principal repayment
at the end of i months is given by

 B ⫽ f 1A, r, t, i2
11 ⫹ r
 ⫽ Ac
11 ⫹ r

122 i ⫺ 1
122 12t ⫺ 1d     10 ⱕ i ⱕ 12t2

Suppose  the  Blakelys  borrow  a  sum  of  $280,000  from  a
bank to help finance the purchase of a house and the bank
charges interest at a rate of 6%/year. If the Blakelys agree
to repay the loan in equal installments over 30 years, how
much  will  they  owe  the  bank  after  the  60th  payment  (5
years)? The 240th payment (20 years)?

47. FORCE GENERATED BY A CENTRIFUGE A  centrifuge  is  a
machine  designed  for  the  specific  purpose  of  subjecting
materials  to  a  sustained  centrifugal  force.  The  actual
amount of centrifugal force, F, expressed in dynes (1 gram
of force ⫽ 980 dynes) is given by
F ⫽ f 1M, S, R2 ⫽

2MR

p2S 

900

where S is in revolutions per minute (rpm), M is in grams,
and R is in centimeters. Show that an object revolving at the
rate of 600 rpm in a circle with radius of 10 cm generates a
centrifugal force that is approximately 40 times gravity.

48. WILSON LOT-SIZE FORMULA The Wilson lot-size formula in
economics states that the optimal quantity Q of goods for a
store to order is given by

Q ⫽ f 1C, N, h2 ⫽ B 2 CN

h

where C is the cost of placing an order, N is the number of
items the store sells per week, and h is the weekly holding

12.1 FUNCTIONS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

855

cost for each item. Find the most economical quantity of
10-speed bicycles to order if it costs the store $20 to place
an  order,  $5  to  hold  a  bicycle  for  a  week,  and  the  store
expects to sell 40 bicycles a week.

49. IDEAL GAS LAW According to the ideal gas law, the volume
V of an ideal gas is related to its pressure P and tempera-
ture T by the formula

V ⫽ kT
P

where k is a positive constant. Describe the level curves of
V and give a physical interpretation of your result.

50. INTERNATIONAL AMERICA’S CUP CLASS Drafted by an interna-
tional  committee  in  1989,  the  rules  for  the  new  Interna-
tional America’s Cup Class (IACC) include a formula that
governs the basic yacht dimensions. The formula

f1L, S, D2 ⱕ 42

where

f1L, S, D2 ⫽ L ⫹ 1.25S1/2 ⫺ 9.80D1/3

0.388

balances the rated length L (in meters), the rated sail area S
(in  square  meters),  and  the  displacement  D (in  cubic
meters). All changes in the basic dimensions are trade-offs.
For example, if you want to pick up speed by increasing the
sail area, you must pay for it by decreasing the length or
increasing the displacement, both of which slow down the
boat. Show that Yacht A of rated length 20.95 m, rated sail
area 277.3 m2, and displacement 17.56 m3 and the longer
and heavier Yacht B with L ⫽ 21.87, S ⫽ 311.78, and D ⫽
22.48 both satisfy the formula.

In Exercises 51–56, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, explain why, or
give an example to show why it is false.
51. If h is a function of x and y, then there are functions f and

t of one variable such that

h1x, y2 ⫽ f1x2 ⫹ t(y2

52. If f is a function of x and y and a is a real number, then

f1ax, ay2 ⫽ af1x, y2

53. The domain of f(x, y) ⫽ 1>(x 2 ⫺ y 2) is {(x, y)兩y ⫽ x}.
54. Every point on the level curve f(x, y) ⫽ c corresponds to a
point on the graph of f that is c units above the xy-plane if 
c ⬎ 0 and 兩 c兩 units below the xy-plane if c ⬍ 0.

55. f is a function of x and y if and only if for any two points

P11x1,  y12 and  P21x2,  y22 in  the  domain  of  f,  f1x1,  y12 ⫽
f1x2, y22 implies that P11x1, y12 ⫽ P21x2, y22 .

56. The level curves of a function f of two variables, f(x, y) ⫽ k,

exist for all values of k.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

856

CHAPTER 12 CALCULUS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

1.

12.1 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises
f11, 32 ⫽ 12 ⫺ 3112132 ⫹ 11 ⫹ 3 ⫽ ⫺6
f1⫺1, 12 ⫽ 1⫺12 2 ⫺ 31⫺12112 ⫹ 1⫺1 ⫹ 1 ⫽ 4
1x ⫹ y

The point (⫺1, 0) is not in the domain of f because the term
is not defined when x ⫽ ⫺1 and y ⫽ 0. In fact, the
domain of f consists of all real values of x and y that satisfy
the inequality x ⫹ y ⱖ 0, the shaded half-plane shown in
the accompanying figure.

y

10

5

–10

– 5

5

10

x

– 5

–10

12.2 Partial Derivatives

2. Since division by zero is not permitted, we see that x ⫽ 0
and x ⫺ y ⫽ 0. Therefore, the domain of f is the set of all
points in the xy-plane except for the y-axis (x ⫽ 0) and the
straight line x ⫽ y.

3. If  Odyssey  spends  $5000/month  on  newspaper  ads  (x ⫽
5000) and $15,000/month on television ads (y ⫽ 15,000),
then its monthly revenue will be given by 

f15000, 15,0002 ⫽ 30150002 1/4115,0002 3/4

⬇ 341,926.06
or  approximately  $341,926.  If 
the  agency  spends
$4000/month  on  newspaper  ads  and  $16,000/month  on
television ads, then its monthly revenue will be given by

f14000, 16,0002 ⫽ 30140002 1/4116,0002 3/4

⬇ 339,411.26

or approximately $339,411.

y

(a, b)

FIGURE 12
We can approach a point in the plane
from infinitely many directions.

z

T

C

(a, b, f(a, b))

0
y ⫽ b

z ⫽ f(x, y)

y

x

Partial Derivatives
For a function f(x) of one variable x, there is no ambiguity when we speak about the rate
of change of f(x) with respect to x, since x must be constrained to move along the x-axis.
The situation becomes more complicated, however, when we study the rate of change of
a function of two or more variables. For example, the domain D of a function of two
variables f(x, y) is a subset of the plane, so if (a, b) is any point in the domain of f, there
are infinitely many directions from which one can approach the point (a, b) (Figure 12).
We may therefore ask for the rate of change of f at (a, b) along any of these directions.
However, we will not deal with this general problem. Instead, we will restrict our-
selves to studying the rate of change of the function f(x, y) at a point (a, b) in each of
two preferred directions—namely, the direction parallel to the x-axis and the direction
parallel to the y-axis. Let y ⫽ b, where b is a constant, so that f(x, b) is a function of
the one variable x. Since the equation z ⫽ f(x, y) is the equation of a surface, the equa-
tion z ⫽ f(x, b) is the equation of the curve C on the surface formed by the intersec-
tion of the surface and the plane y ⫽ b (Figure 13).

Because f(x, b) is a function of one variable x, we may compute the derivative of
f with respect to x at x ⫽ a. This derivative, obtained by keeping the variable y fixed
at b and differentiating the resulting function f(x, b) with respect to x, is called the first
partial derivative of f with respect to x at (a, b), written

x

(a, b)

FIGURE 13
The curve C is formed by the intersection
of the plane y ⫽ b with the surface 
z ⫽ f(x, y).

Thus,

0z
0x

 1a, b2  or 

0f
0x

 1a, b2  or  fx 1a, b2

0z
0x

 1a, b2 ⫽

0f
0x

 1a, b2 ⫽ fx 1a, b2 ⫽ lim 

hS0

 

f 1a ⫹ h, b2 ⫺ f 1a, b2

h

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

12.2 PARTIAL DERIVATIVES

857

PORTFOLIO

Karthik Ramachandran

TITLE Principal Software Engineer
INSTITUTION Iron Mountain

Iron Mountain is the world’s

largest provider of document man-
agement solutions. Although the
company has its roots in paper

document storage, it has become the leader in digital docu-
ment solutions as well. In addition to providing online
backup and digital archiving services, Iron Mountain offers
various digital document management tools.

As a principal software engineer at Iron Mountain, I help

to develop eDiscovery products and services designed
specifically for lawyers. When lawyers search for information
relating to a corporate lawsuit, for example, it can be very
difficult for them to find the information they need if they
are searching through terabytes of unorganized data. To
address this challenge, Iron Mountain has developed a vari-
ety of techniques to organize data automatically based on
the statistical analysis of words and phrases contained
within documents and email messages.

Although we use statistical analysis to initiate the organi-
zation of data, we apply calculus to refine our products and

services. When word sets are very large, it is important to
focus on particular words and phrases that convey vital
information. At Iron Mountain, we use optimization tech-
niques involving partial derivatives to detect the most infor-
mative words and phrases within documents and allot them
an apportioned weight in the organization process.

The methods outlined above allow us to organize data

into folders—or clusters—of related documents. Ultimately,
this enables us to improve upon traditional search capabili-
ties by grouping search results into concept folders, mini-
mizing cost and reducing the time needed for lawyers to
find relevant documents.

With the aid of mathematical

analysis, we provide robust eDiscov-
ery products and services that radi-
cally improve legal workflow. As the
amount of electronically stored infor-
mation grows, our application of sta-
tistics and calculus allows us to
remain at the forefront of our field.

Greg Neustaetter/Iron Mountain; (inset) © istockphoto.com/Jacob Wackerhausen

provided that the limit exists. The first partial derivative of f with respect to x at (a, b)
measures both the slope of the tangent line T to the curve C and the rate of change of
the function f in the x-direction when x ⫽ a and y ⫽ b. We also write

0f
0x ` 1a, b2

⫽ fx1a, b2

Similarly, we define the first partial derivative of f with respect to y at (a, b),

written

0z
0y

 1a, b2  or 

0f
0y

 1a, b2  or  fy 1a, b2

as the derivative obtained by keeping the variable x fixed at a and differentiating the
resulting function f(a, y) with respect to y. That is,

0z
 
0y

 1a, b2 ⫽

0f
0y

 ⫽ lim
 
kS0

 1a, b2 ⫽ fy 1a, b2
f 1a, b ⫹ k2 ⫺ f 1a, b2

k

if the limit exists. The first partial derivative of f with respect to y at (a, b) measures
both the slope of the tangent line T to the curve C, obtained by holding x constant 
(Figure 14), and the rate of change of the function f in the y-direction when x ⫽ a and
y ⫽ b. We write

0f
0y ` 1a, b2

⫽ fy 1a, b2

z

x ⫽ a

0

(a, b, f(a, b))

C

z ⫽ f(x, y)

T

y

(a, b)

x
FIGURE 14
The first partial derivative of f with
respect to y at (a, b) measures the slope 
of the tangent line T to the curve C with 
x held constant.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

858

CHAPTER 12 CALCULUS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

Before looking at some examples, let’s summarize these definitions.

First Partial Derivatives of f(x, y)
Suppose f(x, y) is a function of the two variables x and y. Then the first partial
derivative of f with respect to x at the point (x, y) is

0f
0x

⫽ lim
 
hS0

f 1x ⫹ h, y2 ⫺ f 1x, y2

provided that the limit exists. The first partial derivative of f with respect to y at
the point (x, y) is

0f
0y

⫽ lim
 
kS0

provided that the limit exists.

f 1x, y ⫹ k2 ⫺ f 1x, y2

h

k

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 1 Find the partial derivatives 

and 

of the function

What is the rate of change of the function f in the x-direction at the point (1, 2)?
What is the rate of change of the function f in the y-direction at the point (1, 2)?

Solution To compute ᎏ , think of the variable y as a constant and differentiate

the resulting function of x with respect to x. Let’s write

0f
0x

where the variable y to be treated as a constant is shown in color. Then,

0f
0x

0f
0y

f1x, y2 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ xy 2 ⫹ y 3

f1x, y2 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ xy 2 ⫹ y 3

0f
0x

⫽ 2x ⫺ y 
2

f1x, y2 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ xy 2 ⫹ y 3

0f
0y

⫽ ⫺2xy ⫹ 3y 

2

0f
0y

To compute ᎏ , think of the variable x as being fixed—that is, as a constant—and 

differentiate the resulting function of y with respect to y. In this case,

so

The rate of change of the function f in the x-direction at the point (1, 2) is given by

fx 11, 22 ⫽

0f
0x

 ` 11, 22

⫽ 2112 ⫺ 2 

2 ⫽ ⫺2

That is, f decreases 2 units for each unit increase in the x-direction, y being kept
constant ( y ⫽ 2). The rate of change of the function f in the y-direction at the point 
(1, 2) is given by

fy 11, 22 ⫽

0f
0y

 ` 11, 22

⫽ ⫺2112122 ⫹ 3122 2 ⫽ 8

That is, f increases 8 units for each unit increase in the y-direction, x being kept con-
stant (x ⫽ 1).

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12.2 PARTIAL DERIVATIVES

859

Explore & Discuss
Refer to the Explore & Discuss on page 848. Suppose management has decided that the
projected sales of the first product is a units. Describe how you might help management
decide how many units of the second product the company should produce and sell in order
to maximize the company’s total profit. Justify your method to management. Suppose, how-
ever, that management feels that b units of the second product should be manufactured and
sold. How would you help management decide how many units of the first product to man-
ufacture in order to maximize the company’s total profit?

EXAMPLE 2 Compute the first partial derivatives of each function.

2

b. t1s, t2 ⫽ 1s 2 ⫺ st ⫹ t 225
d. f1x, y2 ⫽ ln1x 2 ⫹ 2y 22

x 

a.

xy
f1x, y2 ⫽
2 ⫹ y 
c. h1u, √2 ⫽ eu2⫺√2
0f
0x

a. To compute 

Solution

, think of the variable y as a constant. Thus,

f 1x, y2 ⫽

xy
2 ⫹ y 
x 

2

Then using the quotient rule, we have

x 

⫽

0f
 
0x

22y ⫺ xy12x2
⫽ 1x 
2 ⫹ y 
1x 
2 ⫹ y 
22
y 1  y 
2 ⫺ x 
22 2
1x 
2 ⫹ y 

22 2

 ⫽

2y 

2y ⫹ y 
1x 

3 ⫺ 2x 
22 2

2 ⫹ y 

0f
0y

, think of the variable x

upon simplification and factorization. To compute 
as a constant. Thus,

f 1x, y2 ⫽

xy
2 ⫹ y 
x 

2

Then using the quotient rule once again, we obtain

x 

⫽

0f
 
0y

22x ⫺ xy12y2
⫽ 1x 
2 ⫹ y 
1x 
2 ⫹ y 
22
x1x 
2 ⫺ y 
22 2
1x 
2 ⫹ y 

22 2

 ⫽

2

3 ⫹ xy 
1x 

2 ⫺ 2xy 
22 2

2 ⫹ y 

, we treat the variable t as if it were a constant. Thus,

b. To compute 

0t
0s

Using the General Power Rule, we find

t1s, t2 ⫽ 1s2 ⫺ st ⫹ t 225

0t
0s

#

⫽ 51s2 ⫺ st ⫹ t 22 4 12s ⫺ t2
⫽ 512s ⫺ t21s2 ⫺ st ⫹ t 22 4

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

860

CHAPTER 12 CALCULUS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

To compute 

c. To compute 

0t
0t

0h
0u

, we treat the variable s as if it were a constant. Thus,

0t
 
0t

2 ⫺ st ⫹ t 

 t1s, t2 ⫽ 1s 
22 5
⫽ 51s 
22 4 1⫺s ⫹ 2t2
2 ⫺ st ⫹ t 
 ⫽ 512t ⫺ s21s 
22 4
2 ⫺ st ⫹ t 

, think of the variable √ as a constant. Thus,

Using the Chain Rule for Exponential Functions, we have

Next, we treat the variable u as if it were a constant,

h1u, √2 ⫽ eu2⫺√2
2 # 2u ⫽ 2ue 

2⫺√ 
⫽ e 
u 

2⫺√ 
u 

2

0h
 
0u

h1u, √2 ⫽ eu2⫺√2
2 # 1⫺2√2 ⫽ ⫺2√eu 

2⫺√ 
u 

2⫺√ 

2

0h
0√ ⫽ e 
 

, think of the variable y as a constant. Thus,

f1x, y2 ⫽ ln1x 2 ⫹ 2y 22

and we obtain

d. To compute 

0f
0x

so the Chain Rule for Logarithmic Functions gives

0f
0x

⫽

2x

x 

2 ⫹ 2y 

2

Next, treating the variable x as if it were a constant, we find

 f 1x, y2 ⫽ ln 1x 

22

2 ⫹ 2y 
4y

0f
 
0y

⫽

x 

2 ⫹ 2y 

2

Explore & Discuss
1. Let (a, b) be a point in the domain of f(x, y). Put t(x) ⫽ f(x, b) and suppose that t is dif-
ferentiable at x ⫽ a. Explain why you can find fx(a, b) by computing t⬘(a). How would
you go about calculating fy(a, b) using a similar technique? Give a geometric interpreta-
tion of these processes.

2. Let f (x, y) ⫽ x 2y 3 ⫺ 3x 2y ⫹ 2. Use the method of Problem 1 to find fx(1, 2) and fy(1, 2).

To compute the partial derivative of a function of several variables with respect
to one variable—say, x—we think of the other variables as if they were constants and
differentiate the resulting function with respect to x.

EXAMPLE 3 Compute the first partial derivatives of the function

w ⫽ f1x, y, z2 ⫽ xyz ⫺ xeyz ⫹ x ln y

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12.2 PARTIAL DERIVATIVES

861

Solution Here we have a function of three variables, x, y, and z, and we are
required to compute

0f
0x

, 

0f
0y

,    

0f
0z

To compute fx, we think of the other two variables, y and z, as fixed, and we differ-
entiate the resulting function of x with respect to x, thereby obtaining

fx ⫽ yz ⫺ eyz ⫹ ln y

To compute fy, we think of the other two variables, x and z, as constants, and we 
differentiate the resulting function of y with respect to y. We then obtain

fy ⫽ xz ⫺ xz e 

yz ⫹ x
y

Finally, to compute fz, we treat the variables x and y as constants and differentiate
the function f with respect to z, obtaining

fz ⫽ xy ⫺ xyeyz

Exploring with

TECHNOLOGY
Refer to the Explore & Discuss on page 860. Let
1xy
11 ⫹ xy 
22 3/2

f 1x, y2 ⫽

e 

1. Compute t(x) ⫽ f(x, 1), and use a graphing utility to plot the graph of t in
2. Use  the  differentiation  operation  of  your  graphing  utility  to  find t⬘(1)  and

the viewing window [0, 2] ⫻ [0, 2].

hence fx(1, 1).

3. Compute h(y) ⫽ f(1, y), and use a graphing utility to plot the graph of h in

the viewing window [0, 2] ⫻ [0, 2].

4. Use  the  differentiation  operation  of  your  graphing  utility  to  find  h⬘(1)  and

hence fy(1, 1).

The Cobb–Douglas Production Function
For an economic interpretation of the first partial derivatives of a function of two vari-
ables, let’s turn our attention to the function

f1x, y2 ⫽ ax by1⫺b

(5)
where  a and  b are  positive  constants  with  0  ⬍ b ⬍ 1.  This  function  is  called  the
Cobb–Douglas  production  function. Here,  x stands  for  the  amount  of  money
expended for labor, y stands for the cost of capital equipment (buildings, machinery,
and other tools of production), and the function f measures the output of the finished
product (in suitable units) and is called, accordingly, the production function.

The partial derivative fx is called the marginal productivity of labor. It measures
the rate of change of production with respect to the amount of money expended for
labor, with the level of capital expenditure held constant. Similarly, the partial deriv-
ative fy, called the marginal productivity of capital, measures the rate of change of
production  with  respect  to  the  amount  expended  on  capital,  with  the  level  of  labor
expenditure held fixed.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

862

CHAPTER 12 CALCULUS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 4 Marginal Productivity A certain country’s production 
in the early years following World War II is described by the function

f1x, y2 ⫽ 30x 2/3y 1/3

units, when x units of labor and y units of capital were used.
a. Compute fx and fy.
b. What is the marginal productivity of labor and the marginal productivity of
capital when the amounts expended on labor and capital are 125 units and 
27 units, respectively?

c. Should the government have encouraged capital investment rather than
increasing expenditure on labor to increase the country’s productivity?

Solution

 fx ⫽ 30 # 2

a.

⫺1/3y 

 x 
3
2/3 # 1
3

1/3 ⫽ 20a y
⫺2/3 ⫽ 10a x

xb 1/3
yb 2/3

 fy ⫽ 30x 

 y 

b. The required marginal productivity of labor is given by

fx 1125, 272 ⫽ 20a 27

125b 1/3

⫽ 20a 3
5b

or 12 units per unit increase in labor expenditure (capital expenditure is held
constant at 27 units). The required marginal productivity of capital is given by

fy 1125, 272 ⫽ 10a 125

27 b 2/3

⫽ 10a 25
9 b

7
9

or 27 units per unit increase in capital expenditure (labor outlay is held con-
stant at 125 units).

c. From the results of part (b), we see that a unit increase in capital expenditure
resulted in a much faster increase in productivity than a unit increase in labor
expenditure would have. Therefore, the government should have encouraged
increased spending on capital rather than on labor during the early years of
reconstruction.

Substitute and Complementary Commodities
For another application of the first partial derivatives of a function of two variables in
the field of economics, let’s consider the relative demands of two commodities. We
say that the two commodities are substitute (competitive) commodities if a decrease
in the demand for one results in an increase in the demand for the other. Examples of
substitute commodities are coffee and tea. Conversely, two commodities are referred
to as complementary commodities if a decrease in the demand for one results in a
decrease in the demand for the other as well. Examples of complementary commodi-
ties are automobiles and tires.

We now derive a criterion for determining whether two commodities A and B are
substitute  or  complementary.  Suppose  the  demand  equations  that  relate  the  quantities
demanded, x and y, to the unit prices, p and q, of the two commodities are given by

x ⫽ f1 p, q2

and

y ⫽ t1 p, q2

Let’s consider the partial derivative ⭸f>⭸p. Since f is the demand function for Com-
⭸f>⭸p ⬍ 0. Now, if the two commodities were substitute commodities, then the quan-

modity A, we see that, for fixed q, f is typically a decreasing function of p—that is,

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12.2 PARTIAL DERIVATIVES

863

tity demanded of Commodity B would increase with respect to p—that is, ⭸t>⭸p ⬎ 0.
⭸f>⭸q ⬎ 0. Thus, the two Commodities A and B are substitute commodities if

A similar argument with p fixed shows that if A and B are substitute commodities, then

Similarly, A and B are complementary commodities if

0f
0q

⬎ 0  and 

⬎ 0

0f
0q

⬍ 0  and 

⬍ 0

0f
0q

⬎ 0    and    

0f
0q

⬍ 0    and    

⬎ 0

⬍ 0

0t
0p

0t
0p

0t
0p

0t
0p

Substitute and Complementary Commodities
Two commodities A and B are substitute commodities if

Two commodities A and B are complementary commodities if

(6)

(7)

APPLIED EXAMPLE 5 Substitute and Complementary Commodities
Suppose that the daily demand for butter is given by

x ⫽ f 1  p, q2 ⫽

3q

1 ⫹ p 

2

and the daily demand for margarine is given by

y ⫽ t1  p, q2 ⫽

2p

1 ⫹ 1q

    1  p ⬎ 0, q ⬎ 02

where p and q denote the prices per pound (in dollars) of butter and margarine,
respectively, and x and y are measured in millions of pounds. Determine whether
these two commodities are substitute, complementary, or neither.

Solution We compute
0f
0q

⫽ 3

1 ⫹ p 
2

  and 

Since

0f
0q

⬎ 0  and 

0t
0p

0t
0p

⫽

2

1 ⫹ 1q

⬎ 0

for all values of p ⬎ 0 and q ⬎ 0, we conclude that butter and margarine are sub-
stitute commodities.

Second-Order Partial Derivatives
The first partial derivatives fx(x, y) and fy(x, y) of a function f(x, y) of the two vari-
ables x and y are also functions of x and y. As such, we may differentiate each of the
functions fx and fy to obtain the second-order partial derivatives of f (Figure 15).

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

864

CHAPTER 12 CALCULUS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

FIGURE 15
A schematic showing the four second-
order partial derivatives of f

Thus, differentiating the function fx with respect to x leads to the second partial derivative

fxx ⫽

0  
2f
0x 
2

⫽

0
0x

 1  fx2

f

∂
∂x

∂
∂y

∂f
∂x

∂f
∂y

∂
∂x

∂
∂y

∂
∂x

∂
∂y

∂
∂x

∂
∂y

∂
∂x

∂
∂y

∂x)
∂f
∂x)
∂f
∂y)
∂f
∂y)
∂f

 =

 =

 =

 =

∂2f
∂x2

∂2f
∂y∂x

∂2f
∂x∂y

∂2f
∂y2

However, differentiation of fx with respect to y leads to the second partial derivative

fxy ⫽

0  
2f
0y0x

⫽

0
0y

 1  fx2

Similarly, differentiation of the function fy with respect to x and with respect to y leads to

fyx ⫽

fyy ⫽

0  
2f
0x0y
0  
2f
0y 
2

⫽

⫽

0
 1  fy2
0x
0
 1  fy2
0y

respectively. Although it is not always true that fxy ⫽ fyx, they are equal, however, if
both fxy and fyx are continuous. We might add that this is the case in most practical
applications.

EXAMPLE 6 Find the second-order partial derivatives of the function

f1x, y2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 3x 2y ⫹ 3xy 2 ⫹ y 2

Solution The first partial derivatives of f are

2y ⫹ 3xy 

 fx ⫽

3 ⫺ 3x 

0
 1x 
0x
2 ⫺ 6xy ⫹ 3y 
 ⫽ 3x 
0
 1x 
0y
2 ⫹ 6xy ⫹ 2y
 ⫽ ⫺3x 

3 ⫺ 3x 

2

 fy ⫽

2y ⫹ 3xy 

2 ⫹ y 

2 ⫹ y 

22

22

Therefore,

 13x 

22
2 ⫺ 6xy ⫹ 3y 

0
0x

0
0x

0
0y

0
0x

 1 fx2 ⫽

0
0y

 13x 

 1 fx2 ⫽

 fxx ⫽
 ⫽ 6x ⫺ 6y ⫽ 6 1x ⫺ y2
 fxy ⫽
 ⫽ ⫺6x ⫹ 6y ⫽ 6 1  y ⫺ x2
 fyx ⫽
 ⫽ ⫺6x ⫹ 6y ⫽ 6 1  y ⫺ x2

 1 fy2 ⫽

 1⫺3x 

0
0x

22
2 ⫺ 6xy ⫹ 3y 

2 ⫹ 6xy ⫹ 2y2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.
Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

12.2 PARTIAL DERIVATIVES

865

0
0y

 1⫺3x 

2 ⫹ 6xy ⫹ 2y2

 fyy ⫽

0
0y

 1 fy2 ⫽
 ⫽ 6x ⫹ 2

Note that fxy ⫽ fyx everywhere.

EXAMPLE 7 Find the second-order partial derivatives of the function

f1x, y2 ⫽ exy2

Solution We have

 fx ⫽

xy 

2
xy 

 1e 

0
0x
 ⫽ y 
2e 
0
0y

 1e 
 ⫽ 2xye 

xy 

2
xy 

22

22

 fy ⫽

so the required second-order partial derivatives of f are

 fxx ⫽

 fxy ⫽

0
0x
 ⫽ y 
4e 
0
0y
 ⫽ 2ye 
 ⫽ 2ye 

0
0x
 ⫽ 2ye 
 ⫽ 2ye 

0
0y
 ⫽ 2xe 
 ⫽ 2xe 

 fyx ⫽

 fyy ⫽

0
0x

 1  y 

xy 

2e 

22

 1  fx2 ⫽

2

xy 

xy 

xy 

xy 

2

xy 

xy 

3e 

2e 

22

22

0
 1  fx2 ⫽
 1  y 
0y
2 ⫹ 2xy 
211 ⫹ xy 
22
0
 12xye 
 1  fy2 ⫽
0x
2 ⫹ 2xy 
22
211 ⫹ xy 
0
 12xye 
 1  fy2 ⫽
22
0y
2 ⫹ 12xy212xy2e 
22
211 ⫹ 2xy 

3e 

2

xy 

xy 

xy 

xy 

xy 

xy 

2
xy 

Note that fxy ⫽ fyx everywhere.

12.2 Self-Check Exercises

1. Compute the first partial derivatives of f(x, y) ⫽ x 3 ⫺

2xy 2 ⫹ y 2 ⫺ 8.

2. Find the first partial derivatives of f(x, y) ⫽ x ln y ⫹

ye x ⫺ x 2 at (0, 1) and interpret your results.

3. Find the second-order partial derivatives of the function of

Self-Check Exercise 1.

4. A certain country’s production is described by the function

f1x, y2 ⫽ 60x 1/3y 2/3

when x units of labor and y units of capital are used.

a. What are the marginal productivity of labor and the mar-
ginal productivity of capital when the amounts expended
on  labor  and  capital  are  125  units  and  8  units,  respec-
tively?

b. Should  the  government  encourage  capital  investment
rather than increased expenditure on labor at this time
to increase the country’s productivity?

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 12.2 can be found on 
page 869.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

866

CHAPTER 12 CALCULUS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

12.2 Concept Questions

1. a. What is the partial derivative of f (x, y) with respect to x

at (a, b)?

b. Give a geometric interpretation of fx(a, b) and a practi-

cal interpretation of fx(a, b).

b. Suppose x ⫽ f ( p, q) and y ⫽ t( p, q) are demand func-
tions for two commodities A and B, respectively. Give
conditions for determining whether A and B are substi-
tute or complementary commodities.

2. a. What  are  substitute  commodities  and  complementary

3. List all second-order partial derivatives of f.

commodities? Give an example of each.

12.2 Exercises

1. Let f(x, y) ⫽ x2 ⫹ 2y2.

a. Find f x(2, 1) and f y(2, 1).
b. Interpret the numbers in part (a) as slopes.
c. Interpret the numbers in part (a) as rates of change.

2. Let f(x, y) ⫽ 9 ⫺ x2 ⫹ xy ⫺ 2y2.

a. Find f x(1, 2) and f y(1, 2).
b. Interpret the numbers in part (a) as slopes.
c. Interpret the numbers in part (a) as rates of change.

In Exercises 3–24, find the first partial derivatives of the function.

3. f1x, y2 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3y ⫹ 5
5. t1x, y2 ⫽ 3x 2 ⫹ 2y ⫹ 1

4. f1x, y2 ⫽ 2xy
6. f1x, y2 ⫽ 1 ⫹ x 2 ⫹ y 2

2y
2
x 

2

2

9.

8.

7.

x 
x 

10.

1 ⫹ y

2 ⫺ y 
2 ⫹ y 

f1x, y2 ⫽
t1u, √2 ⫽ u ⫺ √
u ⫹ √

f1x, y2 ⫽ x
f1x, y2 ⫽
11. f1s, t2 ⫽ 1s2 ⫺ st ⫹ t 22 3 12. t1s, t2 ⫽ s2t ⫹ st⫺3
f1x, y2 ⫽ x21 ⫹ y 
13. f1x, y2 ⫽ 12x 2 ⫹ y 22 2/3
15. f1x, y2 ⫽ e xy⫹1
16. f1x, y2 ⫽ 1ex ⫹ ey2 5
17. f1x, y2 ⫽ x ln y ⫹ y ln x 18.
19. t1u, √2 ⫽ eu ln √
21. f1x, y, z2 ⫽ xyz ⫹ xy 2 ⫹ yz 2 ⫹ zx 2

f 1x, y2 ⫽ x 2e y 2
f1x, y2 ⫽ e 

x ⫹ y

14.

20.

xy

2

2u√ w

2 ⫹ √ 
u 

22.

t1u, √, w2 ⫽
23. h1r, s, t2 ⫽ erst

2 ⫹ w 

2

24. f1x, y, z2 ⫽ xey/z

In  Exercises  25–34,  evaluate  the  first  partial  derivatives  of  the
function at the given point.

25. f1x, y2 ⫽ x 2y ⫹ xy 2; 12, 12
26. f1x, y2 ⫽ x 2 ⫹ xy ⫹ y 2 ⫹ 2x ⫺ y; 1⫺1, 22
28. t1x, y2 ⫽ 2x 

f1x, y2 ⫽ x1y ⫹ y 

2; 12, 12
2; 13, 42

2 ⫹ y 

27.

29.

30.

y

f1x, y2 ⫽ x
f1x, y2 ⫽

; 12, 12
x ⫹ y
x ⫺ y

; 11, ⫺22

31. f1x, y2 ⫽ exy; 11, 12
32. f1x, y2 ⫽ ex ln y; 10, e2
33. f1x, y, z2 ⫽ x 2yz 3; 11, 0, 22
34. f1x, y, z2 ⫽ x 2y 2 ⫹ z 2; 11, 1, 22

In  Exercises  35–42,  find  the  second-order  partial  derivatives  of
the  function.  In  each  case,  show  that  the  mixed  partial  deriva-
tives fxy and fyx are equal.

35. f1x, y2 ⫽ x 2y ⫹ xy 3
36. f1x, y2 ⫽ x 3 ⫹ x 2y ⫹ x ⫹ 4
37. f1x, y2 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 2xy ⫹ 2y2 ⫹ x ⫺ 2y
38. f1x, y2 ⫽ x 3 ⫹ x 2y 2 ⫹ y 3 ⫹ x ⫹ y

2

39.

40.

2 ⫹ y 

f1x, y2 ⫽ 2x 
f1x, y2 ⫽ x1y ⫹ y1x
41. f1x, y2 ⫽ e⫺x/y
42. f1x, y2 ⫽ ln11 ⫹ x 2y 22

43. PRODUCTIVITY OF A COUNTRY The  productivity  of  a  South

American country is given by the function

f1x, y2 ⫽ 20x 3/4y 1/4

when x units of labor and y units of capital are used.
a. What are the marginal productivity of labor and the mar-
ginal productivity of capital when the amounts expended
on labor and capital are 256 units and 16 units, respec-
tively?

b. Should  the  government  encourage  capital  investment
rather than increased expenditure on labor at this time to
increase the country’s productivity?

44. PRODUCTIVITY OF A COUNTRY The productivity of a country

in Western Europe is given by the function

f1x, y2 ⫽ 40x 4/5y 1/5

when x units of labor and y units of capital are used.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

a. What are the marginal productivity of labor and the mar-
ginal productivity of capital when the amounts expended
on labor and capital are 32 units and 243 units, respec-
tively?

b. Should  the  government  encourage  capital  investment
rather than increased expenditure on labor at this time to
increase the country’s productivity?

45. LAND PRICES The rectangular region R shown in the follow-
ing figure represents a city’s financial district. The price of
land within the district is approximated by the function

2b 2
p 1x, y2 ⫽ 200 ⫺ 10 a x ⫺ 1

⫺ 151 y ⫺ 12 2

where p(x, y) is the price of land at the point (x, y) in dol-
lars  per  square  foot  and  x and  y are  measured  in  miles.
Compute

0p
0x

 10, 12  and 

0p
0y

 10, 12

and interpret your results.

y 

(miles)

2

1

R

1 

2

x (miles)

46. COMPLEMENTARY AND SUBSTITUTE COMMODITIES In  a  survey
conducted by a video magazine, it was determined that the
demand equation for DVD players is given by

x ⫽ f1p, q2 ⫽ 10,000 ⫺ 10p ⫹ 0.2q2

and the demand equation for Blu-ray players is given by

y ⫽ t1p, q2 ⫽ 5000 ⫹ 0.8p 2 ⫺ 20q

where  p and  q denote  the  unit  prices  (in  dollars)  for  the
DVD and Blu-ray players, respectively, and x and y denote
the  number  of  DVD  and  Blu-ray  players  demanded  per
week.  Determine  whether  these  two  products  are  substi-
tute, complementary, or neither.

47. COMPLEMENTARY AND SUBSTITUTE COMMODITIES In a survey,
it was determined that the demand equation for DVD play-
ers is given by

x ⫽ f1p, q2 ⫽ 10,000 ⫺ 10p ⫺ e0.5q

12.2 PARTIAL DERIVATIVES

867

and the demand equation for blank DVD discs is given by

y ⫽ t1p, q2 ⫽ 50,000 ⫺ 4000q ⫺ 10p

where p and q denote the unit prices, respectively, and x and
y denote  the  number  of  DVD  players  and  the  number  of
blank DVD discs demanded each week. Determine whether
these two products are substitute, complementary, or neither.

48. COMPLEMENTARY AND SUBSTITUTE COMMODITIES Refer 

to
Exercise  35,  Exercises  12.1.  Show  that  the  finished  and
unfinished home furniture manufactured by Country Work-
shop are substitute commodities.
Hint: Solve the system of equations for x and y in terms of p and q.

49. REVENUE FUNCTIONS The total weekly revenue (in dollars)
of Country Workshop associated with manufacturing and
selling their rolltop desks is given by the function

R1x, y2 ⫽ ⫺0.2x 2 ⫺ 0.25y 2 ⫺ 0.2xy ⫹ 200x ⫹ 160y

where x denotes the number of finished units and y denotes
the  number  of  unfinished  units  manufactured  and  sold 

each week. Compute ⭸R>⭸x and ⭸R>⭸y when x ⫽ 300 and
y ⫽ 250. Interpret your results.

50. PROFIT FUNCTIONS The monthly profit (in dollars) of Bond
and  Barker  Department  Store  depends  on  the  level  of
inventory x (in thousands of dollars) and the floor space y
(in  thousands  of  square  feet)  available  for  display  of  the
merchandise, as given by the equation

P1x, y2 ⫽ ⫺0.02x 2 ⫺ 15y 2 ⫹ xy
⫹ 39x ⫹ 25y ⫺ 20,000

Compute ⭸P>⭸x and ⭸P>⭸y when x ⫽ 4000 and y ⫽ 150.
Interpret your results. Repeat with x ⫽ 5000 and y ⫽ 150.

51. WIND CHILL FACTOR A  formula  used  by  meteorologists 
to  calculate  the  wind  chill  temperature  (the  temperature
that you feel in still air that is the same as the actual tem-
perature when the presence of wind is taken into consider-
ation) is

T ⫽ f1t, s2 ⫽ 35.74 ⫹ 0.6215t ⫺ 35.75s0.16 ⫹ 0.4275ts0.16
1s ⱖ 12

where t is the actual air temperature in degrees Fahrenheit
and s is the wind speed in mph.
a. What is the wind chill temperature when the actual air

temperature is 32°F and the wind speed is 20 mph?

b. If the temperature is 32°F, by how much approximately
will the wind chill temperature change if the wind speed
increases from 20 mph to 21 mph?

52. WIND CHILL FACTOR The wind chill temperature is the tem-
perature that you would feel in still air that is the same as
the actual temperature when the presence of wind is taken
into consideration. The following table gives the wind chill
temperature T ⫽ f(t, s) in degrees Fahrenheit in terms of
the actual air temperature t in degrees Fahrenheit and the
wind speed s in mph.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

868

CHAPTER 12 CALCULUS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

Wind speed (mph)

s

t
30
32
34
36
38
40

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

21.2
23.7
26.2
28.7
31.2
33.6

19.0
21.6
24.2
26.7
29.3
31.8

17.4
20.0
22.6
25.2
27.9
30.5

16.0
18.7
21.4
24.0
26.7
29.4

14.9
17.6
20.3
23.0
25.7
28.5

13.9
16.6
19.4
22.2
24.9
27.7

13.0
15.8
18.6
21.4
24.2
26.9

r
i
a
 
l
a
u
t
c
A

)
F
°
(
 
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
t

T

a. Estimate the rate of change of the wind chill tempera-
ture  with respect to the actual air temperature when
the wind speed is constant at 25 mph and the actual air
temperature is 34°F.
Hint: Show that it is given by

 134, 252 ⬇ f136, 252 ⫺ f134, 252

2

0T
0t

T

b. Estimate the rate of change of the wind chill tempera-
ture  with respect to the wind speed when the actual
air temperature is constant at 34°F and the wind speed
is 25 mph.

Source: National Weather Service.

53. ARSON STUDY A study of arson for profit conducted for a

certain city found that the number of suspicious fires is
approximated by the formula

N1x, y2 ⫽

12021000 ⫹ 0.03x 2y
10 ⱕ x ⱕ 150

15 ⫹ 0.2y2 2

, 

5 ⱕ y ⱕ 352

x

y

where  denotes the number of persons per census tract
and  denotes the level of reinvestment in conventional
mortgages by the city’s ten largest banks measured in
cents per dollars deposited. Compute 
when 

, and interpret your results.

0N>0x

0N>0y

and 

x ⫽ 100

and 

y ⫽ 20

54. ENGINE EFFICIENCY The efficiency of an internal combus-

tion engine is given by

E ⫽ a 1 ⫺

√
Vb 0.4

where V and √ are the respective maximum and minimum
volumes of air in each cylinder.
a. Show that ⭸E>⭸V ⬎ 0 and interpret your result.
b. Show that ⭸E>⭸√ ⬍ 0 and interpret your result.

55. VOLUME OF A GAS The volume V (in liters) of a certain

mass of gas is related to its pressure P (in millimeters of
mercury) and its temperature T (in kelvins) by the law

V ⫽ 30.9T
P

Compute ⭸V>⭸T and ⭸V>⭸P when T ⫽ 300 and P ⫽ 800.

Interpret your results.

56. SURFACE AREA OF A HUMAN BODY The formula

S ⫽ 0.007184W 0.425H 0.725

gives the surface area S of a human body (in square meters)
in terms of its weight W (in kilograms) and its height H (in

centimeters). Compute ⭸S>⭸W and ⭸S>⭸H when W ⫽ 70 kg
and H ⫽ 180 cm. Interpret your results.

57. According to the ideal gas law, the volume V (in liters) of
an ideal gas is related to its pressure P (in pascals) and tem-
perature T (in kelvins) by the formula

V ⫽ kT
P

where k is a constant. Show that

0V
0T

# 0T
0P

# 0P
0V

⫽ ⫺1

58. KINETIC ENERGY OF A BODY The kinetic energy K of a body

of mass m and velocity √ is given by

K ⫽ 1
2

 m√ 2

⫽ K

.

Show that 

0K
0m

# 02K
0√ 2

59. COBB–DOUGLAS PRODUCTION FUNCTION Show 

P ⫽ kx ay1⫺a

that 
the
,  where

Cobb–Douglas  production  function 
0 ⬍ a ⬍ 1

, satisfies the equation

0P
0x

x 

⫹ y 

0P
0y

⫽ P

This equation is called Euler’s equation.

In Exercises 60–63, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
60. If  fx(x,  y)  is  defined  at  (a,  b),  then  fy(x,  y)  must  also  be

defined at (a, b).

61. If fx(a, b) ⬍ 0, then f is decreasing with respect to x near 

(a, b).

62. If fxy(x, y) and fyx(x, y) are both continuous for all values of

x and y, then fxy ⫽ fyx for all values of x and y.

63. If both fxy and fyx are defined at (a, b), then fxx and fyy must

be defined at (a, b).

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.
Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

12.2 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

0f
0x
0f
0y

2

2 ⫺ 2y 

⫽ 3x 
⫽ ⫺2x 12y2 ⫹ 2y

1.

 fx ⫽

 fy ⫽
 ⫽ 2y 11 ⫺ 2x2
fx ⫽ ln  y ⫹ ye 

2.

x ⫺ 2x; fy ⫽ x
y

⫹ e 

x

In particular,

 fx 10, 12 ⫽ ln  1 ⫹ 1e0 ⫺ 2102 ⫽ 1
 fy 10, 12 ⫽ 0

0 ⫽ 1

⫹ e 

1

The results tell us that at the point (0, 1), f(x, y) increases 
1 unit for each unit increase in the x-direction, y being kept
constant; f(x, y) also increases 1 unit for each unit increase
in the y-direction, x being kept constant.

3. From the results of Self-Check Exercise 1,

fx ⫽ 3x 2 ⫺ 2y 2

Therefore,

 fxx ⫽

 fxy ⫽

0
0x
0
0y

 13x 
 13x 

2 ⫺ 2y 

2 ⫺ 2y 

22 ⫽ 6x
22 ⫽ ⫺4y

Also, from the results of Self-Check Exercise 1,

fy ⫽ 2y11 ⫺ 2x2

12.2 PARTIAL DERIVATIVES

869

Thus,

 fyx ⫽

 fyy ⫽

0
0x
0
0y

 32y11 ⫺ 2x24 ⫽ ⫺4y
 32y11 ⫺ 2x24 ⫽ 211 ⫺ 2x2

4. a. The  marginal  productivity  of  labor  when  the  amounts
expended on labor and capital are x and y units, respec-
tively, is given by

fx 1x, y2 ⫽ 60a 1

3

 x⫺2/3b y 

2/3 ⫽ 20a y

xb 2/3

In  particular,  the  required  marginal  productivity  of
labor is given by

fx 1125, 82 ⫽ 20a 8

125b 2/3

⫽ 20a 4

25b ⫽ 3.2

or  3.2  units/unit  increase  in  labor  expenditure,  capital
expenditure  being  held  constant  at  8  units.  Next,  we 
compute

fy 1x, y2 ⫽ 60x 

1/3a 2

3

 y⫺1/3b ⫽ 40a x

yb 1/3

and  deduce  that  the  required  marginal  productivity  of
capital is given by

fy 1125, 82 ⫽ 40a 125

8 b 1/3

⫽ 40a 5

2b ⫽ 100

or 100 units/unit increase in capital expenditure, labor
expenditure being held constant at 125 units.

b. The results of part (a) tell us that the government should
encourage increased spending on capital rather than on
labor.

USING

TECHNOLOGY

Finding Partial Derivatives at a Given Point
Suppose f(x, y) is a function of two variables and we wish to compute

Recall that in computing ⭸f>⭸x, we think of y as being fixed. But in this situation, we
are evaluating ⭸f>⭸x at (a, b). Therefore, we set y equal to b. Doing this leads to the
function t of one variable, x, defined by

It follows from the definition of the partial derivative that

fx 1a, b2 ⫽

0f
0x ` 1a, b2

t1x2 ⫽ f1x, b2
fx1a, b2 ⫽ t⬘1a2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(continued)

870

CHAPTER 12 CALCULUS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

Thus, the value of the partial derivative ⭸f>⭸x at a given point (a, b) can be found by

evaluating the derivative of a function of one variable. In particular, the latter can be
found  by  using  the  numerical  derivative  operation  of  a  graphing  utility.  We  find 
fy(a, b) in a similar manner.

EXAMPLE 1 Let f(x, y) ⫽ (1 ⫹ xy 2)3/2ex2 y. Find (a) fx(1, 2) and (b) fy(1, 2).

Solution
a. Define t(x) ⫽ f(x, 2) ⫽ (1 ⫹ 4x)3/2e2x2. Using the numerical derivative operation

to find t⬘(1), we obtain

fx11, 22 ⫽ t⬘112 ⬇ 429.583225

b. Define h( y) ⫽ f(1, y) ⫽ (1 ⫹ y 2)3/2e y. Using the numerical derivative operation

to find h⬘(2), we obtain

fy11, 22 ⫽ h⬘122 ⬇ 181.7468642

TECHNOLOGY EXERCISES

For each of the following functions, compute

0f
0x

  and 

0f
0y

at the given point:
1.

f1x, y2 ⫽ 1x12 ⫹ xy 
22 1/3; 11, 22
f1x, y2 ⫽ 1xy11 ⫹ 2xy2 2/3; 11, 42
3. f1x, y2 ⫽

x ⫹ y 
2
1 ⫹ x 
2y

; 11, 22

2.

4.

f1x, y2 ⫽
5. f1x, y2 ⫽
6. f1x, y2 ⫽

2

xy 

11x ⫹ 1y2 2 
ln 11x ⫹ y 
22

 ; 14, 12
1x ⫹ y2 1/3; 11, 12
; 14, 12

e⫺xy 2

2 ⫹ y 

x 

2

12.3 Maxima and Minima of Functions of Several Variables

Maxima and Minima
In  Chapter  10,  we  saw  that  the  solution  of  a  problem  often  reduces  to  finding  the
extreme values of a function of one variable. In practice, however, situations also arise
in which a problem is solved by finding the absolute maximum or absolute minimum
value of a function of two or more variables.

For  example,  suppose  Scandi  Company  manufactures  computer  desks  in  both
assembled and unassembled versions. Its profit P is therefore a function of the num-
ber of assembled units, x, and the number of unassembled units, y, manufactured and
sold per week; that is, P ⫽ f(x, y). A question of paramount importance to the manu-
facturer is: How many assembled and unassembled desks should the company manu-
facture per week to maximize its weekly profit? Mathematically, the problem is solved
by finding the values of x and y that will make f(x, y) a maximum.

In this section, we will focus our attention on finding the extrema of a function of
two variables. As in the case of a function of one variable, we distinguish between the
relative (or local) extrema and the absolute extrema of a function of two variables.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12.3 MAXIMA AND MINIMA OF FUNCTIONS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

871

Relative Extrema of a Function of Two Variables
Let f be a function defined on a region R containing the point (a, b). Then f has
a relative maximum at (a, b) if f (x, y) ⱕ f(a, b) for all points (x, y) that are suf-
ficiently close to (a, b). The number f(a, b) is called a relative maximum value.
Similarly, f has a relative minimum at (a, b), with relative minimum value
f(a, b), if f(x, y) ⱖ f(a, b) for all points (x, y) that are sufficiently close to (a, b).

Loosely speaking, f has a relative maximum at (a, b) if the point (a, b, f(a, b)) is
the highest point on the graph of f when compared with all nearby points. A similar
interpretation holds for a relative minimum.

If the inequalities in this last definition hold for all points (x, y) in the domain of f,
then f has an absolute maximum (or absolute minimum) at (a, b) with absolute max-
imum value (or absolute minimum value) f(a, b). Figure 16 shows the graph of a
function with relative maxima at (a, b) and (e, t) and a relative minimum at (c, d). The
absolute maximum of f occurs at (e, t), and the absolute minimum of f occurs at (h, i).
Observe that in the case of a function of one variable, a relative extremum (rela-

tive maximum or relative minimum) may or may not be an absolute extremum.

Absolute maximum
(also a relative
maximum)

z

Relative
maximum

Absolute
minimum

(h, i)

x

Relative
minimum

(a, b)

(e, t)

(c, d)

D

y

Now let’s turn our attention to the study of relative extrema of a function. Sup-
pose  that  a  differentiable  function  f(x,  y)  of  two  variables  has  a  relative  maximum 
(relative minimum) at a point (a, b) in the domain of f. From Figure 17, it is clear that
at the point (a, b) the slopes of the “tangent lines” to the surface in any direction must
be zero. In particular, this implies that both

must be zero.

z

(a, b, f(a, b))

 (a, b) ⫽ 0

∂f
∂x

0f
0x

∂f
∂y

 1a, b2  and 

0f
0y

 1a, b2

 (a, b) ⫽ 0

x

0

(a, b)

 (a, b) ⫽ 0

∂f
∂x

x

y

z

0

∂f
∂y

 (a, b) ⫽ 0

y
(a, b, f(a, b))

(a, b)

(a) f has a relative maximum at (a, b).

(b) f has a relative minimum at (a, b).

FIGURE 16
The relative and absolute extrema of the
function f over the domain D

FIGURE 17

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

872

CHAPTER 12 CALCULUS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

Lest we be tempted to jump to the conclusion that a differentiable function f sat-

isfying both the conditions
0f
0x

 1a, b2 ⫽ 0  and 

0f
0y

 1a, b2 ⫽ 0

at a point (a, b) must have a relative extremum at the point (a, b), let’s examine the
graph of the function f depicted in Figure 18. Here, both 

0f
0x

 1a, b2 ⫽ 0  and 

0f
0y

 1a, b2 ⫽ 0

but f has neither a relative maximum nor a relative minimum at the point (a, b) because
some nearby points are higher and some are lower than the point (a, b, f(a, b)). The
point (a, b, f(a, b)) is called a saddle point.

z

(a, b, f(a, b))

FIGURE 18
The point (a, b, f(a, b)) is called a saddle
point.

x

∂f
––∂x

(a, b) ⫽ 0

y

∂f
––∂y

(a, b) ⫽ 0

Finally, an examination of the graph of the function f depicted in Figure 19 should

convince you that f has a relative maximum at the point (a, b). But both  ⭸f>⭸x and
⭸f>⭸y fail to be defined at (a, b).

(a, b, f(a, b))

z

0

x

(a, b)

y

FIGURE 19
f has a relative maximum at (a, b), but
neither ⭸f>⭸x nor ⭸f>⭸y exists at (a, b).

To summarize, a function f of two variables can have a relative extremum only at

a point (a, b) in its domain where ⭸f>⭸x and ⭸f>⭸y both exist and are equal to zero at

(a, b) or at least one of the partial derivatives does not exist. As in the case of one vari-
able, we refer to a point in the domain of f that may give rise to a relative extremum
as a critical point. The precise definition follows.

Critical Point of f
A critical point of f is a point (a, b) in the domain of f such that both

0f
0x

 1a, b2 ⫽ 0  and 

0f
0y

 1a, b2 ⫽ 0

or at least one of the partial derivatives does not exist.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

12.3 MAXIMA AND MINIMA OF FUNCTIONS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

873

To determine the nature of a critical point of a function f(x, y) of two variables,
we use the second partial derivatives of f. The resulting test, which helps us to clas-
sify these points, is called the second derivative test and is incorporated in the fol-
lowing procedure for finding and classifying the relative extrema of f.

Determining Relative Extrema
1. Find the critical points of f(x, y) by solving the system of simultaneous equa-

tions

e
2. The second derivative test: Let

fx 1x, y2 ⫽ 0
fy 1x, y2 ⫽ 0

D1x, y2 ⫽ fxx 1x, y2 fyy1x, y2 ⫺ f 2

xy1x, y2

Then
a. D(a, b) ⬎ 0 and fxx(a, b) ⬍ 0 implies that f(x, y) has a relative maximum

at the point (a, b).

at the point (a, b).

b. D(a, b) ⬎ 0 and fxx(a, b) ⬎ 0 implies that f(x, y) has a relative minimum

c. D(a, b) ⬍ 0 implies that f(x, y) has neither a relative maximum nor a rel-
ative minimum at the point (a, b). The point (a, b, f(a, b)) is called a sad-
dle point.

d. D(a, b) ⫽ 0 implies that the test is inconclusive, so some other technique

must be used to solve the problem.

EXAMPLE 1 Find the relative extrema of the function

f1x, y2 ⫽ x 2 ⫹ y 2

Solution We have

fx1x, y2 ⫽ 2x
fy1x, y2 ⫽ 2y

2x ⫽ 0
2y ⫽ 0

To find the critical point(s) of f, we set fx 1x, y2 ⫽ 0 and fy 1x, y2 ⫽ 0 and solve the

resulting system of simultaneous equations

z

z ⫽ x2 ⫹ y2

0

y

x
FIGURE 20
The graph of f(x, y) ⫽ x2 ⫹ y 2

obtaining x ⫽ 0, y ⫽ 0, or (0, 0), as the sole critical point of f. Next, we apply the
second derivative test to determine the nature of the critical point (0, 0). We 
compute

and

fxx1x, y2 ⫽ 2

fxy1x, y2 ⫽ 0
D1x, y2 ⫽ fxx1x, y2 fyy1x, y2 ⫺ f 2

fyy1x, y2 ⫽ 2

xy1x, y2 ⫽ 122122 ⫺ 0 ⫽ 4

In particular, D(0, 0) ⫽ 4. Since D(0, 0) ⬎ 0 and fxx(0, 0) ⫽ 2 ⬎ 0, we conclude that
f (x, y) has a relative minimum at the point (0, 0). The relative minimum value, 0,
also happens to be the absolute minimum of f. The graph of the function f, shown in
Figure 20, confirms these results.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

874

CHAPTER 12 CALCULUS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

EXAMPLE 2 Find the relative extrema of the function

f1x, y2 ⫽ 3x 2 ⫺ 4xy ⫹ 4y 2 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 8y ⫹ 4

Solution We have

fx1x, y2 ⫽ 6x ⫺ 4y ⫺ 4
fy1x, y2 ⫽ ⫺4x ⫹ 8y ⫹ 8

To find the critical points of f, we set fx 1x, y2 ⫽ 0 and fy 1x, y2 ⫽ 0 and solve the

resulting system of simultaneous equations

⫺6x ⫺ 4y ⫽ ⫺4
⫺4x ⫹ 8y ⫽ ⫺8

Multiplying the first equation by 2 and the second equation by 3, we obtain the
equivalent system

12x ⫺ 8y ⫽ ⫺08
⫺12x ⫹ 24y ⫽ ⫺24

Explore & Discuss
Suppose f(x, y) has a relative
extremum (relative maximum or
relative minimum) at a point 
(a, b). Let t(x) ⫽ f(x, b) and 
h(y) ⫽ f(a, y). Assuming that f
and t are differentiable, explain
why t⬘(a) ⫽ 0 and h⬘(b) ⫽ 0.
Explain why these results are
equivalent to the conditions 
fx(a, b) ⫽ 0 and fy(a, b) ⫽ 0.

Adding the two equations gives 16y ⫽ ⫺16, or y ⫽ ⫺1. We substitute this value for
y into either equation in the system to get x ⫽ 0. Thus, the only critical point of f is
the point (0, ⫺1). Next, we apply the second derivative test to determine whether
the point (0, ⫺1) gives rise to a relative extremum of f. We compute
fyy1x, y2 ⫽ 8

fxy1x, y2 ⫽ ⫺4

fxx1x, y2 ⫽ 6

and

D1x, y2 ⫽ fxx1x, y2 fyy1x, y2 ⫺ f 2

xy1x, y2 ⫽ 162182 ⫺ 1⫺422 ⫽ 32

Since D(0, ⫺1) ⫽ 32 ⬎ 0 and fxx(0, ⫺1) ⫽ 6 ⬎ 0, we conclude that f(x, y) has a
relative minimum at the point (0, ⫺1). The value of f(x, y) at the point (0, ⫺1) is
given by

f10, ⫺12 ⫽ 31022 ⫺ 41021⫺12 ⫹ 41⫺12 2 ⫺ 4102 ⫹ 81⫺12 ⫹ 4 ⫽ 0

VIDEO

EXAMPLE 3 Find the relative extrema of the function

f1x, y2 ⫽ 4y 3 ⫹ x 2 ⫺ 12y 2 ⫺ 36y ⫹ 2

Solution To find the critical points of f, we set fx ⫽ 0 and fy ⫽ 0 simultaneously,
obtaining

fx1x, y2 ⫽ 2x ⫽ 0
fy1x, y2 ⫽ 12y 2 ⫺ 24y ⫺ 36 ⫽ 0

The first equation implies that x ⫽ 0. The second equation implies that

y 2 ⫺ 2y ⫺ 3 ⫽ 0
1y ⫹ 121y ⫺ 32 ⫽ 0

—that is, y ⫽ ⫺1 or 3. Therefore, there are two critical points of the function f : 
(0, ⫺1) and (0, 3).

Next, we apply the second derivative test to determine the nature of each of the

two critical points. We compute

fxx1x, y2 ⫽ 2

fxy1x, y2 ⫽ 0

fyy1x, y2 ⫽ 24y ⫺ 24 ⫽ 241y ⫺ 12

Therefore,

For the point (0, ⫺1),

D1x, y2 ⫽ fxx1x, y2 fyy1x, y2 ⫺ f 2

xy1x, y2 ⫽ 481y ⫺ 12

D10, ⫺12 ⫽ 481⫺1 ⫺ 12 ⫽ ⫺96 ⬍ 0

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Explore & Discuss
1. Refer to the second deriva-
tive test. Can the condition 
fxx(a, b) ⬍ 0 in part 2a be
replaced by the condition
fyy(a, b) ⬍ 0? Explain your
answer. How about the 
condition fxx(a, b) ⬎ 0 in 
part 2b?

2. Let f(x, y) ⫽ x 4 ⫹ y 4.

a. Show that (0, 0) is a criti-

cal point of f and that 
D(0, 0) ⫽ 0.

b. Explain why f has a rela-
tive (in fact, an absolute)
minimum at (0, 0). Does
this contradict the second
derivative test? Explain
your answer.

12.3 MAXIMA AND MINIMA OF FUNCTIONS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

875

Since D(0, ⫺1) ⬍ 0, we conclude that the point (0, ⫺1) gives a saddle point of f.
For the point (0, 3),

D10, 32 ⫽ 4813 ⫺ 12 ⫽ 96 ⬎ 0

Since D(0, 3) ⬎ 0 and fxx(0, 3) ⬎ 0, we conclude that the function f has a relative
minimum at the point (0, 3). Furthermore, since

f10, 32 ⫽ 41323 ⫹ 1022 ⫺ 121322 ⫺ 36132 ⫹ 2

⫽ ⫺106

we see that the relative minimum value of f is ⫺106.

As in the case of a practical optimization problem involving a function of one variable,
the solution to an optimization problem involving a function of several variables calls
for finding the absolute extremum of the function. Determining the absolute extremum
of  a  function  of  several  variables  is  more  difficult  than  merely  finding  the  relative
extrema of the function. However, in many situations, the absolute extremum of a func-
tion actually coincides with the largest relative extremum of the function that occurs in
the interior of its domain. We assume that the problems considered here belong to this
category. Furthermore, the existence of the absolute extremum (solution) of a practical
problem is often deduced from the geometric or practical nature of the problem.

VIDEO

APPLIED EXAMPLE 4 Maximizing Profits The total weekly revenue (in 
dollars) that Acrosonic realizes in producing and selling its bookshelf 

loudspeaker systems is given by

R 1x, y2 ⫽ ⫺1

4

 x 

2 ⫺ 3
8

 y 

2 ⫺ 1
4

 xy ⫹ 300x ⫹ 240y

where x denotes the number of fully assembled units and y denotes the number of
kits produced and sold each week. The total weekly cost attributable to the pro-
duction of these loudspeakers is

C1x, y2 ⫽ 180x ⫹ 140y ⫹ 5000

dollars, where x and y have the same meaning as before. Determine how many
assembled units and how many kits Acrosonic should produce per week to maxi-
mize its profit.

Solution The contribution to Acrosonic’s weekly profit stemming from the pro-
duction and sale of the bookshelf loudspeaker systems is given by

 P 1x, y2 ⫽ R 1x, y2 ⫺ C 1x, y2

4

 ⫽ a ⫺1
 ⫽ ⫺1
4

 x 

 x 

2 ⫺ 3
8

2 ⫺ 3
8

 y 

2 ⫺ 1
4

 y 

2 ⫺ 1
4

 xy ⫹ 300x ⫹ 240yb ⫺ 1180x ⫹ 140y ⫹ 50002
 xy ⫹ 120x ⫹ 100y ⫺ 5000

To find the relative maximum of the profit function P(x, y), we first locate the
critical point(s) of P. Setting Px(x, y) and Py(x, y) equal to zero, we obtain

 Px ⫽ ⫺1
2
 Py ⫽ ⫺3
4

 x ⫺ 1
4
 y ⫺ 1
4

 y ⫹ 120 ⫽ 0

 x ⫹ 100 ⫽ 0

Solving the first of these equations for y yields

y ⫽ ⫺2x ⫹ 480

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

876

CHAPTER 12 CALCULUS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

which, upon substitution into the second equation, yields

 ⫺3
4

 1⫺2x ⫹ 4802 ⫺ 1

4

 x ⫹ 100 ⫽ 0

 6x ⫺ 1440 ⫺ x ⫹ 400 ⫽ 0

 x ⫽ 208

We substitute this value of x into the equation y ⫽ ⫺2x ⫹ 480 obtaining

y ⫽ 64

Therefore, the function P has the sole critical point (208, 64). To show that the
point (208, 64) is a solution to our problem, we use the second derivative test. We
compute

Pxx ⫽ ⫺1
2

    Pxy ⫽ ⫺1
4

    Pyy ⫽ ⫺3
4

So,

D 1x, y2 ⫽ a ⫺1

2b a ⫺3

4b 2
4b ⫺ a ⫺1

⫽ 3
8

⫺ 1
16

⫽ 5
16

Since D(208, 64) ⬎ 0 and Pxx(208, 64) ⬍ 0, the point (208, 64) yields a 
relative maximum of P. It can be shown that this relative maximum is also the
absolute maximum of P. We conclude that Acrosonic can maximize its weekly
profit by manufacturing 208 assembled units and 64 kits of their bookshelf loud-
speaker systems. The maximum weekly profit realizable from the production and
sale of these loudspeaker systems is given by

y (miles)

40

20
B (– 20, 10)

– 20

–20

A (30, 20)

P(x, y)

20

C(10, –10)

x (miles)

FIGURE 21
Locating a site for a television relay
station

 P 1208, 642 ⫽ ⫺1

4

 12082 2 ⫺ 3

8

 1642 2 ⫺ 1

4

 120821642

  ⫹ 120 12082 ⫹ 100 1642 ⫺ 5000
 ⫽ 10,680

or $10,680.

APPLIED EXAMPLE 5 Locating a Television Relay Station Site A television 
relay station will serve Towns A, B, and C, whose relative locations are 

shown in Figure 21. Determine a site for the location of the station if the sum of
the squares of the distances from each town to the site is minimized.

Solution Suppose the required site is located at the point P(x, y). With the aid
of the distance formula, we find that the square of the distance from Town A to
the site is

1x ⫺ 3022 ⫹ 1y ⫺ 2022

d 

2 ⫽ 1x2 ⫺ x12 2 ⫹ 1  y2 ⫺ y12 2

The respective distances from Towns B and C to the site are found in a similar
manner, so the sum of the squares of the distances from each town to the site is
given by

f1x, y2 ⫽ 1x ⫺ 3022 ⫹ 1y ⫺ 2022 ⫹ 1x ⫹ 2022
⫹ 1y ⫺ 1022 ⫹ 1x ⫺ 1022 ⫹ 1y ⫹ 1022

To find the relative minimum of f(x, y), we first find the critical point(s) of f. Using
the Chain Rule to find fx(x, y) and fy(x, y) and setting each equal to zero, we obtain

fx ⫽ 21x ⫺ 302 ⫹ 21x ⫹ 202 ⫹ 21x ⫺ 102 ⫽ 6x ⫺ 40 ⫽ 0
fy ⫽ 21y ⫺ 202 ⫹ 21y ⫺ 102 ⫹ 21y ⫹ 102 ⫽ 6y ⫺ 40 ⫽ 0

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

12.3 MAXIMA AND MINIMA OF FUNCTIONS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

877

from which we deduce that 

3 2
120
3  , 20
fxx ⫽ 6

is the sole critical point of f. Since

fxy ⫽ 0

fyy ⫽ 6

we have

120
3 2
3 , 20

Since D
relative minimum of f. Thus, the required site has coordinates 

⬎ 0, we conclude that the point 

⬎ 0 and fxx

120
3 2
3 , 20
x ⫽ 20
3

and 

yields a 
y ⫽ 20
.
3

D1x, y2 ⫽ fxx  fyy ⫺ f   

2

xy ⫽ 162162 ⫺ 0 ⫽ 36

120
3 2
3 , 20

12.3 Self-Check Exercises

1. Let f(x, y) ⫽ 2x 2 ⫹ 3y 2 ⫺ 4xy ⫹ 4x ⫺ 2y ⫹ 3.

a. Find the critical point of f.
b. Use the second derivative test to classify the nature of

the critical point.

c. Find the relative extremum of f, if it exists.

where  x (in  units  of  a  hundred)  denotes  the  number  of
mechanical thermostats manufactured each month and y (in
units of a hundred) denotes the number of electronic ther-
mostats  manufactured  each  month.  The  total  monthly  cost
incurred in producing these thermostats is

2. Robertson Controls manufactures two basic models of set-
back thermostats: a standard mechanical thermostat and a
deluxe electronic thermostat. Robertson’s monthly revenue
(in hundreds of dollars) is
2 ⫺ 1
2

R 1x, y2 ⫽ ⫺1

 xy ⫹ 20x ⫹ 60y

2 ⫺ 1
4

 y 

 x 

8

C1x, y2 ⫽ 7x ⫹ 20y ⫹ 280

hundred dollars. Find how many thermostats of each model
Robertson should manufacture each month to maximize its
profits. What is the maximum profit?

Solutions to Self-Check Exercises 12.3 can be found on 
page 880.

12.3 Concept Questions

1. Explain  the  terms  (a)  relative  maximum  of  a  function 

3. Explain how the second derivative test is used to determine

f(x, y) and (b) absolute maximum of a function f(x, y).

the relative extrema of a function of two variables. 

2. a. What is a critical point of a function f(x, y)?

b. Explain  the  role  of  a  critical  point  in  determining  the

relative extrema of a function of two variables.

12.3 Exercises

In Exercises 1–20, find the critical point(s) of the function. Then
use  the  second  derivative  test  to  classify  the  nature  of  each
point, if possible. Finally, determine the relative extrema of the
function.

1. f1x, y2 ⫽ 1 ⫺ 2x 2 ⫺ 3y 2
2. f1x, y2 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ xy ⫹ y 2 ⫹ 1
3. f1x, y2 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ y 2 ⫺ 2x ⫹ 4y ⫹ 1
4. f1x, y2 ⫽ 2x 2 ⫹ y 2 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 6y ⫹ 3
5. f1x, y2 ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 2xy ⫹ 2y 2 ⫺ 4x ⫹ 8y ⫺ 1
6. f1x, y2 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ 4xy ⫹ 2y 2 ⫹ 4x ⫹ 8y ⫺ 1
7. f1x, y2 ⫽ 2x 3 ⫹ y 2 ⫺ 9x 2 ⫺ 4y ⫹ 12x ⫺ 2
8. f1x, y2 ⫽ 2x 3 ⫹ y 2 ⫺ 6x 2 ⫺ 4y ⫹ 12x ⫺ 2

9. f1x, y2 ⫽ x3 ⫹ y2 ⫺ 2xy ⫹ 7x ⫺ 8y ⫹ 4
10. f1x, y2 ⫽ 2y 3 ⫺ 3y2 ⫺ 12y ⫹ 2x2 ⫺ 6x ⫹ 2
11. f1x, y2 ⫽ x3 ⫺ 3xy ⫹ y3 ⫺ 2
12. f1x, y2 ⫽ x3 ⫺ 2xy ⫹ y2 ⫹ 5

2
y 

14.

f1x, y2 ⫽ x

⫹ xy
16. f1x, y2 ⫽ ex 2⫺y 2
18. f1x, y2 ⫽ exy

x

13.

⫹ 2
y

f1x, y2 ⫽ xy ⫹ 4
15. f1x, y2 ⫽ x 2 ⫺ ey 2
17. f1x, y2 ⫽ ex 2⫹y 2
19. f1x, y2 ⫽ ln11 ⫹ x 2 ⫹ y 22
20. f1x, y2 ⫽ xy ⫹ ln x ⫹ 2y 2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

878

CHAPTER 12 CALCULUS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

21. MAXIMIZING PROFIT The total weekly revenue (in dollars) of
the Country Workshop realized in manufacturing and sell-
ing its rolltop desks is given by

R1x, y2 ⫽ ⫺0.2x 2 ⫺ 0.25y 2 ⫺ 0.2xy ⫹ 200x ⫹ 160y

where x denotes the number of finished units and y denotes
the number of unfinished units manufactured and sold each
week. The total weekly cost attributable to the manufacture
of these desks is given by

C1x, y2 ⫽ 100x ⫹ 70y ⫹ 4000

dollars. Determine how many finished units and how many
unfinished  units  the  company  should  manufacture  each
week to maximize its profit. What is the maximum profit
realizable?

22. MAXIMIZING PROFIT The total daily revenue (in dollars) that
Weston  Publishing  realizes  in  publishing  and  selling  its
English-language dictionaries is given by

R1x, y2 ⫽ ⫺0.005x 2 ⫺ 0.003y 2 ⫺ 0.002xy

⫹ 20x ⫹ 15y

where x denotes the number of deluxe copies and y denotes
the  number  of  standard  copies  published  and  sold  daily.
The total daily cost of publishing these dictionaries is given
by

C1x, y2 ⫽ 6x ⫹ 3y ⫹ 200

where  p(x,  y)  is  the  price  of  land  at  the  point  (x,  y)  in
dollars/square foot and x and y are measured in miles. At
what point within the financial district is the price of land
highest?

24. MAXIMIZING PROFIT C&G  Imports  imports  two  brands  of
white wine, one from Germany and the other from Italy.
The  German  wine  costs  $4/bottle,  and  the  Italian  wine
costs  $3/bottle.  It  has  been  estimated  that  if  the  German
wine sells for p dollars/bottle and the Italian wine sells for
for q dollars/bottle, then

2000 ⫺ 150p ⫹ 100q

bottles of the German wine and

1000 ⫹ 80p ⫺ 120q

bottles of the Italian wine will be sold each week. Deter-
mine the unit price for each brand that will allow C&G to
realize the largest possible weekly profit.

25. DETERMINING THE OPTIMAL SITE An auxiliary electric power
station will serve three communities, A, B, and C, whose
relative  locations  are  shown  in  the  accompanying  figure.
Determine where the power station should be located if the
sum of the squares of the distances from each community
to the site is minimized.

y (miles)

dollars. Determine how many deluxe copies and how many
standard copies Weston should publish each day to maxi-
mize its profits. What is the maximum profit realizable?

B (– 4, 4)

23. MAXIMUM PRICE The  rectangular  region  R shown  in  the
accompanying figure represents the financial district of a
city. The price of land within the district is approximated
by the function

2b 2
p 1x, y2 ⫽ 200 ⫺ 10a x ⫺ 1

⫺ 151  y ⫺ 12 2

C(–1, – 3)

A (5, 2)

x (miles)

y 

(miles)

R

2

1

1 

x (miles)

2

26. LOCATING A RADIO STATION The following figure shows the
locations of three neighboring communities. The operators
of a newly proposed radio station have decided that the site
for the station should be chosen so that the sum of
the squares of the distances from the site to each commu-
nity is minimized. Find the location of the proposed radio
station.

P1x, y2

20

10

y

C(4, 24)

P(x, y)

B(20, 8)

A(2, 4)

10

20

x

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

27. PARCEL POST REGULATIONS Postal regulations specify that a
parcel sent by parcel post may have a combined length and
girth of no more than 130 inches. Find the dimensions of a
cylindrical  package  of  greatest  volume  that  can  be  sent
through the mail. What is the volume of such a package?
Hint: The length plus the girth is 

2pr ⫹ l
.

r

l

28. PACKAGING An  open  rectangular  box  having  a  volume  of 
108  in.3 is  to  be  constructed  from  a  tin  sheet.  Find  the
dimensions of such a box if the amount of material used in
its construction is to be minimal.
Hint:  Let  the  dimensions  of  the  box  be  x ⬙ by  y ⬙ by  z ⬙.  Then 
xyz ⫽ 108, and the amount of material used is given by S ⫽ xy ⫹
2yz ⫹ 2xz. Show that

S ⫽ f1x, y2 ⫽ xy ⫹ 216

x

⫹ 216
y

Minimize f (x, y).

29. PACKAGING An open rectangular box having a surface area
of 300 in.2 is to be constructed from a tin sheet. Find the
dimensions of the box if the volume of the box is to be as
large as possible. What is the maximum volume?
Hint: Let the dimensions of the box be x ⫻ y ⫻ z (see the figure
that follows). Then the surface area is xy ⫹ 2xz ⫹ 2yz, and its vol-
ume is xyz.

12.3 MAXIMA AND MINIMA OF FUNCTIONS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

879

31. MINIMIZING HEATING AND COOLING COSTS A building in the
shape of a rectangular box is to have a volume of 12,000
ft3 (see the figure). It is estimated that the annual heating
and  cooling  costs  will  be  $2/square  foot  for  the  top,
$4/square foot for the front and back, and $3/square foot
for the sides. Find the dimensions of the building that will
result in a minimal annual heating and cooling cost. What
is the minimal annual heating and cooling cost?

z

y

x

32. PACKAGING An open box having a volume of 48 in.3 is to
be constructed. If the box is to include a partition that is
parallel to a side of the box, as shown in the figure, and the
amount of material used is to be minimal, what should be
the dimensions of the box?

z

y

x

In Exercises 33–38, determine whether the statement is true or
false. If it is true, explain why it is true. If it is false, give an exam-
ple to show why it is false.
33. If fx(a, b) ⫽ 0 and fy(a, b) ⫽ 0, then f must have a relative

z

extremum at (a, b).

y

x 

30. PACKAGING Postal  regulations  specify  that  the  combined
length  and  girth  of  a  parcel  sent  by  parcel  post  may  not
exceed  130  in.  Find  the  dimensions  of  the  rectangular
package  that  would  have  the  greatest  possible  volume
under these regulations.
Hint: Let the dimensions of the box be x ⬙ by y ⬙ by z ⬙ (see the fig-
ure below). Then 2x ⫹ 2z ⫹ y ⫽ 130, and the volume V ⫽ xyz.
Show that

V ⫽ f1x, z2 ⫽ 130xz ⫺ 2x 2z ⫺ 2xz 2

Maximize f1x, z2.

z

y

x

34. If  (a,  b)  is  a  critical  point  of  f and  both  the  conditions 
fxx (a, b) ⬍ 0 and fyy(a, b) ⬍ 0 hold, then f has a relative
maximum at (a, b).

35. If f(x, y) has a relative maximum at (a, b), then fx(a, b) ⫽ 0

and fy(a, b) ⫽ 0.

36. Let h(x, y) ⫽ f(x) ⫹ t(y). If f(x) ⬎ 0 and t(y) ⬍ 0, then h
cannot have a relative maximum or a relative minimum at
any point.

37. If f(x, y) satisfies fxx(a, b) ⫽ 0, fxy(a, b) ⫽ 0, fyy(a, b) ⫽ 0,
and fxx(a, b) ⫹ fyy(a, b) ⫽ 0 at the critical point (a, b) of f,
then f cannot have a relative extremum at (a, b).

38. Suppose h(x, y) ⫽ f(x) ⫹ t(y), where f and t have contin-
uous second derivatives near a and b, respectively. If a is a
critical  number  of  f,  b is  a  critical  number  of  t,  and
f ⬙(a)t⬙(b) ⬎ 0, then h has a relative extremum at (a, b).

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

880

CHAPTER 12 CALCULUS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

12.3 Solutions to Self-Check Exercises

1. a. To find the critical point(s) of f, we solve the system of

The critical point of P is found by solving the system

equations

fx ⫽ 4x ⫺ 4y ⫹ 4 ⫽ 0
fy ⫽ ⫺4x ⫹ 6y ⫺ 2 ⫽ 0

obtaining x ⫽ ⫺2 and y ⫽ ⫺1. Thus, the only critical
point of f is the point (⫺2, ⫺1).

b. We have fxx ⫽ 4, fxy ⫽ ⫺4, and fyy ⫽ 6, so

D1x, y2 ⫽ fxx fyy ⫺ f 2

xy

⫽ 142162 ⫺ 1⫺42 2 ⫽ 8

 Px ⫽ ⫺1
4
 Py ⫽ ⫺1
4

 x ⫺ 1
4

 y ⫹ 13 ⫽ 0

 x ⫺ y ⫹ 40 ⫽ 0

giving x ⫽ 16 and y ⫽ 36. Thus, (16, 36) is the critical point
of P. Next,

Pxx ⫽ ⫺1
4

    Pxy ⫽ ⫺1
4

    Pyy ⫽ ⫺1

Since D(⫺2, ⫺1) ⬎ 0 and fxx(⫺2, ⫺1) ⬎ 0, we conclude
that f has a relative minimum at the point (⫺2, ⫺1).

c. The  relative  minimum  value  of  f(x,  y)  at  the  point 

and

(⫺2, ⫺1) is
f1⫺2, ⫺12 ⫽ 21⫺22 2 ⫹ 31⫺12 2 ⫺ 41⫺221⫺12

⫹ 41⫺22 ⫺ 21⫺12 ⫹ 3
⫽ 0

2. Robertson’s monthly profit is
P1x, y2 ⫽ R1x, y2 ⫺ C1x, y2
⫽ a⫺1
⫽ ⫺1
8

2 ⫺ 1
2

2 ⫺ 1
2

2 ⫺ 1
4

2 ⫺ 1
4

 x 

 y 

 x 

 y 

8

 xy ⫹ 20x ⫹ 60yb ⫺ 17x ⫹ 20y ⫹ 2802

 xy ⫹ 13x ⫹ 40y ⫺ 280

 D 1x, y2 ⫽ Pxx  Pyy ⫺ P  

2
xy

 ⫽ a⫺1

4b 2
4b1⫺12 ⫺ a⫺1

⫽ 3
16

Since D(16, 36) ⬎ 0 and Pxx(16, 36) ⬍ 0, the point (16, 36)
yields  a  relative  maximum  of  P.  We  conclude  that  the 
monthly  profit  is  maximized  by  manufacturing  1600
mechanical  and  3600  electronic  setback  thermostats  each
month. The maximum monthly profit realizable is

 P 116, 362 ⫽ ⫺1

8

 1162 2 ⫺ 1

2

 1362 2 ⫺ 1

4

 11621362

 ⫽ ⫹ 13 1162 ⫹ 40 1362 ⫺ 280
 ⫽ 544

or $54,400.

CHAPTER 12

Summary of Principal Terms

TERMS

function of two variables (846)
domain (846)
three-dimensional Cartesian coordinate

system (849)
level curve (851)
first partial derivatives of f (858)
Cobb–Douglas production function

(861)

marginal productivity of labor (861)
marginal productivity of capital (861)
substitute commodity (862)
complementary commodity (862)
second-order partial derivative of f (863)
relative maximum (871)
relative maximum value (871)
relative minimum (871)

relative minimum value (871)
absolute maximum (871)
absolute minimum (871)
absolute maximum value (871)
absolute minimum value (871)
saddle point (872)
critical point (872)
second derivative test (873)

CHAPTER 12

Concept Review Questions

Fill in the blanks.
1. The domain of a function f of two variables is a subset of
the _____-plane. The rule of f associates with each _____
_____ in the domain of f one and only one _____ _____,
denoted by z ⫽ _____.

2. If the function f has rule z ⫽ f(x, y), then x and y are called
_____ variables, and z is a/an _____ variable. The number
z is also called the _____ of f at (x, y).

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

REVIEW EXERCISES

881

3. The graph of a function f of two variables is the set of all
points  (x,  y,  z),  where  _____ and  (x,  y)  is  the  domain  of
_____.  The  graph  of  a  function  of  two  variables  is  a/an
_____ in three-dimensional space.

4. The trace of the graph of f(x, y) in the plane z ⫽ k is the
curve with equation _____ lying in the plane z ⫽ k. The
projection  of  the  trace  of  f in  the  plane  z ⫽ k onto  the 
xy-plane is called the _____ _____ of f. The contour map
associated with f is obtained by drawing the _____ _____
of f corresponding to several admissible values of _____.

5. The partial derivative 0f>0x of f at (x, y) can be found by

thinking of y as a/an _____ in the expression for f, and dif-
ferentiating this expression with respect to _____ as if it
were a function of x alone.

6. The number fx(a, b) measures the _____ of the tangent line
to the curve C obtained by intersecting the graph of f with
the plane y ⫽ b at the point _____. It also measures the rate
of  change  of  f with  respect  to  _____ at  the  point 
(a, b) with y held fixed with value _____.

7. A  function  f(x,  y)  has  a  relative  maximum  at  (a,  b)  if 
f(x, y) _____ f(a, b) for all points (x, y) that are sufficiently
close to _____. The absolute maximum value of f (x, y) is
the number f (a, b) such that f (x, y) _____ f (a, b) for all 
(x, y) in the _____ of f.

8. A critical point of f (x, y) is a point (a, b) in the _____ of f
such that _____ _____ _____ or at least one of the partial
derivatives of f does not _____. A critical point of f is a/an
_____ for a relative extremum of f.

CHAPTER 12

Review Exercises

1. Let 

f 1x, y2 ⫽

xy
2 ⫹ y 

x 

Does f(0, 0) exist?

. Compute f(0, 1), f(1, 0), and f(1, 1).

2

15.

f 1x, y2 ⫽

x ⫺ y
y ⫹ 2x

16.

t1x, y2 ⫽

xy
2 ⫹ y 

2

x 

2. Let

f 1x, y2 ⫽

y

xe 

1 ⫹ ln  xy

. Compute f(1, 1),  f(1, 2), and

f(2, 1). Does f(1, 0) exist?

17. h1x, y2 ⫽ (2xy ⫹ 3y 2)5
19. f1x, y2 ⫽ (x 2 ⫹ y 2)ex2⫹y2
20. f1x, y2 ⫽ ln(1 ⫹ 2x 2 ⫹ 4y 4)

18. f1x, y2 ⫽ (xey ⫹ 1)1/2

3. Let 

h 1x, y, z2 ⫽ xye 

z ⫹ x
y

. Compute h(1, 1, 0), h(⫺1, 1, 1),

21.

f 1x, y2 ⫽ ln  a1 ⫹ x 

y 

2

2b

and h(1, ⫺1, 1).

4. Find the domain of the function 

1u
u ⫺ √
x ⫺ y
x ⫹ y
6. Find the domain of the function f1x, y2 ⫽ x ⫹ y

f 1u, √2 ⫽
f 1x, y2 ⫽
1y

5. Find the domain of the function 

.

.

7. Find the domain of the function 

11 ⫺ x

.

xy1z

f1x, y, z2 ⫽

11 ⫺ x2  11 ⫺ y2  11 ⫺ z2

In Exercises 8–11, sketch the level curves of the function corre-
sponding to each value of z.

8. z ⫽ f1x, y2 ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 2y; z ⫽ ⫺2, ⫺1, 0, 1, 2
9. z ⫽ f1x, y2 ⫽ y ⫺ x 2; z ⫽ ⫺2, ⫺1, 0, 1, 2
z ⫽  f 1x, y2 ⫽ 2x 
2; z ⫽ 0, 1, 2, 3, 4

2 ⫹ y 

10.

11. z ⫽ f1x, y2 ⫽ e xy; z ⫽ 1, 2, 3

In  Exercises  12–21,  compute  the  first  partial  derivatives  of  the
function.
12.

f 1x, y2 ⫽ x 2y 3 ⫹ 3xy 2 ⫹ x
f 1x, y2 ⫽ x1y ⫹ y1x

y

13.

14. f 1u, √2 ⫽ 2u√ 

2 ⫺ 2u

In Exercises 22–27, compute the second-order partial derivatives
of the function.

22. f1x, y2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 2x 2y ⫹ y 2 ⫹ x ⫺ 2y
23. f1x, y2 ⫽ x 4 ⫹ 2x 2y 2 ⫺ y 4
24. f1x, y2 ⫽ 12x 2 ⫹ 3y 223
26. t1x, y2 ⫽ ex2⫹y2

25.

27.

x ⫹ y 

t1x, y2 ⫽ x
h 1s, t2 ⫽ ln  as
tb

2

28. Let  f(x,  y,  z)  ⫽ x 3y 2z ⫹ xy 2z ⫹ 3xy ⫺ 4z.  Compute 
fx(1,  1,  0), fy(1,  1,  0),  and  fz(1,  1,  0)  and  interpret  your
results.

In Exercises 29–34, find the critical point(s) of the functions. Then
use the second derivative test to classify the nature of each of
these points, if possible. Finally, determine the relative extrema
of each function.

29. f1x, y2 ⫽ 2x 2 ⫹ y 2 ⫺ 8x ⫺ 6y ⫹ 4
30. f1x, y2 ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 3xy ⫹ y 2 ⫺ 10x ⫺ 20y ⫹ 12
31. f1x, y2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 3xy ⫹ y 2
32. f1x, y2 ⫽ x 3 ⫹ y 2 ⫺ 4xy ⫹ 17x ⫺ 10y ⫹ 8
33. f1x, y2 ⫽ e2x 2⫹y2
34. f1x, y2 ⫽ ln1x 2 ⫹ y 2 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 2y ⫹ 42

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

882

CHAPTER 12 CALCULUS OF SEVERAL VARIABLES

35. IQS The  IQ  (intelligence  quotient)  of  a  person  whose
chronological age is c and whose mental age is m is defined
as

I1c, m2 ⫽

100m

c

Describe the level curves of I. Sketch the level curves cor-
responding to I ⫽ 90, 100, 120, 180. Interpret your results.

36. REVENUE FUNCTIONS A division of Ditton Industries makes
a 16-speed and a 10-speed electric blender. The company’s
management estimates that x units of the 16-speed model
and  y units  of  the  10-speed  model  are  demanded  daily
when the unit prices are

p ⫽ 80 ⫺ 0.02x ⫺ 0.1y
q ⫽ 60 ⫺ 0.1x ⫺ 0.05y

dollars, respectively.
a. Find the daily total revenue function R(x, y).
b. Find the domain of the function R.
c. Compute R(100, 300) and interpret your result.

37. DEMAND FOR CD PLAYERS In a survey conducted by Home
Entertainment magazine,  it  was  determined  that  the
demand equation for CD players is given by

x ⫽ f1 p, q2 ⫽ 900 ⫺ 9p ⫺ e0.4q

whereas the demand equation for audio CDs is given by

y ⫽ t1 p, q2 ⫽ 20,000 ⫺ 3000q ⫺ 4p

CHAPTER 12

Before Moving On . . .

1. Find the domain of

f 1x, y2 ⫽

1x ⫹ 1y
11 ⫺ x2  12 ⫺ y2

corresponding to z ⫽ ⫺3, ⫺2, 1, 0, 1, 2, 3.

2. Sketch the level curves of the function f1x, y2 ⫽ x ⫹ 2y 2
3. Find fx11, 22 and fy11, 22 if f1x, y2 ⫽ x 3y ⫺2x 2y2 ⫹ 3xy3

and interpret your results.

where p and q denote the unit prices (in dollars) for the CD
players and audio CDs, respectively, and x and y denote the
number of CD players and audio CDs demanded per week.
Determine whether these two products are substitute, com-
plementary, or neither.

38. MAXIMIZING REVENUE Odyssey  Travel  Agency’s  monthly
revenue depends on the amount of money x (in thousands
of dollars) spent on advertising per month and the number
of agents y in its employ in accordance with the rule

R1x, y2 ⫽ ⫺x 2 ⫺ 0.5y 2 ⫹ xy ⫹ 8x ⫹ 3y ⫹ 20

Determine the amount of money the agency should spend
per month and the number of agents it should employ to
maximize its monthly revenue.

39. MINIMIZING FENCING COSTS The owner of the Rancho Grande
wants to enclose a rectangular piece of grazing land along the
straight portion of a river and then subdivide it using a fence
running  parallel  to  the  sides  that  are  perpendicular  to  the
river. No fencing is required along the river. If the material
for the sides costs $3/running yard and the material for the
divider costs $2/running yard, what will be the dimensions 
of a 303,750 sq yd pasture if the cost of fencing is kept to a
minimum?

4. Find the first- and second-order partial derivatives of 

f1x, y2 ⫽ x2y ⫹ exy

5. Find the relative extrema, if any, of 

f1x, y2 ⫽ 2x3 ⫹ 2y3 ⫺ 6xy ⫺ 5

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers

CHAPTER 1
Exercises 1.1, page 6

1. Integer, rational, and real

3. Rational and real

5. Irrational and real

7. Irrational and real

9. Rational and real

11. False

13. True

15. False

17. Commutative law of addition

19. Commutative law of multiplication

21. Distributive law

23. Associative law of addition

25. Property 1 of negatives

33. x 2 ⫺ 4y x 2 ⫹ 4y

2

1
1

12
12
12

35. ⫺8ab
2

1

39. 2r ⫺ 3s 4r 2 ⫹ 6rs ⫹ 9s 2

12
12

1

37. 2m ⫹ 1 4m 2 ⫺ 2m ⫹ 1
1
2
41. u2 √ 2 ⫺ 2 √ 4 ⫹ 2√ 2 ⫹ 4
43. 2x ⫹ 1 x 2 ⫹ 3
12
2
47. u ⫺ √ u ⫹ √ u2 ⫹ √ 2
51. x3 ⫺ 2 x ⫹ 3
1
2

2
45. 3a ⫹ b x ⫹ 2y
12

49. x ⫹ y 2x ⫺ 3y 2x ⫹ 3y

53. au ⫹ c u ⫹ 1

12
12
12

55. P 1 ⫹ rt

1
2

1
1
1

12

12

2

1

1

2

2

57. 100x 80 ⫺ x

2

2

59. kx M ⫺ x

1

2

61.

V0

273   1273 ⫹ T2

27. Property 1 of zero properties

29. Property 2 of zero properties

Exercises 1.4, page 25

31. Property 2 of quotients

33. Properties 2 and 5 of quotients

35. Property 6 of quotients and distributive law

37. False

39. False

41. False

Exercises 1.2, page 13

1. 81

3.

8
27

5. ⫺81

7.

⫺ 81
125

9. 256

11. 243y 5

13. 6x ⫺ 3

15. 9x 2 ⫹ 3x ⫹ 1

17. 4y 2 ⫹ 2y ⫹ 9

19. 1.2x3 ⫺ 4.2x2 ⫹ 2.5x ⫺ 8.2

21. 6x5

23. 2x3 ⫹ 4x

25. 7m2 ⫺ 9m

27. 14a ⫺ 7b

29. 6x 2 ⫹ 5x ⫺ 6

31. 6x 2 ⫺ 5xy ⫺ 6y 2

33. 12r 2 ⫺ rs ⫺ 6s2

35. 0.06x 2 ⫺ 0.06xy ⫺ 2.52y 2

37. 6x3 ⫺ 3x 2y ⫹ 4xy ⫺ 2y2

39. 4x 2 ⫹ 12xy ⫹ 9y2

41. 4u2 ⫺ √ 2

43. 2x 2 ⫺ x ⫹ 2

45. 4x 2 ⫹ 6xy ⫹ 9y 2 ⫺ x ⫹ 2y ⫹ 2

47. 2t 4 ⫺ 4t 3 ⫹ 9t 2 ⫺ 2t ⫹ 4

49. ⫺2x ⫹ 1

51. ⫺3x ⫺ 1

53. x 2 ⫺ 10x ⫹ 50

55. 22x 3 ⫺ 20x 2 ⫺ 6x

57. ⫺0.000002x 3 ⫺ 0.02x 2 ⫹ 1000x ⫺ 120,000

59. 0.7t 2 ⫹ 350t

61. 3.5t 2 ⫹ 2.4t ⫹ 71.2

63. False

65. False

67. m

Exercises 1.3, page 19

5. 5mn 2m ⫺ 3n ⫹ 4

1

2

1

1
1
1

7. 3x ⫺ 5 2x ⫹ 1

1. 2m 3m ⫺ 2
12
12
12

2
2
11. 2m ⫹ 1 m ⫺ 6
2

17. 2a ⫺ b 2a ⫹ b
1
29. 7r ⫺ 4 5r ⫹ 3

2
3. 3ab 3b ⫺ 2a
12
12
12
27. 2y 3x ⫹ 2 2x ⫺ 3
12

1
1
9. 2c ⫺ d 3a ⫹ b ⫹ 4ac ⫺ 2ad
2
13. x ⫺ 3y x ⫹ 2y
19. u√ ⫺ w u√ ⫹ w
12
1
31. xy 3x ⫺ 2y 3x ⫹ 2y2

1
1
2
25. x ⫹ 4 x ⫺ 1
1

23. Prime

12

12

2

2

1

2

15. Prime

2

21. Prime

1.

4
x

3.

4
5

5.

2x ⫺ 1

2x

11. x ⫹ y

13.

1
2

x

15.

2
5

x 2

7.

x ⫺ 1
x ⫹ 1

17.

5x
2

9.

x ⫹ 3
2x ⫹ 1

19.

4
3

21.

27.

313r ⫺ 22

2

23.

k ⫹ 1
k ⫺ 2

25.

10x ⫹ 7

12x ⫹ 3212x ⫺ 12
4m3 ⫺ 3

5x ⫺ 9

1x ⫺ 321x ⫹ 221x ⫺ 12

29.

12m2 ⫺ 2m ⫺ 1212m2 ⫺ 3m ⫹ 32

31.

⫺

x2 ⫺ x ⫺ 3
1x ⫹ 121x ⫺ 12

33.

21x2 ⫺ x ⫹ 22
1x ⫹ 221x ⫺ 22

37.

bx ⫺ ay

ab1x ⫺ y2

45.

49.

1

⫺

2x1x ⫹ h2
R311 ⫹ i2 n ⫺ 14
i11 ⫹ i2 n

35.

39.

x3 ⫺ 2x2 ⫹ 3x ⫹ 24

1x ⫹ 321x ⫹ 221x ⫺ 221x ⫹ 12
x ⫹ 1
x ⫺ 1

x ⫹ y
xy ⫺ 1

41.

43.

y ⫺ x
x2y2

47. a.

2.2x ⫹ 2500

x

b.

2.2x ⫹ 2500

51.

164 ⫹ 71t ⫺ 4.52 2
1 ⫹ 0.251t ⫺ 4.52 2
Exercises 1.5, page 30

2

1. ⫺8

3.

1
49

5. ⫺16

7.

7
12

9. 0.0009

11. 1

13. 1

15.

1
32

17. 1

19.

1
27

21.

1
4

x5

23.

3
2x

25.

1
a6

27.

8y6
x6

29.

8
xy

31. ⫺2x 2y5

33.

3
2u√ 2

35. 864x 4

37.

1
4x8

39.

4u4
9√ 5

41.

1

1728x2y3z2

43.

51.

a10
b12

1
u√

45. 9a2b8

47.

u8
16

49.

1 ⫺ x
1 ⫹ x

53.

b ⫹ a
b ⫺ a

55. False

57. False

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

883

884

CHAPTER 1 ANSWERS

Exercises 1.6, page 35

1. x ⫽ 4

3. y ⫽

20
3

2
5. x ⫽ ⫺
3

7. y ⫽ 5

33. x ⫽ ⫺1 ⫾

1
2

37. x ⫽ ⫾ , ⫾

22

210
23

35. x ⫽ ⫺0.93, 3.17

39. y ⫽ ⫾ , ⫾

22

25

9. p ⫽ 15

11. p ⫽ 0

13. k ⫽ 4

15. x ⫽ 2

17. x ⫽ 8

5
41. x ⫽ ⫺ , ⫺
3

7
2

4
43. w ⫽ ,
9

9
4

3
45. x ⫽ ⫺2, ⫺
2

19. x ⫽

1
2

21. x ⫽

1
3

23. y ⫽

3
2

25. x ⫽

17
8

27. q ⫽ ⫺1

29. k ⫽ ⫺2

31. No solution

33. r ⫽

I
Pt

35. q ⫽ ⫺ ⫹

p
3

1
3

37. R ⫽

41.

m ⫽

rB1n ⫹ 12

2I

iS

11 ⫹ i2 n ⫺ 1
n ⫽ 2mI ⫺ rB

rB

43.

39. x ⫽

45.

p ⫽

Vb

a ⫺ V

fq

q ⫺ f

I
47. t ⫽ ;
Pr

3
2

years

49.

t ⫽

a

S ⫺ b

51. a. C ⫽

NV ⫺ St
N ⫺ t

53. a.

t ⫽ 24c ⫺ a

a

b. $115,000

b. 5 years

Exercises 1.7, page 44

1. 9

3. 4

5. 4

7. 4

9. ⫺5

11. 4

15.

9
4

17.

1
4

2
19. ⫺
3

21. 9

23.

1
9

27. 64

29. x1/5

31. x

33.

13.

25.

2
3

3
4

9
x6

35.

y5/2
x3

⫺323 2
223

3

423

3

69.

53.

51.

43.

422
26 x
23 ⫺ 1
y23 xz 2
2a11 ⫹ a2

61.

67.

xz

77.

a

83.

3 ⫹ x1/3

6x1/211 ⫹ x1/32 2
p ⫽ 144 ⫺ x 

91.

37. x12/5 ⫺ 2x17/5

39. 4p2 ⫺ 2p

41.

45. 4xy

47. m2np4

1y
32x

2x

57.

⫺11 ⫹ 222 2
23 18

73.

3

x ⫹ y
x ⫺ y

81.

x

3

59.

49.

223y

23 3
23 x 2
q12q ⫹ 12
23 18y 2
26
2x ⫹ 113x ⫹ 22

q ⫺ 1

65.

75.

2x

3

21x ⫹ 12

55.

63.

71.

79.

85. x ⫽ 1

87. k ⫽

5
2

89. k ⫽

1
3

93. True

95. True

Exercises 1.8, page 51

47. x ⫽ ⫺ , 1

5
2

49. y ⫽ ⫺2,

53. x ⫽ ⫺

16
3

55. t ⫽ ⫺1 ⫾

15
4

1
2

26

51. x ⫽ ⫺8, 2

57. u ⫽ ⫺3, 2

59. r ⫽ 3

61. s ⫽ 6

63. x ⫽

22
7 , 10
3

65. Two real solutions

67. No real solutions

69. One real solution

71. Two real solutions

73. 9.2 sec

75. 1.41 sec after passing the tree

77. 10,000

79. 40,000

81. 3.82 or 26.18 days

83. 12 in. ⫻ 6 in. ⫻ 2 in.

85. 30 ft and 90 ft

87. 1500 yd ⫻ 750 yd

89. 1.83 ft

91. False

93. True

) 
6  

) 
4  

x 

x 

x 

Exercises 1.9, page 62

1. False

3. False

5.

0  

( 
3  

0  

7.

9.

[ 
– 1  
( 
0  
11. ⫺⬁, 3

2

1
17. ⫺⬁, ⫺3 傼 3, ⬁

1
1
3

23. 1,

43

2

29. 4

31. 2

33.

15. ⫺4, 6

1

2

13. ⫺⬁, ⫺5
1
1

1
2
25. ⫺⬁, ⫺3 傼 2, ⬁

4
19. ⫺2, 3
1
2
35. ␲ ⫹ 1

4
523

2

2
21. ⫺3, 5
1
4

3

4

1

27. ⫺⬁, 0 傼 1, ⬁

2

37. 2

39. False

41. False

43. True

45. a ⫺ b ⬍ x ⬍ a ⫹ b

47. False

49. True

51. False

53. $50.70

55. 362, 488.7

3

4

59. Between 1000 and 4000 units

57. $52,000

61. Between 98.04% and 98.36% of the toxic pollutants

2

63. After 2 min

65. 4 sec

67.

兩 x ⫺ 0.5兩 ⱕ 0.01

Chapter 1 Concept Review Questions, page 65

1. a. rational; repeating; terminating

b. irrational; terminates; repeats

1. x ⫽ ⫺2, 3

3. x ⫽ ⫺2, 2

5. x ⫽ ⫺4, 3

9. x ⫽ 2

11. m ⫽ 2,

3
2

17. x ⫽ ⫺4, 2

19. x ⫽ 1 ⫺

3
13. x ⫽ ⫺ ,
2

3
2

26

2

, 1 ⫹

7. t ⫽ ⫺1,

15. z ⫽ ⫺2,

1
2

3
2

21. m ⫽ ⫺ ⫺

1
2

23. x ⫽ ⫺ ⫺

3
4

27. x ⫽ ⫺ , 2

3
2

1
2

213
241

, ⫺ ⫹

1
2

, ⫺ ⫹

3
4

4

1
2

213
241
23

4

29. m ⫽ 2 ⫾

26

2

213

2

25. x ⫽ ⫾

31. x ⫽ ⫾ 210

1
2

1
4

1

2

1

2

1

2

1

2. a. b ⫹ a;  a ⫹ b ⫹ c; a; 0

c. ab ⫹ ac

b. ba;  ab c; 1 ⭈ a ⫽ a; 1

1

2

3. a. a; ⫺ ab ⫽ a ⫺b ; ab

b. 0; 0

4. a. polynomial; x; degree; term; polynomial; coefficient

b. like

5. product; prime; x x ⫹ 2 x ⫺ 1

12

2

6. a. polynomials

b. numerator; denominator; factors; 1; ⫺1

c. denominator; fractions

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

7. complex; 

1 ⫹ 1
x
1 ⫺ 1
y

8. a. a ⭈ a ⭈ a ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ a; base; exponent; power

(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:5)

b. 1; not defined

n factors

c.

1
an

9. a. equation

b. number

c. ax ⫹ b ⫽ 0; 1

10. a. an ⫽ b

b. pairs

c. no

d. real root

11. a. radical; b1/n

b. radical

12. a. ax2 ⫹ bx ⫹ c ⫽ 0

b. factoring; completing the square; x ⫽

⫺b ⫾ 2b2 ⫺ 4ac

2a

Chapter 1 Review Exercises, page 65

1. Rational and real

2. Irrational and real

3. Irrational and real

4. Whole, integer, rational, and real

5. Rational and real

6. Irrational and real

7.

27
8

9.

1
144

10. ⫺32

11.

64
27

12.

1
4

13.

3
5

8. 25

323 3

14.

2
15. 4 x2 ⫹ y 2

1

16.

a15
b11

17.

2x
3z

18. ⫺x1/2

3.

19. 6xy7

20.

9
2

a5b8

21. 9x 2y4

22.

x
y1/2

CHAPTER 2 ANSWERS

885

⫾22

2

54. x ⫽

55. x ⫽ 14

56. p ⫽ ⫺2

57. x ⫽ ⫺ , 0

5
3

58. q ⫽ ⫺

6
17

59. k ⫽ 2

60. x ⫽ 1

61. x ⫽

100C
20 ⫹ C

62. I ⫽

rB1n ⫹ 12

2m

1

2

65. ⫺⬁, ⫺4 傼 5, ⬁

68. 1

1
69. ␲ ⫺ 6
23
1
73. ⫺2, ⫺
2
12x ⫹ 1

77.

78.

74. ⫺1, 4

2

1
z23 xy

x

81. x ⫽ 1 ⫾

26

3

2

63. ⫺2, ⬁
1
70. 8 ⫺ 3

3
66. ⫺⬁, ⫺5 傼 5, ⬁

4
64. ⫺1, 2
2
2
71. [⫺2, ]

1

1
2

2

67. 4

72. ⫺4, 3

3

4

76.

2
3

80.

; 

3
2

311 ⫺ 22x2

1 ⫺ 4x

2
3

23
75. [ , 2]
x ⫺ 2x
22

2x

79.

82. x ⫽ ⫺2 ⫾

2

83. $100

84. $400

Chapter 1 Before Moving On, page 67

1

2

1. 3 5x2 ⫺ 9x ⫹ 4
12

2. a. x2 x ⫺ 3 x ⫹ 2

1

2

b. a a ⫹ 1 a ⫺ 2b ⫺ a2

1

12

2

5x2 ⫺ 1

13x ⫹ 121x ⫺ 221x ⫹ 12
7. a. ⫺4 or

6. 7 ⫺ 4

23
9. [⫺ , ]

2
3

3
2

8. 21

3
2

b.

10. ⫺2, ⫺1

3

4

4.

1
2xy

5.

2s2

1 ⫺ 2s

2217

11

2

3 ⫹

11
or  3 ⫺

2

2217

23. 5x4 ⫹ 20x3 ⫹ 12x2 ⫹ 14x ⫹ 3

24. 9x3 ⫺ 18x2 ⫹ 17x ⫺ 12

25. ⫺2x2 ⫹ 9y2 ⫹ 12xy ⫹ 7x ⫹ 3

26. 3a ⫺ b

CHAPTER 2
Exercises 2.1, page 74

27.

29.

180

28.

1t ⫹ 62 2
78x2 ⫺ 8x ⫺ 27
312x2 ⫺ 1213x ⫺ 12

1

31. ⫺2␲r2 ␲r ⫺ 50

2
34. 6t 2t ⫺ 3 t ⫹ 1

15x2 ⫹ 24x ⫹ 2
413x2 ⫹ 221x ⫹ 22

30.

x ⫹ 1

22x ⫹ 11x ⫹ 22
1
2
1
35. ⫺2 x ⫹ 3 x ⫺ 1

32. 2√w √ 2 ⫹ w2 ⫹ u2

1

1
36. 4 3x ⫺ 5 x ⫺ 6
38. u3 2u√ ⫹ 3 4u2√2 ⫺ 6u√ ⫹ 9

2
2

12
12

12

1

1

2

12
12
39. 3a2b2 2a2b2c ⫺ ac ⫺ 3

2
37. 3a ⫺ 5b 3a ⫹ 5b
1
41t 2 ⫺ 42
1t 2 ⫹ 42 2

2
x ⫹ 2
x ⫹ 3

43. 2

42.

33. 4 ⫺ x 4 ⫹ x

1

12

40. 2x ⫺ y 3x ⫹ y

41.

12

1
2
3x12x3 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 12
1x2 ⫹ 221x3 ⫹ 12
x21 ⫹ 3x213x2 ⫺ 5x ⫹ 12

45.

44.

46.

1x ⫺ 12 2

48. x ⫽ ⫺2,

1
3

49. x ⫽

x

1x ⫹ 221x ⫺ 32

3
47. x ⫽ ⫺ ,
4

1
2

3 ⫾ 241

4

⫺5 ⫾ 213

2

50. x ⫽

51. y ⫽ , 1

1
2

52. m ⫽ ⫺1.2871, 8.2871

53. x ⫽ 0, ⫺3, 1

1. 3, 3 ; Quadrant I

3. 2, ⫺2 ; Quadrant IV

1

2

5. ⫺4, ⫺6 ; Quadrant III

7. A

9. E, F, and G

1
1

2

2

11. F

13–19. See the following figure.

2

y 

13.   ( – 2,  5) 

2

x 

15.   (3,  –1) 

17.    8,  

(  –  7 ) 2  

19.   (4.5,  –  4.5) 

21.

27.

1
2

5
6

23. Not defined

25. 5

29.

d ⫺ b
c ⫺ a

1

a ⫽ c

2

31. a. 4

b. ⫺8

33. Parallel

35. a ⫽ ⫺5

37. Yes

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

886

CHAPTER 2 ANSWERS

Exercises 2.2, page 82

1. (e)

3. (a)

5. (f)

7. Perpendicular

9. y ⫽ ⫺5

11. y ⫽ 2x ⫺ 10

13. y ⫽ 2

15. y ⫽ 3x ⫺ 2

17. y ⫽ x ⫹ 1

19. y ⫽ 3x ⫹ 5

21. y ⫽ 5

23. y ⫽ x; m ⫽ ; b ⫽ 0

1
2

25. y ⫽ x ⫺ 3; m ⫽ ; b ⫽ ⫺3

2
3

1
2

2
3

27. y ⫽ ⫺ x ⫹ ; m ⫽ ⫺ ; b ⫽

1
2

7
2

1
2

7
2

29. y ⫽ x ⫹ 3

1
2

31. y ⫽ x ⫹

4
3

4
3

33. y ⫽ ⫺6

35. y ⫽ b

37. y ⫽ x ⫺

2
3

2
3

39. k ⫽ 8

41.

43.

y 

4 

y 

4 

x 

2 

x 

3 

45.

y 

– 5  

49. y ⫽ ⫺2x ⫺ 4

51. y ⫽ x ⫺

1
8

1
2

53. Yes

55. a.

y (% of total capacity) 

100 

80 

60 

40 

20 

61. a and b.

y (billion dollars) 

20 

15 

10 

5 

1 

2 

3 
4 
Years

5 

6 

x 

c. y ⫽ 1.82x ⫹ 7.9

d. $17 billion; same

63. a and b.

y

s
r
a
l
l
o
D

250
240
230
220
210
200

(100, 250)

20  40  60  80

100

Units

x

2 

x 

c. y ⫽ x ⫹ 200

1
2

d. $227

65. a and b.
y

L

s
r
a
l
l
o
d

 
f
o

9

8

7

 
s
n
o
i
l
l
i

6
5M

1

2

3

4

5

Years

x

c. y ⫽ 0.8x ⫹ 5

d. $12.2 million

67. False

69. True

71. True

Using Technology Exercises 2.2, page 89

Graphing Utility
1.

5 

10 
Years 

15 

20 

t 

3.

b. 1.9467; 70.082
c. The capacity utilization has been increasing by 1.9467% each year

since 1990 when it stood at 70.082%.

d. In the first half of 2005

57. a. y ⫽ 0.55x

b. 2000

59. 84.8%

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

5. a.

b.

7. a.

b.

9.

11.

Excel

1.

3.2x + 2.1y - 6.72 = 0

5.

y

7.

y

9.

y

11.

y

CHAPTER 2 ANSWERS

887

12.1x + 4.1y = 49.61

-15

-10

-5

50
40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30

0

x

20x + 16y = 300

5

10

15

40

30

20

10

0

-10

0

10

20

30

x

20x + 30y = 600

10

20

30

40

50

x

22.4x + 16.1y - 352 = 0

-20

-10

30

20

10

0

0

-10

-20

-10

40

30
20

10

0
-10

-20

-10

10

20

30

x

y

-15

-10

-5

20

10

0

0

-10

-20

x

3.

y

1.6x + 5.1y = 8.16

6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2

0

x

-15

-10

-5

5

10

15

Exercises 2.3, page 97

1. 21, ⫺9, 5a ⫹ 6, ⫺5a ⫹ 6, 5a ⫹ 21

3. 3, 12, 3a2 ⫺ 6a ⫹ 3, 3a2 ⫹ 6a ⫹ 3, 3x 2

5. 2a ⫹ 2h ⫹ 5, ⫺2a ⫹ 5, 2a2 ⫹ 5, 2a ⫺ 4h ⫹ 5, 4a ⫺ 2h ⫹ 5

7.

8
15

, 0, 

2a

a  2 ⫺ 1

21t ⫹ 12
t 1t ⫹ 22

, 

, 

212 ⫹ a2
a  2 ⫹ 4a ⫹ 3
21x ⫹ 12  21x

21x ⫺ 12  2
1x ⫺ 2

, 

9.

8, 

2a  21a ⫺ 1

, 

15. a. ⫺2

b. (i) x ⫽ 2; (ii) x ⫽ 1

17. Yes

19. Yes

21. 7

23.

5

10

15

25.

1⫺⬁, 02 傼 10, ⬁2

11. 10, 1, 1

13.

5
2, 3, 3, 9

d.

3⫺2, 64

c.

30, 64
1⫺⬁, ⬁2

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

888

CHAPTER 2 ANSWERS

1⫺⬁, ⫺22 傼 1⫺2, 22 傼 12, ⬁2

31.

1⫺⬁, 54
1⫺⬁, ⫺22 傼 1⫺2, 14

35.

29.

1⫺⬁, ⬁2
3 ⫺3, ⬁2
1⫺⬁, ⬁2
6, 0, ⫺4, ⫺6, ⫺25

27.

33.

37. a.
b.
c.

4 , ⫺6, ⫺4, 0

y

5

x

5

– 5

39.

y

30
25
20
15
10
5

2

4

(⫺⬁, ⬁);    [1, ⬁)

41.

y

2

4

8

[0, ⬁);    [2, ⬁)

43.

y

1

(⫺⬁, 

];    [ 0, 
1 

⬁)

45.

1

y

–1

–1

1

(⫺⬁, ⬁);    [⫺1, ⬁)

x

x

x

x

47.

y

5

x

5

(⫺⬁, ⬁);    (⫺⬁, 0) 傼 [1, ⬁)

49.

y

5

  –1

– 4
(⫺⬁, ⬁);    [0, ⬁)

1

x

4

51. Yes

53. No

55. Yes

57. Yes

59. 10p in.

61. 8

63. a.

f 1t2 ⫽ e 0.0185t ⫹ 0.58  if 0 ⱕ t ⱕ 20

0.015t ⫹ 0.65

if 20 ⬍ t ⱕ 30

b. 0.0185/year from 1960 through 1980; 0.015/year from 1980

through 1990

c. 1983

65. 20; 26

67. $5.6 billion; $7.8 billion

69. a. $0.6 trillion; $0.6 trillion

b. $0.96 trillion; $1.2 trillion

71. a. 130 tons/day; 100 tons/day; 40 tons/day

b.

y

140
120
100
80
60
40
20

0

2

4

6

8

10

t

73. False

75. False

Using Technology Exercises 2.3, page 104

1. a.

b.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

3. a.

b.

23.

CHAPTER 2 ANSWERS

889

21x  2 ⫺ 22
1x ⫺ 121x ⫺ 22 ;
1x ⫺ 121x ⫺ 22 ;

 f 1x2 ⫹ t1x2 ⫽
 f 1x2 ⫺ t1x2 ⫽
f 1x2t1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 121x ⫹ 22
1x ⫺ 121x ⫺ 22 ; 

⫺2x

f 1x2t1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫹ 121x ⫺ 22
1x ⫺ 121x ⫹ 22
25. f1t1x22 ⫽ x 4 ⫹ 3x 2 ⫹ 3; t1 f1x22 ⫽ 1x2 ⫹ x ⫹ 122 ⫹ 1

27.

29.

33.

37.

39.

41.

31. 49

x

5

x 2 ⫹ 1

; t1   f 1x22 ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 1

35. f1x2 ⫽ 2x 3 ⫹ x 2 ⫹ 1 and t1x2 ⫽ x 5

f 1t1x22 ⫽ 2x  2 ⫺ 1 ⫹ 1; t1   f 1x22 ⫽ x ⫹ 21x
f 1t1x22 ⫽ x
15
f 1x2 ⫽ x  2 ⫺ 1 and t1x2 ⫽ 1x
f 1x2 ⫽ x  2 ⫺ 1 and t1x2 ⫽ 1
f 1x2 ⫽ 3x  2 ⫹ 2 and t1x2 ⫽ 1
x 3/2
47. 212a ⫹ h2

43. 3h

x

45. ⫺h12a ⫹ h2
49. 3a 2 ⫹ 3ah ⫹ h2 ⫺ 1

51.

⫺ 1
a1a ⫹ h2

53. The total revenue in dollars from both restaurants at time t

55. The value in dollars of Nancy’s shares of IBM at time t

57. The carbon monoxide pollution from cars in parts per million at time t 

59. C1x2 ⫽ 0.6x ⫹ 12,100
61. 0.0075t 2 ⫹ 0.13t ⫹ 0.17; D gives the difference in year t between the

deficit without the rescue package and the deficit with the rescue
package.

63. a. 23; In 2002, 23% of reported serious crimes ended in the arrests

or in the identification of the suspects.

b. 18; In 2007, 18% of reported serious crimes ended in the arrests

or in the identification of the suspects.

65. a. P1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.000003x 3 ⫺ 0.07x 2 ⫹ 300x ⫺ 100,000

b. $182,375

67. a. 3.5t 2 ⫹ 2.4t ⫹ 71.2

b. 71,200; 109,900

69. a. 55%; 98.2%

b. $444,700; $1,167,600

71. a. s1x2 ⫽ f1x2 ⫹ t1x2 ⫹ h1x2

73. True

75. False

Exercises 2.5, page 119

1. Yes; y ⫽ ⫺ x ⫹ 2

2
3

3. Yes; y ⫽ x ⫹ 2

1
2

7. No

9
4

1
2

5. Yes; y ⫽ x ⫹
11. a. C1x2 ⫽ 8x ⫹ 40,000
c. P1x2 ⫽ 4x ⫺ 40,000

d. Loss of $8000; profit of $8000

9. No

b. R1x2 ⫽ 12x

5.

7.

`

9. 18.5505

11. 4.1616

13. a.

b. $9.4 billion, $13.9 billion

15. a.

b. 44.7; 52.7; 129.2

Exercises 2.4, page 110

3. f1x2t1x2 ⫽ x 5 ⫺ 2x 3 ⫹ 5x 2 ⫺ 10

11.

13.

17.

19.

7.

15.

5.

9.

x  2 ⫺ 2

2x ⫹ 4

2x  3 ⫺ 1

2x  3 ⫺ 1

1x ⫹ 1

⫽ x ⫺ 2x  3
1x ⫹ 1

h1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫺ 121x ⫹ 1
f 1x2t1x2

1. f1x2 ⫹ t1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫹ x 2 ⫹ 3
f 1x2t1x2
f 1x2t1x2 ⫽ x  3 ⫹ 5
h1x2 ⫽ x 5 ⫺ 2x  3 ⫹ 5x  2 ⫺ 10
f 1x2 ⫹ t1x2 ⫽ x ⫺ 1 ⫹ 1x ⫹ 1
f 1x2t1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫺ 121x ⫹ 1
t1x2
h1x2 ⫽
f 1x2 ⫺ h1x2
t1x2
 f 1x2 ⫹ t1x2 ⫽ x  2 ⫹ 1x ⫹ 3;
 f 1x2 ⫺ t1x2 ⫽ x  2 ⫺ 1x ⫹ 7;
f 1x2t1x2 ⫽ 1x  2 ⫹ 5211x ⫺ 22; 
 f 1x2 ⫹ t1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫺ 121x ⫹ 3 ⫹ 1
 f 1x2 ⫺ t1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫺ 121x ⫹ 3 ⫺ 1
f 1x2t1x2 ⫽

f 1x2t1x2 ⫽ x  2 ⫹ 51x ⫺ 2

f 1x2t1x2 ⫽ 1x ⫺ 121x ⫹ 3

1x ⫹ 3

x ⫺ 1

x ⫺ 1

x ⫺ 1

;

;

; 

21.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

890

CHAPTER 2 ANSWERS

13. m ⫽ ⫺2; b ⫽ 4
1
17. Ó4,

Ô

2
3

19. ⫺4, ⫺6

15. 3, 13

2

1

2

21. 1000 units; $15,000

23. 600 units; $240

25. $900,000; $800,000

27. a. y ⫽ 1.033x
29. C1x2 ⫽ 0.6x ⫹ 12,100; R1x2 ⫽ 1.15x;

b. $1570.16

P1x2 ⫽ 0.55x ⫺ 12,100

31. a. $12,000/year

b. V ⫽ 60,000 ⫺ 12,000t

c.

V

s
r
a
l
l
o
d

 
f
o

 
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
t
 

n
i
 
s
e
l
a
S

60

50

40

30

20

10

1

3
2
Years

4

t

d. $24,000

33. $900,000; $800,000

35. a. m ⫽ a>1.7; b ⫽ 0
1
37. a. f t ⫽ 6.5t ⫹ 20  0 ⱕ t ⱕ 8

21

b. 117.65 mg

2

b. 72 million

45. a. C11x2 ⫽ 18,000 ⫹ 15x
C21x2 ⫽ 15,000 ⫹ 20x

y

30

C1 (x)

15

C2 (x)

R(x)

b.

s
r
a
l
l
o
d

 
f
o

 
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
T

x

1 2 3 4 5 6 7
In units of a hundred

c. Machine II; Machine II; Machine I
d. ($1500); $1500; $4750

47. Middle of 2003

49. a.

y

60
50
40
30
20
10

 

2 

4 

6 

8 

10

t

b. Feb. 2005

51. True

39. a. F ⫽ C ⫹ 32

9
5

b. 68°F

c. 21.1°C

Using Technology Exercises 2.5, page 126

41. a.

s
r
a
l
l
o
d

 
f
o
 
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
T

100

20

y

C(x)

R(x)

x

2
In units of a thousand

10

c.

P

50

s
r
a
l
l
o
d

 
f
o

 
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
T

– 50

P(x)

x

8

In units

of a thousand

43. 9259 units; $83,331

b. 8000 units; $112,000

1. 2.2875

3. 2.880952381

5. 7.2851648352

d. 8000, 0

1

2

7. 2.4680851064

Exercises 2.6, page 132

1. Vertex:

1⫺1
4 2
2, ⫺25

; x-intercepts: ⫺3, 2
y

20
15
10
5

⫺6 ⫺4 ⫺2

x

2

4

6

⫺5
⫺10
2

y

1

3. Vertex: 2, 0 ; x-intercept: 2

100
80
60
40
20

⫺5

5

10

x

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

5. Vertex:

1 5
42
2, 1

y

; x-intercepts: 2, 3

1

2

3

4

5

x

⫺2
⫺4
⫺6
⫺8

7. Vertex:

1 5
122
6, ⫺13

; x-intercepts: 0.2324, 1.4343

x

x

y

20

15

10

5

⫺2 ⫺1
8 2
1 3
4, 15

9. Vertex:

1

2

3

; no x-intercepts

y

15
12.5
10
7.5
5
2.5

1

2

3

⫺2 ⫺1
1

2

11. Vertex: 0, ⫺4 ; x-intercepts: ⫾2

y

20

15

10

5

⫺4 ⫺2

2

4

x

13. Vertex: 0, 16 ; x-intercepts: ⫾4

1

2

y

15
10
5

x

2

4

6

; x-intercepts:

4
3

, 4

⫺6

⫺4

15. Vertex:

⫺2

⫺5
⫺10
⫺15
⫺20
1 8
32
3, ⫺2

y

15
12.5
10
7.5
5
2.5

⫺4 ⫺2

2 4 6 8

x

CHAPTER 2 ANSWERS

891

17. Vertex:

1⫺ 4

3 2
3, ⫺10

; x-intercepts:
y

1
3

, ⫺3

30

20

10

⫺2

2

4

x

⫺4
2
1

⫺6
1
1

19. 2, 0 ;  ⫺3, ⫺5

1
2
23. ⫺1.1205, 0.1133 , 2.3205, ⫺8.8332

21. ⫺2, ⫺2 ;  3, 3

1

2

2

2

1

2

25. a.

p ($)

b. 5000

35
30
25
20
15
10
5

x

1 2 3 4 5 6
Units of a thousand

27. a.

p ($)

b. $26

30

x

3

Units of a thousand

29. 2500; $67.50

31. 11,000; $3

33. a. 3.6 million; 9.5 million

b. 11.2 million

35. a.

y

b. t ⫽ 2; 144 ft

140

120

100

80

t
e
e
F

37. 3000

39. a.

R

s
r
a
l
l
o
d

 

d
e
r
d
n
u
H

400

300

200

100

1

2

3
Seconds

4

b. $30

t

p

10

20 30 40 50 60

Dollars

41. 500; $32.50

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

892

CHAPTER 2 ANSWERS

43. a.

√ (r)

40
30
20
1010

0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2

r

b. 0, 0.2. The velocity of blood is greatest along the central artery 
(r ⫽ 0) and smallest along the wall of the artery (r ⫽ 0.2). The
maximum velocity is √(0) ⫽ 40 cm/sec, and the minimum velocity
is √(0.2) ⫽ 0 cm/sec.

45.

28

p ⫹ 4

ft by 

28

p ⫹ 4

ft

47. True

49. True

51. True

Using Technology Exercises 2.6, page 136

1. ⫺3.0414, 0.1503 ;  3.0414, 7.4497

2
3. ⫺2.3371, 2.4117 ;  6.0514, ⫺2.5015

2
5. ⫺1.1055, ⫺6.5216 ;  1.1055, ⫺1.8784

2
2

1
1
1

1
1
2

1

2

7. a.

b. 438 wall clocks; $40.92

Exercises 2.7, page 144

1. Polynomial function; degree 6

3. Polynomial function; degree 6

5. Some other function

7. a. 59.7 million

b. 152.54 million

9. a. $2360

b. $4779.04

11. a. $0.72 trillion

b. $3.513 trillion

13. a. R x ⫽

1

2

100x
40 ⫹ x

b. 60%

15. a. 0.06 million terabytes

b. 1.122 million terabytes

17. a. 320,000

b. 3,923,200

19. a.

N(t) (million)

200
175
150
125
100
75
50
25

⫺ 52; $32, $6.71, $3;

the gap was closing.

25.

110
1
2 t ⫹ 1

⫺ 26a 1

4

 t  2 ⫺ 1b 2

27. $5 billion, $152 billion

29. a.

y

5

4

3

2

1

5

10 15

20 25 30 35

t (year)

b. 3.95; 3.05

p ⫽ 2⫺x 

31.

2 ⫹ 100; 6614

c. 1995 to 2000

d. 2010 through 2030

33. a.

b ⫺ d
c ⫺ a

; 

bc ⫺ ad
c ⫺ a

b.

c.

If the unit price is increased, then the equilibrium quantity
decreases while the equilibrium price increases.
If the upper bound for the unit price of a commodity is lowered,
then both the equilibrium quantity and the equilibrium price drop.

35.

f 1x2 ⫽ 2x ⫹ 500

x

; x ⬎ 0

37.

f 1x2 ⫽ 0.5x  2 ⫹ 8

x

; x ⬎ 0

39. f1x2 ⫽ 122 ⫹ x2136 ⫺ 2x2 bushels/acre
41. a. P1x2 ⫽ ⫺0.0002x 2 ⫹ 3x ⫹ 50,000

43. False

45. False

b. $60,800

Using Technology Exercises 2.7, page 150

f1t2 ⫽ 1.85t ⫹ 16.9

1. a.
b.

c.

t
y

1

18.8

2

20.6

3

22.5

4

24.3

5

26.2

6

28.0

d. 31.7 gallons

3. a. f1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.221t2 ⫹ 4.14t ⫹ 64.8

b.

c. 77.8 million

5. a.

2

4

6

8

10

t (year) 

b. 176,610,000

21. 582,650; 1,605,590

23. $699; $130

b. f1t2 ⫽ 2.94t2 ⫹ 38.75t ⫹ 188.5

c. $870 billion

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

7. a. f1t2 ⫽ ⫺0.00081t3 ⫹ 0.0206t 2 ⫹ 0.125t ⫹ 1.69

b.

c. $1.8 trillion; $2.7 trillion; $4.2 trillion

9. a. ⫺0.0056t 3 ⫹ 0.112t 2 ⫹ 0.51t ⫹ 8

b.

c. $8 billion, $10.4 billion, $13.9 billion

11. a. f1t2 ⫽ ⫺2.4167t3 ⫹ 24.5t2 ⫺ 123.33t ⫹ 506

b.

c. 506,000; 338,000; 126,000

13. a. f1t2 ⫽ 0.00125t4 ⫺ 0.0051t3 ⫺ 0.0243t2 ⫹ 0.129t ⫹ 1.71

b.

c. 1.71 mg; 1.81 mg; 1.85 mg; 1.84 mg; 1.83 mg; 1.89 mg
d. 2.13 mg/cigarette

Chapter 2 Concept Review Questions, page 153

1. ordered; abscissa (x-coordinate); ordinate (y-coordinate)

2. a. x; y

b. third

3. a.

y2 ⫺ y1
x2 ⫺ x1

b. undefined

c. 0

d. positive

1
m 2

4. m1 ⫽ m2; m1 ⫽ ⫺
5. a. y ⫺ y1 ⫽ m1x ⫺ x12; point-slope form

b. y ⫽ mx ⫹ b; slope-intercept

6. a. Ax ⫹ By ⫹ C ⫽ 0 (A, B, not both zero)

a
b
8. domain, f x ; vertical, point

b. ⫺

1

2

; A 傽 B; A 傽 B; 0

CHAPTER 2 ANSWERS

893

Chapter 2 Review Exercises, page 154

1. x ⫽ ⫺2

2. y ⫽ 4

3. y ⫽ ⫺ x ⫹

1
10

19
5

4. y ⫽ ⫺ x ⫹

4
5

12
5

5. y ⫽ x ⫹ 9

5
2

6. y ⫽ x ⫹

3
4

11
2

7. y ⫽ ⫺ x ⫺ 3

1
2

8.

3
5

6
; ⫺
5

9. y ⫽ ⫺ x ⫹

3
4

9
2

10. y ⫽ ⫺ x ⫹

3
5

12
5

11. y ⫽ ⫺ x ⫺ 7

3
2

12.

y

⫺6

13.

x

8

y

3

⫺10 ⫺6
1

4

14. ⫺⬁, 9

16. a. 0

⫺1
1

15. ⫺⬁, ⫺1 傼 Ó⫺1,

2
b. 3a2 ⫹ 17a ⫹ 20

x

Ô 傼 Ó , ⬁Ô

3
2

3
2

c. 12a2 ⫹ 10a ⫺ 2

d. 3a2 ⫹ 6ah ⫹ 3h2 ⫹ 5a ⫹ 5h ⫺ 2

17. a. From 1985 to 1990

b. From 1990 on
c. 1990; $3.5 billion

18. a.

y

b. No

c. Yes

x

x

2

19.

y

2

7. domain; range; B

1

2

9. f x ⫾ t x ; f x t x ; 
2
2
1
10. t f x ; f ; f x ; t
2

42

2
1

1
3

1

1

f1x2
t1x2

11. ax2 ⫹ bx ⫹ c; parabola; upward; downward; vertex; 
12. a. P1x2 ⫽ anx n ⫹ an⫺1x n⫺1 ⫹ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⫹ a1x ⫹ a0

1an ⫽ 0; n, a positive integer2

linear; quadratic

b.
c. quotient; polynomials
d. x r (r, a real number)

⫺b
2a

; x ⫽

⫺b
2a

20. a.

c.

2x ⫹ 3

x

1

2x ⫹ 3

b.

d.

1

x12x ⫹ 32
⫹ 3

2
x

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

894

CHAPTER 3 ANSWERS

21. Vertex:

111
24 2
12, ⫺361
y

2
; x-intercepts: ⫺ ,
3

5
2

250
200
150
100
50

⫺6 ⫺4 ⫺2
1 1
2, 42

22. Vertex:

x

2

4

6 8

; x-intercepts:

⫺1

2, 3
2

y

⫺4 ⫺2

x

2

4

6

⫺20
⫺40
⫺60
⫺80
⫺100
⫺120
2

1⫺2, 1
32
28. L2

1
1

24.

25.

23. 2, ⫺3

26. 2500, 50,000

16, 21
2 2
27. L2
1
2
29. 60,000
31. a. C x ⫽ 6x ⫹ 30,000
c. P x ⫽4x ⫺ 30,000

2
30. a. f x ⫽ x ⫹ 2.4

1
1

2
2

b. $5.4 million

1

2

b. R x ⫽ 10x
d. ($6,000); $2000; $18,000

32. a. $200,000/year

b. $4,000,000

33. p ⫽ ⫺0.05x ⫹ 200

p

200

150

100

50

–1000

1000

2000

3000

4000

5000

6000

x

–50

34. p ⫽

1
36  x ⫹ 400
9

35. 117 mg

36. a. y ⫽ 0.25x

b. 1600

37. $45,000

38. 400; 800

39. 990; 2240

40.

T

140
120
100
80
60
40
20

2

4

6

8 10  12

n

As the length of the list increases, the time taken to learn the list
increases by a very large amount.

41. 648,000; 901,900; 1,345,200; 1,762,800

42. a. $16.4 billion; $17.6 billion; $18.3 billion; $18.8 billion; 

$19.3 billion

b.

y (billion dollars)

19

18

17

16

1

2

3

4

t (year)

43. a.

b.

f1t2 ⫽ 267; t1t2 ⫽ 2t 2 ⫹ 46t ⫹ 733
f1t2 ⫹ t1t2 ⫽ 2t 2 ⫹ 46t ⫹ 1000

c.

1936 tons

44. 5000; $20

23 13V2>14p2

d. 3 ft

b. t t ⫽ ␲t

9
2

1

2

1

2
2 23 t

3

45. a. r ⫽ f V ⫽

c. h t ⫽

1

2

46. a. 59.8%; 58.9%; 59.2%; 60.7%, 61.7%

b.

P%

62

61

60

59

c. 60.7%

1

2

3

4

t (year)

47. x120 ⫺ 2x22
48. 100x 2 ⫹

1350

x

Chapter 2 Before Moving On, page 156

1. y ⫽

5   x ⫺ 3
7
5

2. y ⫽

⫺1

3  x ⫹ 4
3

3. a. 3

b. 2

c.

17
4

4. a.

1

x ⫹ 1

⫹ x2 ⫹ 1

b.

x2 ⫹ 1
x ⫹ 1

1

c.

x2 ⫹ 2
2

1

5. V x ⫽ 108x2 ⫺ 4x3

d.

1

1x ⫹ 12 2

⫹ 1

CHAPTER 3
Exercises 3.1, page 162

1. a. 16

b. 27

3. a. 3

b.

15

5. a. ⫺3

b. 8

7. a. 4x 3

b. 5x3/2y2

9. a.

2
a

b.

1
3 b2

11. a. 8x 9y 6

b. 16x 4y 4z 6

13. 3

15. 3

17. 3

19.

5
4

21. 1 or 2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

23.

27.

31.

25.

y = 2x

y

2

4
3

y = 2 – x

y

1

4
3
2

–2

–1

1

2

3

x

– 3  – 2  –1

1 2

x

29.

y

30

20

10

y = e0.5x

–3

–1

1 2 3 4 5

x

y = 40.5x

y

1

4
3
2

–2

–1

1

2

3

4

y
7
6
5
4
3
2

y = 0.5e–x

–2 –1

21

x

x

33.

f1x2 ⫽ 100

16
52 x

35. 54.6

37. a. 26.30%; 24.67%; 21.71%; 19.72%

b.

R(t) %

25

20

15

10

5

CHAPTER 3 ANSWERS

895

Using Technology Exercises 3.1, page 165

3.

7.

1.

5.

9.

11. a.

b. 0.08 g/cm3

c. 0.12 g/cm3

13. a.

b. 20 sec

c. 35.1 sec

Exercises 3.2, page 172

5

10

15

t (year)

1.

log2 64 ⫽ 6

3.

log4  1
16

⫽ ⫺2

5.

log1/3 1
3

⫽ 1

7.

log32 16 ⫽ 4
5

9. log10 0.001 ⫽ ⫺3

11. 1.0792

0

1

2

3

4

5

0.45

0.80

1.41

2.49

4.39

7.76

13. 1.2042

15. 1.6813

21.

log x ⫹ 4 log 1x ⫹ 12

39. a.
Year
Number of Web 
Addresses (billions)

b.

N(t) (billions)

6

4

2

1

2

3

4

5

t (year)

41. 34,210,000

43. a. 0.08 g/cm3

b. 0.12 g/cm3

45. False

47. True

ln 

17. ln a2b3

19.

31xy13 z
2 log 1x ⫹ 12 ⫺ log 1x  2 ⫹ 12
2 ln 11 ⫹ x  22

1

23.

25. ln x ⫺ x 2

27.

⫺3

2 ln x ⫺ 1

29. x ⫽ 8

31. x ⫽ 3

33. x ⫽ 10

35. x ⫽

11
2

37. x ⫽

16
7

39. x ⫽

11
3

41. x ⫽ 3

43.

y

y = log3 x

1

2

3

4

5

x

1

_1
_2
_3

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 3 ANSWERS

y

y = ln 2x

1

2

3

4

5

x

896

45.

2

1

_1
_2

47.

y

y = 2x

5

y = log2 x

5

x

17.

D(t)

2000

1000

t

50

a. 573 computers/month; 1177 computers/month; 
1548 computers/month; 1925 computers/month

b. 2000 computers/month

19. 135.1 cm

21. 86%

23. 76.4 million; 85.0 million

25. 1080

Using Technology Exercises 3.3, page 185

49. 5.1986

57.

⫺2 ln a A
Bb
63. a. 103I0

51. ⫺0.0912

53. ⫺8.0472
59. f1x2 ⫽ 2 ⫹ 2.8854 ln x

55. ⫺4.9041

61. 106 mm

b. 100,000 times greater

c. 10,000,000 times greater

65. 27.4 years

67. 6.4 years

69. a. 9.1 sec

b. 20.3 sec

1.

3. a.

71. False

73. a. ln 2

Exercises 3.3, page 181

1. a. 0.02

b. 300

c.

t
Q

0
300

10
366

20
448

3. a. Q1t2 ⫽ 100e0.035t

b. 266 min

5. a. 54.93 years

b. 14.25 billion

7. 8.7 lb/in.2

9. Q1t2 ⫽ 100e⫺0.049t; 70.7 g

11. 13,412 years ago

13.

Q(t)

100

10 

20

t

a. 60 words/min

b. 107 words/min

c. 136 words/min

15. $5.81 trillion; $8.57 trillion

b. 666 million, 1006.6 million

5. a.

1000

100
2217

1.46 ⫻ 1011
c. Q1t2 ⫽ 1000e0.035t

b. 325 million

7. a.

b. 0
d. 0.760 g/cm3

c. 0.237 g/cm3

f 1t2 ⫽

544.61

1 ⫹ 1.65e⫺0.1846t

9. a.

b.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Chapter 3 Concept Review, page 186

37.

y

1. power; 0; 1; exponential

2. a.

3. a.

1⫺⬁, ⬁2; 10, ⬁2
10, ⬁2; 1⫺⬁, ⬁2; 11, 02

b.

4. a. x

b. x

10, 12

; left; right

b. falls; rises

5. a. initially; growth

b. decay

c. time; one half

6. a.
b.

learning curve; C
logistic growth model; A, carrying capacity

Chapter 3 Review Exercises, page 187

1.

y

2.

y

120
100
80
60
40
20

120
100
80
60
40
20

⫺1

1

2

3

x

⫺3

⫺2

⫺1

1

3.

y

1

⫺1
⫺2

4.

y

x

2
1

⫺1

2

4

6

8

10

2

4

6

8

10

x

x

CHAPTER 4 ANSWERS

897

y = log3 (x + 1)

2

4

6

8

10

x

2

1

−1
−2

38. a. Q1t2 ⫽ 2000e0.01831t

40.

D(t)

b. 162,000

39. k ⬇ 0.0004

a. 1175; 2540; 3289

b. 4000

4000

2000

t

50

41. 970
42. 12.5/1000 live births; 9.3/1000 live births; 6.9/1000 live births
43. a. 0 g/cm3

b. 0.0361 g/cm3

Chapter 3 Before Moving On, page 188

1.

12
x6

4. ⫺0.9589

5. 8.7 min

2. x ⫽ ln 3

3. x ⫽ 0 or 8

5. log3 81 ⫽ 4

6. log9 3 ⫽

1
2

7. log2/3 ⫽ ⫺3

27
8

3
8. log16 0.125 ⫽ ⫺
4

9. 3.4011

10. 2.1972

11. 1.2809

12. 4.3174

13. x ⫹ y ⫹ z

14. x ⫹ 2y ⫺ z

15. y ⫹ 2z

16. x ⫽ 3

17. x ⫽ ⫺2, 1

18. x ⫽ ⫺5

19. x ⫽ ⫺2, 3

CHAPTER 4
Exercises 4.1, page 202

1. $80; $580

3. $836

5. $1000

7. 243 days

1
3

9. 10%/year

11. $1718.19

13. $4974.47

20. x ⫽

15
2

21. x ⫽ 2

22. x ⬇ 1.1610

23. x ⬇ ⫺0.9464

15. $27,566.93

17. $261,751.04

19. $214,986.69

24. x ⬇ ⫺2.5025

25. x ⬇ ⫺1.2528

26. x ⬇ 2.8332

21. 10.25%/year

23. 8.3%/year

25. $31,576.37

27. x ⬇ 1.8195

28. x ⬇ 0.2409

29. x ⬇ 33.8672

30. x ⬇ ⫾1.8934

31. x ⬇ 2.5903

32. x ⫽ ⫺9.1629

33. x ⬇ 8.9588

34. x ⬇ 3.4657

35. x ⬇ ⫺9.1629

36.

y

3

2

1

–3

–2

–1

_1
_2
_3

y = log2(x + 3)

1

2

3

x

27. $30,255.95

29. $6885.64

31. 2.2 years

33. 7.7 years

35. 6.08%/year

37. 2.06 years

39. 24%/year

41. $123,000

43. 5%/year

45. 2.39%/year

47. $852.21

49. $255,256

51. $2.58 million

53. $22,163.75

55. $26,267.49

57. a. $34,626.88

b. $33,886.16

c. $33,506.76

59. Acme Mutual Fund

61. $23,329.48

63. $5994.86

65. $339.79 billion

67. Investment A

69. $33,885.14; $33,565.38

71.

$151,718

80,000e11t/2⫺0.09t2;
81. True

75. 4.2%

77. 5.83%

79. True

Using Technology Exercises 4.1, page 208

1. $5872.78

3. $475.49

5. 8.95%/year

7. 10.20%/year

9. $29,743.30

11. $53,303.25

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

898

CHAPTER 5 ANSWERS

Exercises 4.2, page 215

Chapter 4 Concept Review Questions, page 243

1. $15,937.42

3. $54,759.35

5. $37,965.57

1. a. original; P(1 ⫹ rt)

b. interest; P(1 ⫹ i)n; A(1 ⫹ i)⫺n
a 1 ⫹ r

mb m

⫺ 1

7. $137,209.97

9. $31,048.97

11. $15,558.61

13. $15,011.29

15. $68,642.95

17. $455.70

19. $44,526.45

21. Karen

23. $9850.12

25. $608.54

27. Between $383,242 and $469,053

29. Between $307,014 and $373,768

31. $17,887.61

33. $70,814.38

35. False

Using Technology Exercises 4.2, page 219

1. $59,622.15

3. $8453.59

5. $35,607.23

7. $13,828.60

9. a.

b. $35,038.78/year

Exercises 4.3, page 228

1. $14,902.95

3. $444.24

5. $622.13

7. $798.70

9. $1491.19

11. $516.76

13. $172.95

15. $2348.83

17. $3450.87

2. simple; one; nominal; m; 

3. annuity; ordinary annuity; simple annuity

Rc 11 ⫹ i2 n ⫺ 1

i

d

Rc 1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ i2 ⫺n

i

d

; 

4.

5.

6. future; 

iS

11 ⫹ i2 n ⫺ 1
232a ⫹ 1n ⫺ 12d4

n

Pi

1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ i2 ⫺n

7. constant 

8. constant 

d; a ⫹ 1n ⫺ 12d; 
a11 ⫺ rn2
1 ⫺ r

r; arn⫺1; 

Chapter 4 Review Exercises, page 244

1. a. $7320.50
d. $7446.77

2. a. $19,859.95
d. $20,156.03

b. $7387.28

c. $7422.53

b. $20,018.07

c. $20,100.14

3. a. 12%

b. 12.36%

c. 12.5509%

d. 12.6825%

4. a. 11.5%

b. 11.8306%

c. 12.0055%

d. 12.1259%

5. $30,000.29

6. $39,999.95

7. $5557.68

8. $23,221.71

9. $7861.70

10. $173,804.43

11. $694.49

12. $318.93

13. $332.73

14. $208.44

19. $16,274.54

21. a. $212.27

b. $1316.36; $438.79

15. 7.442%

16. 10.034%

17. $80,000

23. a. $456.33; $352.28

b. $1427.88; $1909.44

18. $2,592,702; $8,612,002

19. $5,491,922

20. $2982.73

25. $1438.92; $46,670; $69,154; $140,392

27. $60,982.31

21. $15,000

22. $5000

23. 7.6%

24. $218.64

29. $3135.48

31. $328.67

33. $447.98

25. $73,178.41

26. $13,026.89

27. $2000

35. $1454.19; $2868.08

37. $1,111.63

39. $24,639.53

28. a. $965.55

b. $227,598

c. $42,684

41. $33,835.20

43. $212.77

45. $167,341.59

29. a. $1217.12

b. $99,081.60

c. $91,367

47. $1957.80; $257,135.23

30. $19,573.56

31. $4727.67

32. $205.09; 20.27%/year

49. a. $1681.71

b. $194,282.85

c. $1260.11

d. $421.60

33. $2203.83

51. $1000.61

53. $29,658

55. $640,569.40

Chapter 4 Before Moving On, page 245

Using Technology Exercises 4.3, page 234

1. $628.02

3. $1685.47

5. $1960.96

7. $894.12

9. $18,288.92

Exercises 4.4, page 241

1. 30

9
3. ⫺
2

5. ⫺3, 8, 19, 30, 41

7. x ⫹ 6y

9. 795

11. 792

13. 671

15. a. 275

b. ⫺280

17. At the beginning of the 37th week

19. $15.80

21. b. $800

23. GP; 256; 508

25. Not a GP

1
27. GP;  ; 
3

1093

3

29. 3; 0

31. 293,866

33. $56,284

35. Annual raise of 8%/year

37. a. $20,113.57

b. $87,537.38

39. $25,165.82

41. $39,321.60; $110,678.40

43. True

1. $2540.47

2. 6.18%/year

3. $569,565.47

4. $1213.28

5. $35.13

6. a. 210

b. 127.5

CHAPTER 5
Exercises 5.1, page 253

1. Unique solution; (2, 1)

3. No solution

5. Unique solution; (3, 2)

7. Infinitely many solutions; 1

t, 2

5t ⫺ 2

2; t, a parameter

9. Unique solution; (1, ⫺2)

11. No solution

15. Infinitely many solutions; 1

13. Unique solution; 1
2

2t ⫹ 2

3, t

1
2, 1
2

2

17. k ⫽ ⫺2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

19. 42x ⫹ 30y ⫽ 18,500
42x ⫹ 30y ⫽ 18,600

21. 5x ⫹ y ⫽ 100
5x ⫹ 6y ⫽ 560

23.

x ⫹ y ⫽ 1000
0.5x ⫹ 1.5y ⫽ 1300

25. 0.06x ⫹ 0.08y ⫹ 0.12z ⫽ 21,600
0
0

z ⫽
0.08y ⫺ 0.12z ⫽

2x 

⫺

27. 18x ⫹ 20y ⫹ 24z ⫽ 26,400
4x ⫹ 4y ⫹ 3z ⫽ 4,900
5x ⫹ 4y ⫹ 6z ⫽ 6,200

29. 18,000x ⫹ 27,000y ⫹ 36,000z ⫽ 2,250,000
0
100

2y
y ⫹

x ⫺
x ⫹

⫽
z ⫽

31. 10x ⫹ 6y ⫹ 8z ⫽ 100
10x ⫹ 12y ⫹ 6z ⫽ 100
5x ⫹ 4y ⫹ 12z ⫽ 100

33. True

Exercises 5.2, page 266

1.

3.

c 2 ⫺3
1 ` 7
4d

3

£

0 ⫺1
2
0

2
  †  
2 ⫺8
3
4

5
4
0

§

5. 3x ⫹ 2y ⫽ ⫺4
x ⫺ y ⫽ 5

7.

x ⫹ 3y ⫹ 2z ⫽ 4
⫽ 5
2x
3x ⫺ 3y ⫹ 2z ⫽ 6

9. Yes

11. No

13. Yes

15. No

17. No

19.

c 1

2
  `
0 ⫺5

4

⫺10d

21.

c 1 ⫺2

20

0

  ` ⫺3
20d

23.

25.

27.

£

£

2

1
3
0 ⫺1 ⫺5
0 ⫺7 ⫺7

  †

6
⫺7
⫺14

§

⫺6 ⫺11
4
⫺2

2
1

0
1
0

  †

⫺5
3
⫺10

§

  ` 6
9
c 3
4d
2
1
R2 ⫺ 2R1———씮

c 1

0

3
1

1
3

2

R1

——씮

c 1
  ` 2
c 1
3
0d
0 ⫺5
  ` 2
c 1
0d
R1 ⫺ 3R2———씮

0

3
1

  ` 2
4d
⫺ R2
——씮

1
5

0
1

  ` 2
0d

29.

£

3
1
3
8
2 ⫺3

1
3
1

†

3
7
⫺10

§

R2 ⫺ 3R1———씮
R3 ⫺ 2R1

£

1
3
1
0 ⫺1
0
0 ⫺9 ⫺1

†

3
⫺2
⫺16

§

⫺R2——씮

CHAPTER 5 ANSWERS

899

£

£

£

3
1

1
1
0
0
0 ⫺9 ⫺1

†

3
2
⫺16

§

R1 ⫺ 3R2———씮
R3 ⫹ 9R2

R1 ⫹ R3———씮

⫺R3

1
0
0

1
0
0

0
1
0⫺1

1
0

†

⫺3
2
2

§

0
1
0

0
0
1

†

⫺1
2
⫺2

§

31. (2, 0)

33. (⫺1, 2, ⫺2)

35. (2,1)

37. (4, ⫺2)

39. (⫺1, 2)

41.

43.

1

2, 1
1
4

2

45.

1

7
9, ⫺1

9, ⫺2
3

2

49. (3, 0, 2)

51. (1, ⫺2, 1)

1

1
2, 3
2

2

47. (19, ⫺7, ⫺15)

53. (⫺20, ⫺28, 13)

55. (4, ⫺1, 3)

57. 300 acres of corn, 200 acres of wheat

59. In 100 lb of blended coffee, use 40 lb of the $5/lb coffee and 60 lb of

the $6/lb coffee.

61. 200 children and 800 adults

63. $40,000 in a savings account, $120,000 in mutual funds, $80,000 in

bonds

65. 400 bags of grade A fertilizer; 600 bags of grade B fertilizer; 

300 bags of grade C fertilizer

67. 60 compact, 30 intermediate-size, and 10 full-size cars

69. 4 oz of Food I, 2 oz of Food II, 6 oz of Food III

71. 240 front orchestra seats, 560 rear orchestra seats, 200 front balcony

seats

73. 7 days in London, 4 days in Paris, and 3 days in Rome

75. False

Using Technology Exercises 5.2, page 271

1. x1 ⫽ 3; x2 ⫽ 1; x3 ⫽ ⫺1; x4 ⫽ 2

3. x1 ⫽ 5; x2 ⫽ 4; x3 ⫽ ⫺3; x4 ⫽ ⫺4

5. x1 ⫽ 1; x2 ⫽ ⫺1; x3 ⫽ 2; x4 ⫽ 0; x5 ⫽ 3

Exercises 5.3, page 278

1. a. One solution

b. (3, ⫺1, 2)

3. a. One solution

b. (2, 5)

5. a. Infinitely many solutions

b. (4 ⫺ t, ⫺2, t); t, a parameter

7. a. No solution

9. a. Infinitely many solutions

b. 14, ⫺1, 3 ⫺ t, t2; t, a parameter
b. 12 ⫺ 3s, 1 ⫹ s, s, t2; s, t, parameters

11. a. Infinitely many solutions

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

900

CHAPTER 5 ANSWERS

13. (2, 1)

15. No solution

17. (1, ⫺1)

21.

14 ⫹ t, ⫺3 ⫺ t, t2

25. No solution

4
3

⫺ 2

12 ⫹ 2t, t2; t, a parameter
2; t, a parameter
2

⫺1, 17

7 , 23
7

3  t, t

1 ⫺ 1

4 s ⫹ 1

4 t, s, t

19.

23. 1
1
1

29.

27.

2; s, t, parameters

31. No solution

33. (2, ⫺1, 4)

35. x ⫽ 20 ⫹ z, y ⫽ 40 ⫺ 2z; 25 compact cars, 30 mid-sized cars, and 

5 full-sized cars; 30 compact cars, 20 mid-sized cars, and 10 full-
sized cars

39. $10,000 in money-market account, $60,000 in stocks, and $30,000 in

bonds; $20,000 in money-market account, $70,000 in stocks, and
$10,000 in bonds

41. a. x1

x1 ⫺ x2

x2 ⫺ x3

⫺ x3 ⫹ x4

⫹ x6

⫽ 1700
⫹ x7 ⫽ 700
⫽ 300
⫽ 400
⫹ x7 ⫽ 700
⫽ 1800

⫺ x4 ⫹ x5

x5 ⫹ x6

b. (1700 ⫺ s, 1000 ⫺ s ⫹ t, 700 ⫺ s ⫹ t, 1100 ⫺ s ⫹ t, 1800 ⫺ s,
s, t); (900, 1000, 700, 1100, 1000, 800, 800); (1000, 1100, 800,
1200, 1100, 700, 800)

c. x6 must have at least 300 cars/hr.

43. k ⫽ ⫺36; 

14 ⫹ 2

3 y ⫺ 4

3 z, y, z2

45. False

Using Technology Exercises 5.3, page 282

1.

3.

11 ⫹ t, 2 ⫹ t, t2; t, a parameter
1⫺17
7  t, t2;

7  t, 3 ⫺ t, ⫺18
7

⫹ 1

⫹ 6

7

t, a parameter

5. No solution

Exercises 5.4, page 289

1. 4 ⫻ 4; 4 ⫻ 3; 1 ⫻ 5; 4 ⫻ 1

3. 2; 3; 8

5. D; DT ⫽ [1 3 ⫺2 0]

7. 3 ⫻ 2; 3 ⫻ 2; 3 ⫻ 3; 3 ⫻ 3

9.

£

1
6
6 ⫺1
2
2

§

11.

£

1

1 ⫺4
1
1

⫺1 ⫺8
3

6

13.

17.

19.

5
10

2

c 5
c ⫺1.9

6.0

9

13d

15.

c 3 ⫺4 ⫺16
16d

17 ⫺4

3.0 ⫺0.6
9.6

1.2d

£

7
2
⫺19
6
29
3

10
3 ⫺1
3
⫺17
2
23
3
2
3
17
⫺1 ⫺2
6

§

21. u ⫽ 3, x ⫽ , y ⫽ 7, and z ⫽ 2

5
2

23. x ⫽ 2, y ⫽ 2, z ⫽ , and u ⫽ 15

⫺7
3

31.

≥

3
2
⫺1
5

¥

33. £

1
⫺1
2

3
4
2

0
1
0

§

§

Exercises 5.5, page 302

1. 2 ⫻ 5; not deﬁned

3. 1 ⫻ 1; 7 ⫻ 7

35.

£

220
220
215

215
210
205

210
200
195

205
195
190

§

37.

B ⫽ £

350.2
422.3
638.6

370.8
442.9
679.8

391.4
453.2
721

§

39. a.

D ⫽ £

b.

E ⫽ £

2960
1100
1230

3256
1210
1353

1510
550
590

1661
605
649

1150
490
470

§

1265
539
517

§

2000 2001
7.05
4.09

 c 6.88

4.13

2002
7.18

4.06d

41.

MA
U.S.

43.

White Black Hispanic
91.2

Women
Men

 c 82.6

78

80.5
73.9

84.8d

Women Men

White
Black
Hispanic 

£

82.6
80.5
91.2

78
73.9
84.8

§

45. True

47. False

Using Technology Exercises 5.4, page 295

1.

3.

5.

7.

£

£

£

£

15
51.25
21.25

⫺5
    1
   0.5

38.75 ⫺67.5
40
35

   33.75
    52.5 ⫺38.75
⫺65

   105

§

6.3 ⫺6.8
0.5
4.2 ⫺3.5

     3.9
     5.4 ⫺4.8
     5.6

§

⫺3.66
16.44 ⫺3.65
10.64
12.77
2.58
0.28 ⫺10.84
5.09

0.63
0.05
17.64

§

22.2 ⫺0.3 ⫺12
21.6
9
8.7

17.7
4.2 ⫺20.7

4.5
⫺4.2
33.6

§

5. n ⫽ s; m ⫽ t

7.

c ⫺1
3d
c 4 ⫺2
13d
c 0.57

0.64

9

11.

15.

1.93

1.76d

c 13
⫺10d
c 2
16d

9

5

9.

13.

17.

21.

£

£

6 ⫺3

⫺2

4 ⫺4

0
1 ⫺8
9

§

19.

c 5

1

1⫺6
7⫺4

d

⫺4 ⫺20
12
32

4
12

4
0
20

§

23.

c 4 ⫺3

1 ⫺5d

7

2

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 5 ANSWERS

901

57. a.

£

8800
3380
1020

§

b.

£

8800
3380
1020

§

c.

£

17,600
6,760
2,040

§

59. False

61. True

Using Technology Exercises 5.5, page 309

1.

3.

5.

7.

9.

£

£

£

£

18.66
24.48
15.39

20.09
44.42
20.97

15.2
41.88
  7.16

⫺12
   89.82
  ⫺1.25

  ⫺1.3
20.61
71.6
   64.89
  7.17 ⫺60.65

§

§

32.89

⫺12.85 ⫺8.37
14.29

13.48

13.63 ⫺57.17
256.92
181.64

§

128.59
246.73
125.06

⫺32.50
123.08
403.12
481.52
47.01 ⫺264.81

§

68
176
128
174

117
85
69
157
157

≥

87
119
51
28

113
72
81
133
154

E

110
221
142
174

82
143
94
112

¥

72
36
76
56
94

101
72
87
121
127

90
76
30
146

122U

11.

≥

170
349
245.2
310

  18.1
226.5
157.7
245.2

133.1 ⫺106.3
324.1
231.5
291

   164
   125.5
   274.3

341.3
506.4
312.9
354.2

¥

c 3 ⫺5
2d

⫺1

7. Does not exist

2 ⫺11 ⫺3
⫺6 ⫺2
1
⫺1
0
   0

§

11. Does not exist

£

£

5.

9.

13.

15.

⫺13
10
2
5
⫺ 7
10

3

7
5
⫺1
5
3
5

1
2
0
1
2

§

4 ⫺6

≥

⫺2 ⫺3
⫺4 ⫺4
⫺4 ⫺5

1
5 ⫺1
7 ⫺1
8 ⫺1

¥

17. a. AX ⫽ B, where 

A ⫽ c 2

1

5

3d

,

X ⫽ c x
yd

,

and 

B ⫽ c 3
2d

b. x ⫽ ⫺1; y ⫽ 1

c. Kaitlin: $80.06; Emma: $88.58

Exercises 5.6, page 317

8

20d

27.

31.

7

; 

13

22

BA ⫽ c 5

AB ⫽ c 10
15d
A ⫽ c ⫺2 ⫺1
2d
A ⫽ c 2 ⫺3
3 ⫺4d

5

33. b. No

37. AX ⫽ B, where 

,

X ⫽ c x
yd

,

35. a.

AT ⫽ c 2

4 ⫺6d

5

and 

B ⫽ c 7
8d

39.

AX ⫽ B, where A ⫽ £

2 ⫺3
0
1 ⫺1

4
2 ⫺3
2

§ , X ⫽ £

x
y
z

§

,

and B ⫽ £

6
7
4

§

41.

AX ⫽ B, where A ⫽ £

and 

B ⫽ £

0
2
4

§

43. a.

AB ⫽ c 51,400
54,200d

⫺1

⫺3

1

1
2 ⫺1 ⫺1
4

2

§

,

X ⫽ £

x1
x2
x3

§

,

b. The first entry shows that William’s total stock holdings are
$51,400; the second shows that Michael’s stock holdings are
$54,200.

N

S

D

R

kroner kronor kroner

45. a.

A ⫽ Kaitlin
Emma

c     82

    64

    68
    74

     62
     44

rubles
    1200

    1600 d

b.

B ⫽

N
S
D
R

 ≥

0.1805
0.1582
0.1901
0.0356

¥  

47. a.

390    125    210    554

; the entries give the respective total number of

Model I, II, III, and IV houses built in the three states.

b.

£

300
120
60

§

; the entries give the respective total number of Model I, II,

III, and IV houses built in all three states.

49.

B ⫽ £

4
6
8

§ ;  AB ⫽D

1960
3180
2510

3300T;  $10,950

Ind

Rep
51. BA ⫽ [41,000 35,000

Dem

14,000]

53.

AB ⫽ £

1575
410
215

1590
405
205

1560
415
225

975
270
155

§

55. [277.60]; it represents Cindy’s long-distance bill for phone calls to

London, Tokyo, and Hong Kong.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

902

CHAPTER 5 ANSWERS

19. a. AX ⫽ B, where 

A ⫽ £

2 ⫺3 ⫺4
0 ⫺1
0
1 ⫺2
1

§

,

X ⫽ £

x
y
z

§

,

and 

B ⫽ £

4
3
⫺8

§

b. x ⫽ ⫺1; y ⫽ 2; z ⫽ ⫺3

21. a. AX ⫽ B, where 

A ⫽ £

1
2
⫺1

4⫺1
3⫺2
2

3

§ , X ⫽ £

x
y
z

§ ,

and 

B ⫽ £

3
1
7

§

b. x ⫽ 1; y ⫽ 1; z ⫽ 2

23. a. AX ⫽ B, where 

A ⫽ ≥

1 ⫺1
1
1
1
2
1
0
2
2 ⫺1 ⫺1

1
0
1
3

¥

,

X ⫽ ≥

x1
x2
x3
x4

¥

,

and 

B ⫽ ≥

6
4
7
9

¥

b. x1 ⫽ 1; x2 ⫽ 2; x3 ⫽ 0; x4 ⫽ 3

25. b. (i) x ⫽ 4.8 and y ⫽ 4.6

(ii) x ⫽ 0.4 and y ⫽ 1.8

27. b. (i) x ⫽ ⫺1; y ⫽ 3; z ⫽ 2

(ii) x ⫽ 1; y ⫽ 8; z ⫽ ⫺12

29. b. (i)

x ⫽ ⫺ 2
17

; 

y ⫽ ⫺10
17

; 

z ⫽ ⫺60
17

(ii) x ⫽ 1; y ⫽ 0; z ⫽ ⫺5

31. b. (i) x1 ⫽ 1; x2 ⫽ ⫺4; x3 ⫽ 5; x4 ⫽ ⫺1

(ii) x1 ⫽ 12; x2 ⫽ ⫺24; x3 ⫽ 21; x4 ⫽ ⫺7

33. a.

35. a.

2
2

2

⫺3
2

A⫺1 ⫽ c ⫺5
1d
A⫺1 ⫽ c 3 ⫺5
ABC ⫽ c 4
3d
1 ⫺2d ;
4d ; C⫺1 ⫽ c 1
B⫺1 ⫽ c 1 ⫺3
4d

⫺3
8
1

⫺1

10

; 

8
1
4

37.

c

5
7
⫺3
7

3
7
8

7d

39. a. 3214; 3929

b. 4286; 3571

c. 3929; 5357

41. a. 400 acres of soybeans; 300 acres of corn; 300 acres of wheat
b. 500 acres of soybeans; 400 acres of corn; 300 acres of wheat

43. a. $80,000 in high-risk stocks; $20,000 in medium-risk stocks;

$100,000 in low-risk stocks

b. $88,000 in high-risk stocks; $22,000 in medium-risk stocks;

$110,000 in low-risk stocks

c. $56,000 in high-risk stocks; $64,000 in medium-risk stocks;

$120,000 in low-risk stocks

45. All values of k except k  ⫽  3
2; 

1

3  ⫺  2k

 c 3 ⫺2
1d

⫺k

ad ⫽ 0

; every entry along the main diagonal is

47.

exists provided 

A⫺1
not equal to zero.

49. True

51. True

Using Technology Exercises 5.6, page 323

1.

£

0.36
0.06
⫺0.19

0.04 ⫺0.36
0.20
0.05
0.10
0.09

§

0.01 ⫺0.09

0.86 ⫺0.42

0.31 ⫺0.11
0.58 ⫺0.15 ⫺0.02
0.07 ⫺0.37
0.31

0.01 ⫺0.05

¥

3.

≥

⫺0.25

⫺0.27

0.30
⫺0.21

0.85 ⫺0.10 ⫺0.77 ⫺0.11
0.21
0.10
0.03 ⫺0.16
0.03
⫺0.14 ⫺0.46
0.71 ⫺0.05

0.01 ⫺0.26
0.12 ⫺0.01
0.13

0.10 ⫺0.05 ⫺0.10 ⫺0.03

0.11U

5.

E

7. x ⫽ 1.2; y ⫽ 3.6; z ⫽ 2.7
9. x1 ⬇ 2.50; x2 ⬇ ⫺0.88; x3 ⬇ 0.70; x4 ⬇ 0.51

Chapter 5 Concept Review Questions, page 325

1. a. one; many; no
3. Ri ↔ Rj; cRi; Ri ⫹ aRj; solution

b. one; many; no

2. equations

4. a. unique

b. no; infinitely many; unique

5. size; entries

6. size; corresponding

7. m ⫻ n; n ⫻ m; aji

8. cA; c

9. a. columns; rows

b. m ⫻ p

10. a. A(BC); AB ⫹ AC

b. n ⫻ r

11. A⫺1A; AA⫺1; singular

12. A⫺1B

Chapter 5 Review Exercises, page 325

1.

£

2
⫺1
3

2
4
3

§

2.

c ⫺2

⫺2

0

6d

3. [⫺6 ⫺2]

4.

c 17
13d

5. x ⫽ 2; y ⫽ 3; z ⫽ 1; w ⫽ 3

6. x ⫽ 2; y ⫽ ⫺2

7. a ⫽ 3; b ⫽ 4; c ⫽ ⫺2; d ⫽ 2; e ⫽ ⫺3

8. x ⫽ ⫺1; y ⫽ ⫺2; z ⫽ 1

9.

11.

13.

£

£

£

8

9
⫺10 ⫺1
12

11

11
3
10

§

10.

£

7 ⫺3
⫺1
⫺2
11
5
10 ⫺8
2

§

6
⫺12
24

18
6
0

6
18
12

§

12.

£

10 ⫺18
⫺10
26
4
14
16 ⫺32
⫺4

§

⫺11 ⫺16 ⫺15
⫺2 ⫺10
⫺4
⫺6
14
2

§

14. £

5
⫺2
26

20
20
10

19
8
30

§

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 6 ANSWERS

903

IBM Google Boeing
  ⫺200
100

  100
200 ⫺100

C ⫽ c  100

b.

GM
  ⫺300

100d Olivia

Max

45. 30 of each type

46. Houston: 100,000 gallons; Tulsa: 600,000 gallons

Chapter 5 Before Moving On, page 327

1.

2
3,⫺2

3, 5
3

1

2

2. a. (2, ⫺3, 1)
d. (0, 0, 0, 0)

b. No solution
e. (2 ⫹ t, 3 ⫺ 2t, t), t, a parameter

c. (2, 1 ⫺ 3t, t), t, a parameter

3. a. (⫺1, 2)

4. a.

c 3

1
5 ⫺2

b. 1
6d

4

4
7, ⫺5
7

⫹ 2t, t

2, t, a parameter

b.

c 14

14

3
5

7

1d

c.

5.

£

3 ⫺2 ⫺5
6
2

2
1

⫺3
⫺1

§

6. (1, ⫺1, 2)

5

c 0
4 ⫺1 ⫺11d

3

CHAPTER 6
Exercises 6.1, page 335

1.

y

3.

y

x

2

5.

y

x = – 3

7.

x

5

– 5

y

4

x

2

15.

£

⫺3
⫺2
74

17
56
78

8
27
116

§

16.

£

3
2
11
2
7
2

⫺2 ⫺5
⫺1
11
⫺3
0

§

17. x ⫽ 1; y ⫽ ⫺1

18. x ⫽ ⫺1; y ⫽ 3

19. x ⫽ 1; y ⫽ 2; z ⫽ 3

20.

12, 2t ⫺ 5, t2; t, a parameter
22. x ⫽ 1; y ⫽ ⫺1; z ⫽ 2; w ⫽ 2

21. No solution

23. x ⫽ 1; y ⫽ 0; z ⫽ 1

24. x ⫽ 2; y ⫽ ⫺1; z ⫽ 3

25.

27.

29.

31.

33.

35.

37.

38.

2
5
⫺1
5

c
c ⫺1

⫺1
5
3

5d
2d

2
1 ⫺3

26.

28.

3
4
⫺1
8

c
c 1

4
1
8

⫺1
2
1

4d
4d

1
2
⫺1

£

5
4
⫺1
4
⫺3
4

£

⫺1
5
2
3
⫺ 1
30

1
4
⫺1
4
1
4

2
5
⫺1
3
1
15

⫺7
4
3
4
5
4

§

0
1
3
⫺1
6

§

30.

£

⫺1
4
7
8
⫺1
8

1
2
⫺3
4
1
4

32.

£

0 ⫺1
5
1
1
5

⫺2
⫺1

⫺1
4
⫺5
8
3
8

§

2
5
1
3
5

§

1

3
2
⫺7
2

c
c 2

⫺1d
5d
A⫺1 ⫽ c 2

⫺3
5
1

5
1
5

7
1
7

A⫺1 ⫽ c

2
5
⫺1
5

34.

c

11
24
⫺ 1
12

⫺7
8
1

4d

36.

c

4
7
⫺3
7

⫺3
7
4

7d

3
7
⫺2

7d ; x ⫽ ⫺1; y ⫽ ⫺2
10d ; x ⫽ 2; y ⫽ 1

3
10
1

39.

A⫺1 ⫽ £

1 ⫺2
4
5
5
1 ⫺1
⫺ 7
3
5
10

⫺1
⫺1
2

§ ; x ⫽ 1; y ⫽ 2; z ⫽ 4

40.

A⫺1 ⫽ £

0

1
7
⫺1 ⫺4
7
⫺1
⫺1
2
2

2
7
6
7
1
2

§ ; x ⫽ 3; y ⫽ ⫺1; z ⫽ 2

41. $10,824, $10,078, and $13,266

42. $2,300,000; $2,450,000; an increase of $150,000

43. a.

A ⫽ c 800

600

1200
1400

400
600

1500

2000d

b.

B ⫽ ≥

50.26
31.00
103.07
38.67

¥

9.

y

8

x

x

b. William: $176,641; Michael: $212,738

– 6

IBM Google Boeing
  1200
2000

  500
600

500

A ⫽ c  800

44. a.

IBM Google Boeing
  1000
2100

  600
500

700

B ⫽ c  900

GM
  1500

800d  

Olivia
Max

GM
  1200

900d  

Olivia
Max

;

11. 1 ⱕ x ⱕ 5; 2 ⱕ y ⱕ 4

13. 2x ⫺ y ⱖ 2; 5x ⫹ 7y ⱖ 35; x ⱕ 4

15. x ⫺ y ⱖ ⫺10; 7x ⫹ 4y ⱕ 140; x ⫹ 3y ⱖ 30

17. x ⫹ y ⱖ 7; x ⱖ 2; 3 ⱕ y ⱕ 7

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

904

19.

CHAPTER 6 ANSWERS

y

4

–7

x

8

Unbounded

21.

y

x

5

Unbounded

23.

y

–1

3

x

Bounded

No solution

25.

y

x = 3

6
4
2

2

4

6

Bounded

27.

y

2

– 4

– 2

4

Unbounded

x

x

29.

y

3x – 7y = – 24

Unbounded

x + 3y = 8

x

31.

y

x

3

– 4

Bounded

y

x + y = 4

6x + 5y = 30

x

Bounded

3x + y = 6

y

33.

35.

3

– 6

x – y = –6

x – 2y = –2

x

6

x + 2y = 6

Unbounded

37. False

39. True

Exercises 6.2, page 342

1. Maximize P ⫽ 3x ⫹ 4y

subject to

6x ⫹ 9y ⱕ 300
5x ⫹ 4y ⱕ 180
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

3. Maximize P ⫽ 2x ⫹ 1.5y

subject to

3x ⫹ 4y ⱕ 1000
6x ⫹ 3y ⱕ 1200
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

5. Maximize P ⫽ 45x ⫹ 20y

subject to

40x ⫹ 16y ⱕ 3200
3x ⫹ 4y ⱕ 520
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

7. Maximize P ⫽ 0.1x ⫹ 0.12y

subject to

x ⫹ y ⱕ 20
x ⫺ 4y ⱖ 0
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

subject to

9. Maximize P ⫽ 50x ⫹ 40y
200 y ⱕ 1
300 y ⱕ 1
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

200 x ⫹ 1
1
1
100 x ⫹ 1

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

11. Minimize C ⫽ 14,000x ⫹ 16,000y
50x ⫹ 75y ⱖ 650
3000x ⫹ 1000y ⱖ 18,000

subject to

x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

13. Minimize C ⫽ 300x ⫹ 500y

subject to

x ⫹ y ⱖ 10
x ⱕ 5
y ⱕ 10
y ⱖ 6
x ⱖ 0

15. Minimize C ⫽ 2x ⫹ 5y

subject to

30x ⫹ 25y ⱖ 400
x ⫹ 0.5y ⱖ 10
2x ⫹ 5y ⱖ 40

x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

17. Minimize C ⫽ 1000x ⫹ 800y

subject to

70,000x ⫹ 10,000y ⱖ 2,000,000
40,000x ⫹ 20,000y ⱖ 1,400,000
20,000x ⫹ 40,000y ⱖ 1,000,000

x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

19. Maximize P ⫽ 0.1x ⫹ 0.15y ⫹ 0.2z

subject to

x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⱕ 2,000,000

⫺2x ⫺ 2y ⫹ 8z ⱕ 0
⫺6x ⫹ 4y ⫹ 4z ⱕ 0
⫺10x ⫹ 6y ⫹ 6z ⱕ 0
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

21. Maximize P ⫽ 18x ⫹ 12y ⫹ 15z
subject to 2x ⫹ y ⫹ 2z ⱕ 900
3x ⫹ y ⫹ 2z ⱕ 1080
2x ⫹ 2y ⫹ z ⱕ 840
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

23. Maximize P ⫽ 26x ⫹ 28y ⫹ 24z

subject to

5
4

3
2

x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⱕ 310
x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⱕ 205
x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⱕ 190

3
2
3
4
1
2

x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

25. Minimize C ⫽ 60x1 ⫹ 60x2 ⫹ 80x3 ⫹ 80x4 ⫹ 70x5 ⫹ 50x6

subject to

x1 ⫹ x2 ⫹ x3 ⱕ 300
x4 ⫹ x5 ⫹ x6 ⱕ 250
x1 ⫹ x4 ⱖ 200
x2 ⫹ x5 ⱖ 150
x3 ⫹ x6 ⱖ 200

x1 ⱖ 0, x2 ⱖ 0, . . . , x6 ⱖ 0

27. Maximize P ⫽ x ⫹ 0.8y ⫹ 0.9z

subject to 8x

⫹ 4z ⱕ 16,000
8x ⫹ 12y ⫹ 8z ⱕ 24,000
4y ⫹ 4z ⱕ 5000
z ⱕ 800

x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

29. False

Exercises 6.3, page 353

1. Max: 35; min: 5

3. No max. value; min: 18

5. Max: 44; min: 15

7. x ⫽ 3; y ⫽ 3; P ⫽ 15

9. Any point (x, y) lying on the line segment joining 

P ⫽ 5

11. x ⫽ 0; y ⫽ 8; P ⫽ 64

15
2, 02

and (1, 3); 

CHAPTER 6 ANSWERS

905

13. x ⫽ 0; y ⫽ 4; P ⫽ 12

15. x ⫽ 4; y ⫽ 0; C ⫽ 8

17. Any point (x, y) lying on the line segment joining (20, 10) and 

(40, 0); C ⫽ 120

19. x ⫽ 14; y ⫽ 3; C ⫽ 58

21. x ⫽ 3; y ⫽ 3; C ⫽ 75

23. x ⫽ 15; y ⫽ 17.5; P ⫽ 115

25. x ⫽ 10; y ⫽ 38; P ⫽ 134

27. Max: x ⫽ 15; y ⫽ 3; P ⫽ 135

Min: x ⫽ 9; y ⫽ 9; P ⫽ 117

29. 20 Product A, 20 Product B; $140

31. 120 model A, 160 model B; $480

33. 40 tables; 100 chairs; $3800

35. $16 million in homeowner loans, $4 million in auto loans; $2.08 

million

37. 50 fully assembled units, 150 kits; $8500

39. Saddle Mine: 4 days; Horseshoe Mine: 6 days; $152,000

41. Reservoir: 4 million gallons; pipeline: 6 million gallons; $4200

43. Infinitely many solutions; 10 oz of Food A and 4 oz of Food B or 

20 oz of Food A and 0 oz of Food B, etc., with a minimum value of 
40 mg of cholesterol

45. 30 in Newspaper I, 10 in Newspaper II; $38,000

47. 80 from I to A, 20 from I to B, 0 from II to A, 50 from II to B

49. $22,500 in growth stocks and $7500 in speculative stocks; maximum

return; $5250

51. 750 urban, 750 suburban; $10,950

53. False

55. a. True

b. True

59. a.

y

2x + y = 4

x + y = 3

3

5x + 8y = 40

x

3

b. No solution

Exercises 6.4, page 374

1. a. It is already in standard form.

b.
x
1
1

y
4
3
⫺2 ⫺4

u
1
0
0

√
0
1
0

P
0
0
1

Constant

12
10
0

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

906

CHAPTER 6 ANSWERS

subject to

3. a. Maximize P ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3y
x ⫹ y ⱕ 10
x ⫹ 2y ⱕ 12
2x ⫹ y ⱕ 12
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

b.
x
1
1
2

y
1
2
1
⫺2 ⫺3

u
1
0
0
0

√
0
1
0
0

w
0
0
1
0

P
0
0
0
1

Constant

10
12
12
0

subject to

5. a. Maximize P ⫽ x ⫹ 3y ⫹ 4z
x ⫹ 2y ⫹ z ⱕ 40
x ⫹ y ⫹ z ⱕ 30
x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0, z ⱖ 0

b.
x
1
1

y
2
1

z
1
1
⫺1 ⫺3 ⫺4

u
1
0
0

√
0
1
0

P
0
0
1

Constant

40
30
0

30
7. In final form; x ⫽ ,
7

y ⫽ 20
7

, u ⫽ 0, √ ⫽ 0; P ⫽ ᎏ

220
7

9. Not in final form; pivot element is  , lying in the first row, second

1
2

column.

11. In final form; 

x ⫽ 1
3

, y ⫽ 0,

z ⫽ 13
3

, u ⫽ 0, √ ⫽ 6, w ⫽ 0; 

P ⫽ 17

13. Not in final form; pivot element is 1, lying in the third row, second

column.

15. In final form; x ⫽ 30, y ⫽ 10, z ⫽ 0, u ⫽ 0, √ ⫽ 0; P ⫽ 60; 
x ⫽ 30, y ⫽ 0, z ⫽ 0, u ⫽ 10, √ ⫽ 0; P ⫽ 60; among others

17. x ⫽ 0, y ⫽ 4, u ⫽ 0, √ ⫽ 1; P ⫽ 16
19. x ⫽ 6, y ⫽ 3, u ⫽ 0, √ ⫽ 0; P ⫽ 96
21. x ⫽ 6, y ⫽ 6, u ⫽ 0, √ ⫽ 0, w ⫽ 0; P ⫽ 60
23. x ⫽ 0, y ⫽ 4, z ⫽ 4, u ⫽ 0, √ ⫽ 0; P ⫽ 36
25. x ⫽ 0, y ⫽ 3, z ⫽ 0, u ⫽ 90, √ ⫽ 0, w ⫽ 75; P ⫽ 12
27. x ⫽ 15, y ⫽ 3, z ⫽ 0, u ⫽ 2, √ ⫽ 0, w ⫽ 0; P ⫽ 78
, y ⫽ , z ⫽ 0, u ⫽ 0, √ ⫽ , w ⫽ 0; P ⫽ 90
29.
31. x ⫽ 2, y ⫽ 1, z ⫽ 1, u ⫽ 0, √ ⫽ 0, w ⫽ 0; P ⫽ 87

x ⫽ 5
4

15
4

15
2

35. No model A, 2500 model B; $100,000

37. 65 acres of Crop A, 80 acres of Crop B; $25,750; yes; 5 acres of land

39. $62,500 in the money market fund, $125,000 in the international

equity fund, $62,500 in the growth-and-income fund; $25,625

41. 180 units of Product A, 140 units of Product B, and 200 units of

Product C; $7920; no

43. 22 min of morning advertising time, 3 min of evening advertising

time

45. 80 units of model A, 80 units of model B, and 60 units of model C;

maximum profit: $5760; no

47. 9000 bottles of Formula I, 7833 bottles of Formula II, 6000 bottles of

Formula III; maximum profit: $4986.60; Yes, ingredients for 4167
bottles of Formula II

49. Project A: $800,000, project B: $800,000, and project C: $400,000;

$280,000

51. False

53. True

Using Technology Exercises 6.4, page 384

1. x ⫽ 1.2, y ⫽ 0, z ⫽ 1.6, w ⫽ 0; P ⫽ 8.8

3. x ⫽ 1.6, y ⫽ 0, z ⫽ 0, w ⫽ 3.6; P ⫽ 12.4

Exercises 6.5, page 394

1. x ⫽ 4, y ⫽ 0; C ⫽ ⫺8

3. x ⫽ 4, y ⫽ 3; C ⫽ ⫺18

5. x ⫽ 0, y ⫽ 13, z ⫽ 18, w ⫽ 14; C ⫽ ⫺111

x ⫽ 5

4, y ⫽ 1
4

, u ⫽ 2, √ ⫽ 3; C ⫽ P ⫽ 13

7.
9. x ⫽ 5, y ⫽ 10, z ⫽ 0, u ⫽ 1, √ ⫽ 2; C ⫽ P ⫽ 80
11. Maximize P ⫽ 4u ⫹ 6√
u ⫹ 3√ ⱕ 2
2u ⫹ 2√ ⱕ 5;
u ⱖ 0, √ ⱖ 0

x ⫽ 4, y ⫽ 0; C ⫽ 8

subject to

13. Maximize P ⫽ 60u ⫹ 40√ ⫹ 30w

subject to

6u ⫹ 2√ ⫹ w ⱕ 6
u ⫹ √ ⫹ w ⱕ 4;
u ⱖ 0, √ ⱖ 0, w ⱖ 0

subject to

15. Maximize P ⫽ 10u ⫹ 20√
20u ⫹ √ ⱕ 200
10u ⫹ √ ⱕ 150;
u ⫹ 2√ ⱕ 120
u ⱖ 0, √ ⱖ 0

x ⫽ 10, y ⫽ 20; C ⫽ 140

x ⫽ 0, y ⫽ 0, z ⫽ 10; C ⫽ 1200

17. Maximize P ⫽ 10u ⫹ 24√ ⫹ 16w

subject to

u ⫹ 2√ ⫹ w ⱕ 6
2u ⫹ √ ⫹ w ⱕ 8;
2u ⫹ √ ⫹ w ⱕ 4
u ⱖ 0, √ ⱖ 0, w ⱖ 0

x ⫽ 8, y ⫽ 0, z ⫽ 8; C ⫽ 80

subject to

19. Maximize P ⫽ 6u ⫹ 2√ ⫹ 4w
2u ⫹ 6√
ⱕ 30
⫹ 6w ⱕ 12;
4u
3u ⫹ √ ⫹ 2w ⱕ 20
u ⱖ 0, √ ⱖ 0, w ⱖ 0

x ⫽ , y ⫽ , z ⫽ 0; C ⫽ 26

4
3

1
3

21. 2 type A vessels; 3 type B vessels; $250,000

23. 30 in Newspaper I; 10 in Newspaper II; $38,000

25. 8 oz of orange juice; 6 oz of pink grapefruit juice; 178 calories

27. True

Using Technology Exercises 6.5, page 400

1. x 艐 1.333333, y 艐 3.333333, z ⫽ 0; and C 艐 4.66667
3. x ⫽ 0.9524, y ⫽ 4.2857, z ⫽ 0; C ⫽ 6.0952

Chapter 6 Concept Review Questions, page 400

1. a. half-plane; line

b. ax ⫹ by ⱕ c; ax ⫹ by ⫽ c

2. a. points; each

b. bounded; enclosed

3. objective function; maximized; minimized; linear; inequalities

4. a. corner point

b. line

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5. maximized; nonnegative; less than; equal to

6. equations; slack variables; ⫺c1x1 ⫺ c2x2 ⫺ ⭈ ⭈ ⭈ ⫺ cnxn ⫹ P ⫽ 0;

below; augmented

7. minimized; nonnegative; greater than; equal to

8. dual; objective; optimal value

Chapter 6 Review Exercises, page 401

1. Max: 18—any point (x, y) lying on the line segment joining (0, 6)

and (3, 4); min: 0

2. Max: 27—any point (x, y) lying on the line segment joining (3, 5)

and (6, 1); min: 7

3. x ⫽ 0, y ⫽ 4; P ⫽ 20

4. x ⫽ 0, y ⫽ 12; P ⫽ 36

5. x ⫽ 3, y ⫽ 4; C ⫽ 26

6. x ⫽ 1.25, y ⫽ 1.5; C ⫽ 9.75

7. x ⫽ 3, y ⫽ 10; P ⫽ 29

8. x ⫽ 8, y ⫽ 0; P ⫽ 48

9. x ⫽ 20, y ⫽ 0; C ⫽ 40

10. x ⫽ 2, y ⫽ 6; C ⫽ 14

11. Max: x ⫽ 22, y ⫽ 0; Q ⫽ 22; min: x ⫽ 3,

y ⫽ 5

2; Q ⫽ 11
2

12. Max: x ⫽ 12, y ⫽ 6; Q ⫽ 54; min: x ⫽ 4, y ⫽ 0; Q ⫽ 8
13. x ⫽ 3, y ⫽ 4, u ⫽ 0, √ ⫽ 0; P ⫽ 25
14. x ⫽ 3, y ⫽ 6, u ⫽ 4, √ ⫽ 0, w ⫽ 0; P ⫽ 36

x ⫽ 56
5

, y ⫽ , z ⫽ 0, u ⫽ 0, √ ⫽ 0; P ⫽

15.
16. x ⫽ 0, y ⫽ , z ⫽ , u ⫽ , √ ⫽ 0, w ⫽ 0; P ⫽

118
5

2
5

37
6

11
3

25
6

119
6

13
17. x ⫽ , y ⫽ 1; C ⫽ ᎏ
2

3
2

18. x ⫽ , y ⫽ ; C ⫽

36
11

32
11

104
11

19. x ⫽ , y ⫽ 0, z ⫽ ; C ⫽ 60

3
4

7
4

20. x ⫽ 0, y ⫽ 2, z ⫽ 0; C ⫽ 4

21. $40,000 in each company; $13,600

22. 60 model A satellite radios; 60 model B satellite radios; $1320

23. 93 model A, 180 model B; $456

24. Saddle Mine: 4 days; Horseshoe Mine: 6 days; $152,000

25. $70,000 in blue-chip stocks; $0 in growth stocks; $30,000 in specula-

tive stocks; maximum return: $13,000

26. 0 unit of Product A, 30 units of Product B, 0 unit of Product C; 

P ⫽ $180

Chapter 6 Before Moving On, page 403

27. a.

1. Min: x ⫽ 3, y ⫽ 16; C ⫽ ⫺7
Max: x ⫽ 28, y ⫽ 8; P ⫽ 76

2. Max: x ⫽ 0, y ⫽ 24

7 ; P ⫽ 72
7

CHAPTER 7 ANSWERS

907

3.

x
2
1 ⫺2
3
2
⫺1 ⫺2

z
y
1 ⫺1
3
4
3

u
1
0
0
0

√
0
1
0
0

w
0
0
1
0

冨

P
0
0
0
1

Constant

3
1
17
0

4. x ⫽ 2, y ⫽ 0, z ⫽ 11, u ⫽ 2, √ ⫽ 0, w ⫽ 0; P ⫽ 28
5. x ⫽ 6, y ⫽ 2; u ⫽ 0, √ ⫽ 0; P ⫽ 34

CHAPTER 7
Exercises 7.1, page 412
1. {
3. {
5. {2, 3, 4, 5, 6}

x 0 x
x 0 x

7. {⫺2}

is a gold medalist in the 2010 Winter Olympic Games}
is an integer greater than 2 and less than 8}

9. a. True

b. False

11. a. False

b. False

13. True

15. a. True

b. False

17. a and b.
19. a. ⭋, {1}, {2}, {1, 2}

b. ⭋, {1}, {2}, {3}, {1, 2}, {1, 3}, {2, 3}, {1, 2, 3}
c. ⭋, {1}, {2}, {3}, {4}, {1, 2}, {1, 3}, {1, 4}, {2, 3}, {2, 4}, {3, 4},

{1, 2, 3}, {1, 2, 4}, {1, 3, 4}, {2, 3, 4}, {1, 2, 3, 4}

21. {1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10}
23. {Jill, John, Jack, Susan, Sharon}

25. a.

U

U

U

U

A
B
C

b.

c.

A

B

A, B, C

A

B

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

49. a. B c

b. A 傽 B

c. A 傽 B 傽 Cc

51. a. A 傽 B 傽 C; the set of tourists who have taken the underground, a

cab, and a bus over a 1-week period in London

b. A 傽 C; the set of tourists who have taken the underground and a

bus over a 1-week period in London

c. Bc; the set of tourists who have not taken a cab over a 1-week

period in London

53.

55.

57.

A

B

A

B

A

B

C

A

B

C

U

U

U

U

U

U

908

CHAPTER 7 ANSWERS

b.

29. a.

b.

31. a.

b.

U

U

U

U

U

A

B

A

B

C

A

B

C

A

B

C

A

B

C

33. a. {2, 4, 6, 8, 10}

b. {2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10}

c. {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10}

35. a. C ⫽ {1, 2, 4, 5, 8, 9}

b. ⭋

c. {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10}

A

B

37. a. Not disjoint

b. Disjoint

39. a. The set of all employees at Universal Life Insurance who do not

C

drink tea

b. The set of all employees at Universal Life Insurance who do not

drink coffee

41. a. The set of all employees at Universal Life Insurance who drink tea

but not coffee

b. The set of all employees at Universal Life Insurance who drink

coffee but not tea

43. a. The set of all employees in a hospital who are not doctors
b. The set of all employees in a hospital who are not nurses

A

B

C

45. a. The set of all employees in a hospital who are female doctors

b. The set of all employees in a hospital who are both doctors and

61. a. x, y, √, r, w, u

b. √, r

administrators

47. a. D 傽 F

b. R 傽 Fc 傽 Lc

63. a. s, t, y

b. t, z, w, x, s

65. A 傺 C

67. False

69. True

71. True

73. True

75. True

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Exercises 7.2, page 418

3. a. 4

b. 5

c. 7

d. 2

7. 19

9. a. 15

b. 30

c. 15

d. 12

e. 50

f. 20

11. a. 140

b. 100

c. 60

13. 12

15. 0

17. 12

19. 61

21. a. 106

b. 64

c. 38

d. 14

23. a. 182

b. 118

c. 56

d. 18

25. 30

27. a. 16

29. a. 64

35. a. 62

b. 31

b. 10

b. 33

c. 4

d. 21

e. 11

31. a. 36

b. 36

33. 5

c. 25

d. 38

37. a. 108

b. 15

c. 45

d. 12

39. a. 22

b. 80

41. True

43. True

Exercises 7.3, page 425

1. 12

7. 24

3. 64

9. 60

17. 400

19. 9990

5. 36

11. 1 billion

13. 64

15. 550

21. a. 17,576,000

b. 17,576,000

23. 1024; 59,049

25. 2730

27. 217

29. True

Exercises 7.4, page 436

1. 360

3. 30

5. 120

7. 60

9. n

11. 1

13. 21

15. 1

17. 84

n1n ⫺ 121n ⫺ 22

6

19.

 

21.

n!
2

23. Permutation

25. Combination

27. Permutation

29. Combination

31. P(4, 4) ⫽ 24

33. P(4, 4) ⫽ 24

35. P(9, 9) ⫽ 362,880

37. C(12, 4) ⫽ 495

39. 151,200

41. 2520

43. 20

45. C(12, 3) ⫽ 220

47. C(100, 3) ⫽ 161,700

49. P(6, 6) ⫽ 720

51. P(12, 5) ⫽ 95,040

53. a. P(10, 10) ⫽ 3,628,800

b. P(3, 3)P(4, 4)P(3, 3)P(3, 3) ⫽ 5184

55. a. P(20, 20) ⫽ 20!

b. P(5, 5)P[(4, 4)]5 ⫽ 5!(4!)5 ⫽ 955,514,880

57. a. P(12, 9) ⫽ 79,833,600

b. C(12, 9) ⫽ 220

c. C(12, 9) ⭈ C(3, 2) ⫽ 660

CHAPTER 7 ANSWERS

909

61. C(3,3)[C(8, 6) ⫹ C(8, 7) ⫹ C(8, 8)] ⫽ 37

63. a. C(12, 3) ⫽ 220

b. C(11, 2) ⫽ 55

c. C(5, 1)C(7, 2) ⫹ C(5, 2)C(7, 1) ⫹C(5, 3) ⫽ 185

65. P(7, 3) ⫹ C(7, 2)P(3, 2) ⫽ 336

67. C(5, 1)C(3, 1)C(6, 2)[C(4, 1) ⫹ C(3, 1)] ⫽ 1575

69. 10C(4, 1) ⫽ 40

71. C(4, 1)C(13, 5) ⫺ 40 ⫽ 5108

73. 13C(4, 3) ⭈ 12C(4, 2) ⫽ 3744

75. C(6, 2) ⫽ 15

77. C(12, 6) ⫹ C(12, 7) ⫹ C(12, 8) ⫹ C(12, 9) ⫹

C(12, 10) ⫹ C(12, 11) ⫹ C(12, 12) ⫽ 2510

79. 4! ⫽ 24

83. True

85. True

Using Technology Exercises 7.4, page 441

1. 1.307674368 ⫻ 1012

3. 2.56094948229 ⫻ 1016

5. 674,274,182,400

7. 133,784,560

9. 4,656,960

11. 658,337,004,000

Exercises 7.5, page 446
1. {a, b, d, f }; {a}
9. ⭋

11. Yes

3. {b, c, e}; {a}

5. No

7. S

13. Yes

15. E 傼 G

17. Fc

19. (E 傼 F 傼 G)c
21. a. {12, 12, 13, 12, 14, 12, 15, 12, 16, 12, 13, 22, 14, 22, 15, 22, 16, 22,

14, 32, 15, 32, 16, 32, 15, 42, 16, 42, 16, 52}

b. {11, 22, 12, 42, 13, 62}

23. ⭋, {a}, {b}, {c}, {a, b}, {a, c}, {b, c}, S
25. a. S ⫽ {B, R}
b. ⭋, {B}, {R}, S
27. a. S ⫽ {1H, 12, 1H, 22, 1H, 32, 1H, 42, 1H, 52, 1H, 62, 1T, 12,

1T, 22, 1T, 32, 1T, 42, 1T, 52, 1T, 62}

b. {1H, 12, 1H, 32, 1H, 52}

b. No

29. a. No
31. S ⫽ {ddd, ddn, dnd, ndd, dnn, ndn, nnd, nnn}
33. a. S ⫽ {bbbb, bbbt, bbtb, bbtt, btbb, btbt, bttb, bttt, tbbb,

tbbt, tbtb, tbtt, ttbb, ttbt, tttb, tttt}

b. E ⫽ {bbbt, bbtb, btbb, tbbb}
c. F ⫽ {bbbt, bbtt, btbt, bttt, tbbt, tbtt, ttbt, tttt}
d. G ⫽ {tbbt, tbtt, ttbt, tttt}

35. a. {ABC, ABD, ABE, ACD, ACE, ADE, BCD, BCE, BDE, CDE}

b. 6

c. 3

d. 6

c. E 傼 F

5t 0  0 ⬍ t ⱕ 26

c.

5t 0  t ⬎ 26

b. E ⫽ {0, 1, 2, 3}

d.

37. a. Ec

b. Ec 傽 F c
1E 傽 Fc2 傼 1Ec 傽 F2
5t 0  t ⬎ 06

39. a.
41. a. S ⫽ {0, 1, 2, 3, . . . , 10}

b.

c. F ⫽ {5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10}
43. a. S ⫽ {0, 1, 2, . . . , 20}
b. E ⫽ {0, 1, 2, . . . , 9}

c. F ⫽ {20}

59. 2{C(2, 2) ⫹ [C(3, 2) ⫺ C(2, 2)]} ⫽ 6

49. False

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

910

CHAPTER 7 ANSWERS

Exercises 7.6, page 454
1. {(H, H)}, {(H, T)}, {(T, H)}, {(T, T)}
3. {(D, m)}, {(D, f )}, {(R, m)}, {(R, f )}, {(I, m)}, {(I, f )}
5. {(1, i)}, {(1, d)}, {(1, s)}, {(2, i)}, {(2, d)}, {(2, s)}, . . . ,

{(5, i)}, {(5, d)}, {(5, s)}

7. {(A, Rh⫹)}, {(A, Rh⫺)}, {(B, Rh⫹)}, {(B, Rh⫺)},

{(AB, Rh⫹)}, {(AB, Rh⫺)}, {(O, Rh⫹)}, {(O, Rh⫺)}

9. Grade

Probability

A
.10

B
.25

C
.45

D
.15

F
.05

11.

Answer
Probability

Falling
behind

.40

Staying

Increasing 

even
.44

faster
.12

Don’t
know
.04

13.

.69

15.

Number of Days
Probability

0
.05

1
.06

2
.09

3
.15

4
.11

5
.20

6
.17

7
.17

17.

Event
Probability

A

.026

B

.199

C
.570

D
.193

E

.012

19. a. S ⫽ {(0 ⬍ x ⱕ 200), (200 ⬍ x ⱕ 400),
(400 ⬍ x ⱕ 600), (600 ⬍ x ⱕ 800),
(800 ⬍ x ⱕ 1000), (x ⬎ 1000)}

b.

Cars, x

Probability

0 ⬍ x ⱕ 200
200 ⬍ x ⱕ 400
400 ⬍ x ⱕ 600
600 ⬍ x ⱕ 800
800 ⬍ x ⱕ 1000
x ⬎ 1000

.075
.1
.175
.35
.225
.075

21.

.469

23. a.

.856

b. .144

25.

.46

27. a.

1
4

b.

1
2

c.

1
13

29.

3
8

31. a.

.4

b. .1

c.

.1

33. a.

.633

b. .276

35. a.

.35

b. .33

37.

.530

39. a.

.4

b. .23

41. a.

.448

b. .255

43.

.783

45. There are six ways of obtaining a sum of 7.

47. No

49. a.

1
6

b.

5
6

c. 1

51. True

Exercises 7.7, page 463

1.

9.

1
2

3
13

3.

1
36

5.

ᎏ1
1
6

7.

1
52

11.

12
13

13.

.002; .998

15. P(a) ⫹ P(b) ⫹ P(c) ⫽ 1

17. Since the five events are not mutually exclusive, Property 3 cannot be

used; that is, he could win more than one purse.

19. The two events are not mutually exclusive; hence, the probability of

the given event is 

1
6

⫹ 1
6

⫺ 1
36

⫽ 11
36

.

21. E C 傽 F C ⫽ {e} ⫽ ⭋
23. P[(G 傼 C)c] ⫽ 1 ⫺ P(G) ⫺ P(C); he has not considered the case in

which a customer buys both glasses and contact lenses.

25. a. 0

b. .7

c.

.5

d.

.3

27. a.

2, 3
1
8

29. a.

.41

33. a.

.24

b.

2, 5
1
8
b. .48

b. .46

c.

1
8

d.

3
4

31.

.332

35. a.

.16

b. .38

c.

.22

37. a.

.41

b. .518

39. a.

.52

b. .34

41. a.

.439

b. .385

43. b. .52

c.

.859

45. a.

.90

b. .40

47. a.

.6

b. .332

c.

c.

.40

.232

d.

.6

51. True

53. False

Chapter 7 Concept Review Questions, page 469

1. set; elements; set

2. equal

3. subset

4. a. no

b. all

5. union; intersection

6. complement

7. Ac 傽 Bc 傽 Cc

8. permutation; combination

9. experiment; sample; space; event

10. ⭋

11. uniform; 

1
n

Chapter 7 Review Exercises, page 469
1. {3}
3. {4, 6, 8, 10}

2. {A, E, H, L, S, T}

4. {⫺4}

5. Yes

6. Yes

7. Yes

8. No

9.

10.

U

U

A

B

C

A

(
B C

)

A

B

C

(

A B C c)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

11.

12.

U

U

A

B

C

Ac

Bc

Cc

A

B

C

c
A

c

(
B

C

c)

17. The set of all participants in a consumer-behavior survey who 
both avoided buying a product because it is not recyclable and 
boycotted a company’s products because of its record on the 
environment.

18. The set of all participants in a consumer-behavior survey who 

avoided buying a product because it is not recyclable and/or 
voluntarily recycled their garbage.

19. The set of all participants in a consumer-behavior survey who both
did not use cloth diapers rather than disposable diapers and volun-
tarily recycled their garbage.

20. The set of all participants in a consumer-behavior survey who did not

boycott a company’s products because of its record on the environ-
ment and/or did not voluntarily recycle their garbage.

21. 150

22. 230

23. 270

24. 30

25. 70

26. 200

27. 190

28. 181,440

29. 120

30. 8400

31. a. 0

b. .6

c.

.6

d.

.4

e. 1

32. a.

.35

33. a.

.49

b. .65

b. .39

c.

c.

.05

.48

34.

2
7

35. None

36. a. 446

b. 377

c. 34

37. 720

38. 20

39. a. 50,400

b. 5040

40. a. 60

b. 125

41. 80

42. a. 1287

b. 288

43. 720

44. 1050

45. a. 5040

b. 3600

46. a. 487,635

b. 550

c. 341,055

47. a. 1365

b. 1155

48. a.

.019

b. .981

49. a.

.54

b. .72

50. a.

.757

b. .243

51. a.

.56

b. .4

52.

.5

CHAPTER 8 ANSWERS

911

Chapter 7 Before Moving On, page 472
1. a. {d, f, t}
2. 15

b. {b, c, d, e, f, t}
5.

3. 200

4.

4
13

c. {b, c, e}

5
12

6. a.

.9

b. .3

CHAPTER 8
Exercises 8.1, page 478

1.

1
32

3.

31
32

5. P(E) ⫽ 13C(4, 2)NC(52, 2) ⬇ .059
7. C(26, 2)NC(52, 2) ⬇ .245
9. [C(3, 2)C(5, 2)]NC(8, 4) ⫽ 3N7
11. [C(5, 1)C(3, 3)]NC(8, 4) ⫽ 1N14
13. C(3, 2)N8 ⫽ 3N8
15. 1N8
19. a. C(4, 2)NC(24, 2) ⬇ .022
21. a. C(6, 2)NC(80, 2) ⬇ .005

17. C(10, 6)N210 ⬇ .205
b. 1 ⫺ C(20, 2)NC(24, 2) ⬇ .312
b. 1 ⫺ C(74, 2)NC(80, 2) ⬇ .145
.12; C(98, 10)NC(100, 12) ⬇ .013

23. a.

b. .15; .015

25. [C(12, 8)C(8, 2) ⫹ C(12, 9)C(8, 1) ⫹ C(12, 10)]/C(20, 10) ⬇ .085
c. 1 ⫺ C(3, 3)NC(5, 3) ⫽ .9

b. C(3, 1)NC(5, 3) ⫽ .3

27. a.

3
5

29.

1
729

31.

.0001

33.

.1

35. 40NC(52, 5) ⬇ .0000154
37. [4C(13, 5) ⫺ 40]NC(52, 5) ⬇ .00197
39. [13C(4, 3) ⭈ 12C(4, 2)]NC(52, 5) ⬇ .00144

41. a.

.618

b. .059

43.

.030

Exercises 8.2, page 490

1. a.

.6

b. .5

3.

.3

5. Not independent

7. Independent

9. a.

.3

b. .8

c.

.4

d.

.7

11. a.

.5

b. .4

c.

.2

d.

.35

e. No

f. No

13.

. 4

.6

A

B

. 3

.7

. 3

.7

C

D

C

D

a.

.4

b. .3

c.

.12

d.

.30

e. Yes

f. Yes

15. a.

1
12

b.

1
36

c.

1
6

d.

1
6

e. No

17.

4
11

19. Independent

21. Not independent

23.

.1875

25. a.

4
9

b.

4
9

27. a.

1
21

b.

1
3

29.

.48

31.

.06

33. 1
7

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

912

CHAPTER 8 ANSWERS

35. a.

4

. 6

.36

P

A

4

.2
.16

.60

8

.3
.58

.04

R

r

N

R

r

N

P ⫽ Professional
A ⫽ Amateur
R ⫽ Recovered 
within 48 hr
r ⫽ Recovered 
after 48 hr

N ⫽ Never recovered

b. .24

c.

.3984

37. a.

.16

b. .424

c.

.1696

39. a.

.092

b.

.008

41. a.

.28; .39; .18; .643; .292

b. Not independent

43. Not independent

45.

.0000068

47. a.

7
10

b.

1
5

49. 3

53. 1

57. True

59. True

Exercises 8.3, page 499

1.

5

P ( A )  =  .3

P(B) = .35

P(C) = .30

A

B

C

7

. 5

.43

1

. 7

.29

3

. 3

.67

D

Dc
D

Dc
D

Dc

3. a.

.45

7. a.

.08

b. .22

b. .15

5. a.

.48

b. .33

c.

.348

9. a.

1
12

b.

1
4

c.

1
18

d.

3
14

11.

. 3

.7

A

Ac

. 2

.8

. 3

.7

B

Bc

B

Bc

a.

.27

b. .22

c.

.73

d.

.33

13.

4
17

15.

4
51

17.

2
5

3
5

W

B

4
9

5
9

1
3

2
3

W

B

W

B

19.

9
17

21.

.423

23. a.

3
ᎏ
4

b.

2
9

25.

.125

27.

.407

29. a.

.543

b. .545

c.

.455

31.

.377

33. a.

.297

b. .10

35.

.856

37. a.

.57

b. .691

39.

.647

41.

.172

43.

.301

45. a.

.763

b. .276

47. a.

.4906

b. .62

c.

c.

.724

.186

Exercises 8.4, page 511

49.

.028

51.

.029

1. a. See part (b).

b.

Outcome
Value

Outcome
Value
c. {GGG}

GGG

3

GRR

1

GGR

2

RGR

1

GRG

2

RRG

1

RGG

2

RRR

0

3. Any positive integer

5.

1
6

7. Any positive integer; infinite discrete

9. x ⱖ 0; continuous

11. Any positive integer; infinite discrete

13. No. The probability assigned to a value of the random variable X can-

not be negative.

15. No. The sum of the probabilities exceed 1.

17. a ⫽ .2

19. a.

.20

b. .60

c.

.30

d. 1

e.

.40

f. 0

21.

23. a.

b.

25. a.

12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20

x

x
P(X ⴝ x)

y
P(Y ⴝ y)

1
1
6

1
1
6

x ⴙ y
P(X ⴙ Y ⴝ x ⴙ y)

x ⴙ y
P(X ⴙ Y ⴝ x ⴙ y)

2
1
6

2
1
6

2
1
36

8
5
36

3
1
6

3
1
6

4
1
6

4
1
6

3
2
36

9
4
36

4
3
36

10
3
36

5
4
36

11
2
36

6
1
6

6
1
6

7
6
36

5
1
6

5
1
6

6
5
36

12
1
36

x
P(X ⴝ x)

x
P(X ⴝ x)

0

1

2

3

4

.017

.067

.033

.117

.233

5

6

7

8

9

.133

.167

.100

.050

.067

10
.017

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

b.

.2

.1

c.

.217

27. a.

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

x

x
P(X ⴝ x)

x
P(X ⴝ x)

1

.007

6
.15

2

.029

7
.20

3

.021

8

.207

4

.079

9

.114

5

.164

10
.029

b. .70

29. True

Using Technology Exercises 8.4, page 516

Graphing Utility

CHAPTER 8 ANSWERS

913

Exercises 8.5, page 525

1. a. 2.6

b.

x
P(X ⴝ x)

0
0

1
.1

2
.4

3
.3

4
.2

; 2.6

3. 0.96

5. $78.50

7. 0.91

9. 0.12

11. 1.73

13. 4.16%

15. ⫺39¢

17. $100

19. $118,800

21. City B

23. Company B

25. 2.86%

27. ⫺5.3¢

29. ⫺2.7¢

31. 2 to 3; 3 to 2

33.

.4

35.

7
12

37.

5
14

41. a. Mean: 74; mode: 85; median: 80

b. Mode

43. 3; close

45. 16; 16; 16

47. True

Exercises 8.6, page 535
1. ␮ ⫽ 2, Var1X2 ⫽ 1, ␴ ⫽ 1
3. ␮ ⫽ 0, Var1X2 ⫽ 1, ␴ ⫽ 1
5. ␮ ⫽ 518, Var1X2 ⫽ 1891, ␴ ⬇ 43.5

7. Figure (a)

9. 1.56

11. ␮ ⫽ 4.5, Var1X2 ⫽ 5.25
13. a. Let X ⫽ the annual birthrate during the years 1997–2006.

b.

14.0
.2

14.1
.2

13.9
.1

x
P(X ⴝ x)
c. ␮ ⫽ 14.26, Var1X2 ⫽ 0.0744, ␴ ⬇ 0.2728

14.2
.1

14.5
.2

14.6
.1

14.7
.1

1.

3.

Excel

1.

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

3.

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

Histogram

1

2

x

3

4

Histogram

15. a. Mutual Fund A: ␮ ⫽ $620, Var(X) ⫽ 267,600;
Mutual Fund B: ␮ ⫽ $520, Var(X) ⫽ 137,600

b. Mutual Fund A
c. Mutual Fund B

17. 1
19. ␮ ⫽ $439,600; Var(X) ⫽ 1,443,840,000; ␴ ⬇ $37,998

21. 95.3%; 0.5%

23. 34.95; 5.94

25. ⫺25.5%; 9.23

27. 21.59%; 5.20

29. 9.64%; 1.64

31. 94.56%; 19.94

33. 1607; 182

35. 3.324; 0.4497

37. a. At least .75
b. At least .96

39. 7

41. At least 

7
16

43. At least 

15
16

45. True

Using Technology Exercises 8.6, page 541

1. a.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11

x

b. ␮ ⫽ 4,

␴ ⬇ 1.40

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

914

CHAPTER 9 ANSWERS

3. a.

b. ␮ ⫽ 17.34,

␴ ⬇ 1.11

24. $100

25. a.

.8

b. ␮ ⫽ 2.7; ␴ ⬇ 1.42

26. 41.3 mph

27. $12,000

28. At least .75

29. €26.76 billion; €1.6317 billion

30. ␮ ⫽ 27.87; ␴ ⫽ 6.41

Chapter 8 Before Moving On, page 544

5. a. Let X denote the random variable that gives the weight of a carton

1.

.72

2.

.308

of sugar.

b.

x

4.96

4.97

4.98

4.99

5.00

5.01

P(X ⴝ x)

3
30

4
30

4
30

1
30

1
30

5
30

x
P(X ⴝ x)

5.02

5.03

5.04

5.05

5.06

3
30

3
30

4
30

1
30

1
30

c. ␮ ⬇ 5.00; ␴ ⬇ 0.03

7. a.

b. 65.875; 1.73

Chapter 8 Concept Review Questions, page 542

1. conditional

2. independent

3. a posteriori probability

4. random

5. finite; infinite; continuous

6. sum; .75

a

b.

P1E2
P1EC2
p11x1 ⫺ m2 2 ⫹ p21x2 ⫺ m2 2 ⫹ p ⫹ pn1xn ⫺ m2 2; 2Var1X2

a ⫹ b

7. a.

8.

Chapter 8 Review Exercises, page 543

1.

6.

.18

.364

2.

.25

3.

.06

4.

.49

5.

.37

7. No

8.

.5

9. a.

7
8

b.

7
8

c. No

10. a.

.284

b. .984

11.

.150

12.

2
15

13.

1
24

14.

1
52

15.

.00018

16.

.00995

17.

.245

18. .510

20.

.245

19.
b. .390
23. a. {WWW, BWW, WBW, WWB, BBW, BWB, WBB, BBB}

22. a.

.619

.180

.513

21.

WWW

BWW

WBW

WWB

0

1

1

1

BBW

BWB

WBB

BBB

3

b.

c.

d.

Outcome
Value of X

Outcome
Value of X

x
P(X ⴝ x)

16
35
12
35
8
35
4
35

2

0
1
35

2

2

2
18
35

3
4
35

1
12
35

x

0

1

2

3

3.

x
P(X ⴝ x)

⫺3
.05

⫺2
.1

0
.25

1
.3

2
.2

3
.1

4. a.

.8

b. .92

5. 0.44; 4.0064; 2.0016

CHAPTER 9
Exercises 9.1, page 562

1.

  f 1x2 ⫽ 3

lim
xS⫺2

3.

   f 1x2 ⫽ 3

lim
xS3

5.

   f 1x2 ⫽ 3

lim
xS⫺2

7. The limit does not exist.

9.

x
f(x)

1.9
4.61

x
f(x)

2.001
5.004

 1x  2 ⫹ 12 ⫽ 5

lim
xS2

1.99
4.9601

2.01
5.0401

1.999
4.9960

2.1
5.41

11.

13.

15.

17.

x
f(x)

x
f(x)

⫺0.1
⫺1

0.001

1

⫺0.01

⫺1

0.01

1

⫺0.001

⫺1

0.1
1

The limit does not exist.

x
f(x)

x
f(x)

0.9
100

1.001

1,000,000

0.99
10,000

1.01
10,000

0.999

1,000,000

1.1
100

The limit does not exist.

x
f(x)

0.9 
2.9 
x  2 ⫹ x ⫺ 2

lim
 
xS1

x ⫺ 1

0.99 
2.99 

0.999 
2.999 

1.001 
3.001 

1.01 
3.01 

1.1
3.1

⫽ 3

y

2

x

–2

lim f(x) = –1
x→0

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

19.

y

1

1

lim f(x) = 1
x→1

21.

y

1

2

lim f(x) = 0
x→0

x

x

23. 4

25. 3

35. 2

37.

27. ⫺2

1171 ⫽ 3119

29. 2

31. ⫺4

33.

5
6

39. 1

41. ⫺1

43. 0

45. 2

47.

1
6

49. 2

1
51. ⫺
2

53. ⫺10

55. The limit does not exist.

57.

5
3

59.

1
2

61.

2
3

  f 1x2 ⫽ ⬁; lim
  f 1x2 ⫽ ⫺⬁;  lim

  f 1x2 ⫽ ⬁
  f 1x2 ⫽ ⫺⬁

xS⫺⬁

xS⫺⬁

lim
xS⬁

lim
xS⬁

65. 0; 0

x
f(x)

1
0.5

10

100

1000

0.009901

0.0001

0.000001

⫺100
0.0001

⫺1000
0.000001

100

2.99 ⫻ 106

⫺5
⫺390

x
f(x)

⫺1
0.5

⫺10

0.009901

  f 1x2 ⫽ 0 and  lim

xS⫺⬁

  f 1x2 ⫽ 0

lim
xS⬁

10
2910

⫺1
6

⫺100

x
f(x)

x
f(x)

1
12

5
360

1000

2.999 ⫻ 109

x
f(x)

⫺10
⫺3090

  f 1x2 ⫽ ⬁ and  lim

xS⫺⬁

lim
xS⬁

63.

67.

69.

71.

⫺3.01 ⫻ 106
  f 1x2 ⫽ ⫺⬁
  f 1x2 ⫽ ⫺⬁

lim
xS⫺⬁

⫺1000

⫺3.0 ⫻ 109

79. 0

73. 3

75. 3

77.

81. a. $0.5 million; $0.75 million; $1.17 million; $2 million; $4.5 mil-

lion; $9.5 million

b. The limit does not exist; as the percent of pollutant to be removed

approaches 100, the cost becomes astronomical.

83. $2.20; the average cost of producing x DVDs will approach

$2.20/disc in the long run.

85. a. $24 million; $60 million; $83.1 million

b. $120 million

87. 1000

89. a moles/liter/second

91. True

93. False

95. False

97. No

CHAPTER 9 ANSWERS

915

Using Technology Exercises 9.1, page 568

1. 5

3. 3

5.

2
3

7. e 2 ⬇ 7.38906

11. a.

b. 25,000

13. a. 50

c.

Exercises 9.2, page 577

1. 3; 2; the limit does not exist.

3. The limit does not exist; 2; the limit does not exist.

5. 0; 2; the limit does not exist.

7. ⫺2; 2; the limit does not exist.

9. True

11. True

13. False

15. True

17. False

19. True

21. 7

23.

⫺1
2

25. The limit does not exist.

27. ⫺1

29. 0

31. ⫺4

33. The limit does not exist.

35. 4

37. 0; 0

39. x ⫽ 0; conditions 2 and 3

41. Continuous everywhere

45.

51.

55.

47. (⫺⬁, ⬁)

1⫺⬁,  ⬁2
1⫺⬁, ⫺22, 1⫺2, 12, and 11, ⬁2
1⫺⬁, ⬁2

57. ⫺1 and 1

49.

43. x ⫽ 0; condition 3
22 and 11
1⫺⬁, ⬁2

1⫺⬁, 1

53.

2, ⬁2

59. 1 and 2

61. f is discontinuous at x ⫽ 1, 2, . . . , 12.

63. Michael makes progress toward solving the problem until x ⫽ x1.
Between x ⫽ x1 and x ⫽ x2, he makes no further progress. But at
x ⫽ x2 he suddenly achieves a breakthrough, and at x ⫽ x3 he pro-
ceeds to complete the problem.

65. Conditions 2 and 3 are not satisfied at each of these points.

67.

y

100
80
60
40
20

5

10

15

20

x

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

916

CHAPTER 9 ANSWERS

69.

y

10

8

6

4

2

1

2

3

4

f is discontinuous at 

x ⫽ 1

2, 1, 11

6
5
2, p , 4
.

23. a. 4x

c.

b. y ⫽ 4x ⫺ 1
y

x

4

–2

x

2

71. a. ⬁; as the time taken to excite the tissue is made shorter and
shorter, the strength of the electric current gets stronger and
stronger.

b. b; as the time taken to excite the tissue is made longer and longer,

the strength of the electric current gets weaker and weaker and
approaches b.

73. 3

75. a. Yes

b. No

77. a.
b.

79. a.
b.

f is a polynomial of degree 2.

f112 ⫽ 3 and f132 ⫽ ⫺1
f1⫺12 ⫽ ⫺4 and f112 ⫽ 4

f is a polynomial of degree 3.

81. 0.59

83. 1.34

85. c.

1
7
;  ; Joan sees the ball on its way up  sec after it was thrown and
2
2
again 3 sec later.

1
2

89. False

91. False

93. False

95. False

87. False

97. No

99. c.

⫾

12

2

Using Technology Exercises 9.2, page 583

1. x ⫽ 0, 1

3.

x ⫽ 0, 1
2

5.

x ⫽ ⫺1

2, 2

7. x ⫽ ⫺2, 1

9.

11.

Exercises 9.3, page 596

1. 1.5 lb/month; 0.58 lb/month; 1.25 lb/month

3. 3.1%/hr; ⫺21.2%/hr

b. They are traveling at the same speed.

5. a. Car A
c. Car B
d. Both cars covered the same distance; they are again side-by-side.

7. a. P2

b. P1

c. Bactericide B; Bactericide A

9. 0

11. 2

13. 4x

15. ⫺2x ⫹ 3

17. 2; y ⫽ 2x ⫹ 7

19. 6; y ⫽ 6x ⫺ 3

21. 1

9; y ⫽ 1

9 x ⫺ 2
3

25. a. 2x ⫺ 2

c.

b. 11, 02

y

10

5

1

2

3

4

x

d. 0

27. a. 6; 5.5; 5.1

b. 5

c. The computations in part (a) illustrate that as h approaches zero,
the average rate of change approaches the instantaneous rate of
change.

29. a. 130 ft/sec; 128.2 ft/sec; 128.02 ft/sec

b. 128 ft/sec

c. The computations in part (a) illustrate that as the time intervals
over which the average velocity are computed become smaller
and smaller, the average velocity approaches the instantaneous
velocity of the car at t ⫽ 20.

31. a. 5 sec

b. 80 ft/sec

c. 160 ft/sec

33. a.

⫺1
6

liter/atmosphere

b.

⫺1
4

liter/atmosphere

35. a.

⫺2

3 x ⫹ 7

b. $333/per $1000 spent on advertising;

⫺$13,000/per $1000 spent on advertising

37. $6 billion/year; $10 billion/year

39. a. f ⬘(h) gives the instantaneous rate of change of the temperature

with respect to height at a given height h, in °F per foot.

b. Negative

c. ⫺0.05°F

41. Average rate of change of the seal population over 3a, a ⫹ h4; instan-

taneous rate of change of the seal population at x ⫽ a

43. Average rate of change of the country’s industrial production over 

3a, a ⫹ h4; instantaneous rate of change of the country’s industrial
production at x ⫽ a

45. Average rate of change of atmospheric pressure with respect to alti-

tude over 3a, a ⫹ h4; instantaneous rate of change of atmospheric
pressure with respect to altitude at x ⫽ a

47. a. Yes

b. No

c. No

49. a. Yes

b. Yes

c. No

51. a. No

b. No

c. No

53. 32.1, 30.939, 30.814, 30.8014, 30.8001; 30.8 ft/sec

55. False

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

57.

y

−1

59. a ⫽ 2, b ⫽ ⫺1

1

y

x

40

30

20

10

−5

5

10

x

Using Technology Exercises 9.3, page 602

1. a. y ⫽ 9x ⫺ 11

b.

y ⫽ 1

12 x ⫹ 4
3

3. a.
b.

5. a. 4

b. y ⫽ 4x ⫺ 1
c.

7. a. 4.02

b. y ⫽ 4.02x ⫺ 3.57
c.

9. a.

b. 41.22¢/mi

c. 1.22¢/mi/year

Exercises 9.4, page 610

1. 0

3. 5x 4

5. 3.1x 2.1

7. 8x

9. 2pr

11.

2
x2/3

13.

3

21x

15. ⫺84x⫺13

17. 8x ⫺ 2

19. ⫺3x 2 ⫹ 4x

21. 0.06x ⫺ 0.4

23.

4x ⫺ 4 ⫺ 3
x 2

25. 16x 3 ⫺ 7.5x 3/2

27.

⫺ 5
x 2

⫺ 8
x 3

29.

⫺16
5
t 

⫹

9
4
t 

⫺ 2
t 2

21x
31. 3 ⫺ 5

CHAPTER 9 ANSWERS

917

33.

⫺ 4
x 3

⫹ 1
x4/3

35. a. 20

b. ⫺4

c. 20

37. 3

39. 11

41. m ⫽ 5; y ⫽ 5x ⫺ 4

43. m ⫽ 3; y ⫽ 3x ⫺ 7

10, 02

45. a.
b.

y

4

x

2

47. a.

1⫺2, ⫺72, 12, 92

b. y ⫽ 12x ⫹ 17 and y ⫽ 12x ⫺ 15
c.

y

(2, 9)

3

x

(– 2, – 7)

–10

10, 02; 12, ⫺8

32; 1⫺1, ⫺ 5
122

49. a.
c.

51. a.

b.

10, 02; 11, ⫺13
122
10, 02; 14, 80
3 2; 1⫺3, 81
4 2
 cm 3/cm

b.

16p

9

25p

4

 cm 3/cm

53. a. 16.3 million

b. 14.3 million/year

c. 66.8 million

d. 11.7 million/year

55. a. 49.6%; 41.1%; 36.9%; 34.1%
b. ⫺5.6%/decade; ⫺3.3%/decade

57. a. 157 million

b. 10.4 million/year

59. a. 120 ⫺ 30t

b. 120 ft/sec

c. 240 ft

61. a. 5%; 11.3%; 15.5%

b. 0.63%/year; 0.525%/year

63. a. ⫺0.9 thousand metric tons/year; 20.3 thousand metric tons/year

b. Yes

65. a. 15 pts/year; 12.6 pts/year; 0 pts/year

b. 10 pts/year

67. a.

0.000125x1/4

b. $0.00125/radio

69. a.

20a 1 ⫺ 11tb

b. 50 mph; 30 mph; 33.4 mph

c. At 6:30 A.M. the average speed is decreasing at the rate of 

8.28 mph/hr; at 7 A.M., it is not changing; and at 8 A.M., it is
increasing at the rate of 5.86 mph/hr.

71. 32 turtles/year; 428 turtles/year; 3260 turtles

73. a. 12%; 23.9%

b. 0.8%/year; 1.1%/year

75. a. The population age 65 and over, including the population of the

developed countries and that of the underdeveloped/emerging
countries

b. 0.92t ⫹ 3.727; 13 million people/year

77. True

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

918

CHAPTER 9 ANSWERS

Using Technology Exercises 9.4, page 616

1. 1

3. 0.4226

5. 0.1613

7. a.

b. 3.4295 ppm/40 year; 105.4332 ppm/40 year

f1t2 ⫽ 0.611t3 ⫹ 9.702t2 ⫹ 32.544t ⫹ 473.5

9. a.

b.

c. At the beginning of 2000, the assets of the hedge funds were

increasing at the rate of $53.78 billion/year, and at the beginning
of 2003, they were increasing at the rate of $139.48 billion/year.

5.

3.

Exercises 9.5, page 625
1. 2x12x2 ⫹ 1x 2 ⫹ 12122, or 6x 2 ⫹ 2
1t ⫺ 12122 ⫹ 12t ⫹ 12112, or 4t ⫺ 1
13x ⫹ 2212x2 ⫹ 1x 2 ⫺ 22132, or 9x 2 ⫹ 4x ⫺ 6
1x 3 ⫺ 12122 ⫹ 12x ⫹ 1213x 22, or 8x 3 ⫹ 3x 2 ⫺ 2
1w 3 ⫺ w 2 ⫹ w ⫺ 1212w2 ⫹ 1w 2 ⫹ 2213w 2 ⫺ 2w ⫹ 12, or 
5w 4 ⫺ 4w 3 ⫹ 9w 2 ⫺ 6w ⫹ 2
25x 2 ⫺ 10x1x ⫹ 1

7.

9.

15x 2 ⫹ 121x⫺1/22 ⫹ 12x 1/2 ⫺ 12110x2, or 
1x 2 ⫺ 5x ⫹ 221x 2 ⫹ 22

⫹ 1x 2 ⫺ 2212x ⫺ 52

1x

x2

,

or 

3x4 ⫺ 10x 3 ⫹ 4

x 2

x

12x ⫹ 12122 ⫺ 12x ⫺ 12122

12x ⫹ 12  2

17.

⫺1
1x ⫺ 22  2
⫺ 2x
1x 2 ⫹ 12  2
2 x⫺1/223x 2 ⫹ 1 ⫺ 4x 3/2 1x1/2 ⫹ 124
11

s 2 ⫹ 2s ⫹ 4
1s ⫹ 12  2

21.

2x3 ⫹ 2x 2 ⫹ 2x ⫺ 2x 3 ⫺ x 2 ⫺ 4x ⫺ 2

,

or 

⫺3x 2 ⫺ 4x3/2 ⫹ 1

21x1x 2 ⫹ 12  2
x 2 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 2
1x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 12  2

, or 

1x 2 ⫹ 12  2

1x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 12  2

1x ⫺ 22  2

11.

13.

15.

19.

23.

25.

27.

29.

39. 60; y ⫽ 60x ⫺ 102

37.

 ; ⫺1
2

⫺3x4 ⫹ 2x2 ⫺ 1
1x4 ⫺ 2x 2 ⫺ 12  2
2; y ⫽ ⫺1
2 x ⫹ 3
2

⫺1

41.

43. 4x ⫺ 2; 4
47. 4t 3 ⫺ 6t 2 ⫹ 12t ⫺ 3; 121t 2 ⫺ t ⫹ 12

51.

59.

⫺ 6
x4

53. 8

55. y ⫽ 7x ⫺ 5

14
3, ⫺770

27 2; 12, ⫺302

61.

y ⫽ ⫺1

45. 6x 2 ⫺ 6x; 612x ⫺ 12
49. 1216x ⫺ 12
11
272; 11, 22
3, 50
2 x ⫹ 1; y ⫽ 2x ⫺ 3
2

57.

63. 0.125, 0.5, 2, 50; the cost of removing (essentially) all of the pollu-

tant is prohibitively high.

65. ⫺5000/min; ⫺1600/min; 7000; 4000
5011 ⫺ 0.01x 22
10.01x 2 ⫹ 12 2

0.01x 2 ⫹ 1

67. a.

50x

b.

c. 6.69, 0, ⫺3.70; the revenue is increasing at the rate of approxi-
mately $6700/thousand watches/week when the level of sales 
is 8000 watches/week; the rate of change of the revenue is
$0/thousand watches/week when the level of sales is 
10,000 watches/week, and the revenue is decreasing at the rate 
of approximately $3700/thousand watches/week when the sales
are 12,000 watches/week.

b. 3.7; 2.2; 1.8; 1.1

Yes

69. a.

c.

180

1t ⫹ 62 2

y

60
50
40
30
20
10

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

t

d. 50 words/min

71. Dropping at the rate of 0.0375 ppm/year; dropping at the rate of 

0
0

1
2.7

2
4.8

3
6.3

t
Nⴕ(t)
Nⴖ(t)

4
7.2
0.6

5
7.5
0

6
7.2

7
6.3
⫺0.6 ⫺1.2

77. 8.1 million; 0.204 million/year; ⫺0.03 million/year2. At the beginning

of 1998, there were 8.1 million people receiving disability benefits;
the number was increasing at the rate of 0.2 million/year; the rate of
the rate of change of the number of people was decreasing at the rate
of 0.03 million people/year2.

,

or 

4

12x ⫹ 12  2

0.006 ppm/year

73. 128 ft/sec; 32 ft/sec2

75. a. and b.

1x ⫺ 2213x 2 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 12 ⫺ 1x 3 ⫹ x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 12

, or 

2x3 ⫺ 5x 2 ⫺ 4x ⫺ 3

1x ⫺ 22  2

1x 2 ⫺ 421x 2 ⫹ 4212x ⫹ 82 ⫺ 1x 2 ⫹ 8x ⫺ 4214x 32

1x 2 ⫺ 42  21x 2 ⫹ 42  2
⫺2x5 ⫺ 24x4 ⫹ 16x3 ⫺ 32x ⫺ 128

1x2 ⫺ 42 21x2 ⫹ 42 2
33. ⫺9

35. 213x 2 ⫺ x ⫹ 32; 10

31. 8

, or 

79. False

81. False

Using Technology Exercises 9.5, page 631

1. 0.8750

3. 0.0774

5. ⫺0.5000

7. 31,312/year

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

9. ⫺18

11. 15.2762

13. ⫺0.6255

15. 0.1973

17. ⫺68.46214; at the beginning of 1988, the rate of change of the 

rate of change of the rate at which banks were failing was 
68 banks/year/year/year.

Exercises 9.6, page 639
1. 612x ⫺ 122
5. 412x ⫺ x 22312 ⫺ 2x2, or 8x 31x ⫺ 2231x ⫺ 12

3. 10x1x 2 ⫹ 224

9.

5x1x2 ⫺ 42 3/2

11.

3

213x ⫺ 2

13.

7.

⫺4

12x ⫹ 12  3

⫺2x

311 ⫺ x 22 2/3
3116x 3 ⫹ 12
214x4 ⫹ x2 5/2

15.

⫺

6

12x ⫹ 32 4

17.

⫺1

12t ⫺ 42 3/2

19.

⫺

21. ⫺213x 2 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 12⫺316x ⫹ 22 or ⫺413x ⫹ 1213x 2 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 12⫺3
23. 31x 2 ⫹ 1) 212x2 ⫺ 21x 3 ⫹ 1213x 22, or 6x12x 2 ⫺ x ⫹ 12
25. 31t ⫺1 ⫺ t ⫺2221⫺t ⫺2 ⫹ 2t ⫺32

27.

1

21x ⫺ 1

⫹

1

21x ⫹ 1

29. 2x 214213 ⫺ 4x231⫺42 ⫹ 13 ⫺ 4x2414x2, or 1⫺12x214x ⫺ 1213 ⫺ 4x23
31. 81x ⫺ 12212x ⫹ 123 ⫹ 21x ⫺ 1212x ⫹ 124, or 

33.

35.

37.

39.

41.

t

3

d

, or 

, or 

1x ⫺ 22 2

12t ⫹ 12  2

61x ⫺ 1212x ⫺ 1212x ⫹ 123
x ⫺ 2b 2c 1x ⫺ 22112 ⫺ 1x ⫹ 32112
3a x ⫹ 3
2t ⫹ 1b 1/2c 12t ⫹ 12112 ⫺ t122
2a
d
3u ⫹ 2b ⫺1/2c 13u ⫹ 22112 ⫺ 1u ⫹ 12132
2a u ⫹ 1
21u ⫹ 1 13u ⫹ 22 3/2
1x 2 ⫺ 12 412x2 ⫺ x 21421x 2 ⫺ 12  312x2
1x 2 ⫺ 12 8

13u ⫹ 22 2

, or 

⫺

1

1

3t1/2

212t ⫹ 12 5/2

 d

, or

1⫺2x213x 2 ⫹ 12

1x 2 ⫺ 12 5

2x1x 2 ⫺ 12  313x 2 ⫹ 12  2391x 2 ⫺ 12 ⫺ 413x 2 ⫹ 124
2x13x 2 ⫹ 13213x 2 ⫹ 12  2

1x 2 ⫺ 12 8

⫺

, or

1x 2 ⫺ 12 5

12x ⫹ 12 ⫺1/231x 2 ⫺ 12 ⫺ 12x ⫹ 1212x24

, or

⫺

151x ⫹ 32 2
1x ⫺ 22 4

77.

CHAPTER 9 ANSWERS

919

49.

51.

53.

55.

4

3 u1/3; 6x; 8x13x 2 ⫺ 12 1/3
⫺ 2
3u5/3

; 6x 2 ⫺ 1; ⫺

216x 2 ⫺ 12

312x 3 ⫺ x ⫹ 12 5/3

2 u⫺3/2; 3x 2 ⫺ 1;

2 u⫺1/2 ⫺ 1
1
2f ¿12x ⫹ 12

13x2 ⫺ 121x3 ⫺ x ⫺ 12

21x3 ⫺ x2 3/2

57. ⫺12

59. 6

61. No

63. y ⫽ ⫺33x ⫹ 57

65.

y ⫽ 43

5 x ⫺ 54
5

67. 0.333 million/week; 0.305 million/week; 16 million; 22.7 million

69.

6.87775

15 ⫹ t2 0.795

; 0.53%/year; 64.9%

71. a. 100, 30.0. The probability of survival at the moment of diagnosis

is 100%. The probability of survival 1 year after diagnosis is
approximately 30%.

b. ⫺129% per year, ⫺34% per year. At the moment of diagnosis,
the probability of survival is falling at the rate of approximately
129% per year; the probability of survival 1 year after diagnosis is
dropping at the rate of approximately 34% per year.

73. a. 0.026710.2t 2 ⫹ 4t ⫹ 642⫺1/310.1t ⫹ 12
75. a. 0.0333t 21t ⫺ 724 ⫹ t 31421t ⫺ 7234, or 0.21t 21t ⫺ 321t ⫺ 723
b. 90.72; 0; ⫺90.72; at 8 A.M. the level of nitrogen dioxide is

b. 0.0090 ppm/year

increasing; at 10 A.M. the level stops increasing; at 11 A.M. the
level is decreasing.

d ,

d ,

211
300c 1t ⫹ 252 1
2 t 2 ⫹ 2t ⫹ 252 ⫺1/21t ⫹ 22 ⫺ 11
1t ⫹ 252  221

1t ⫹ 252  2

2 t 2 ⫹ 2t ⫹ 25

3450t

or 

0.2 beats/min/sec, 179 beats/min

2 t 2 ⫹ 2t ⫹ 252 1/2112

; 2.9 beats/min/sec, 0.7 beats/min/sec,

79. 160p ft2/sec

81. ⫺27 mph/decade; 19 mph

83.

11.422 c 13t 2 ⫹ 80t ⫹ 5502114t ⫹ 1402 ⫺ 17t 2 ⫹ 140t ⫹ 700216t ⫹ 802

13t 2 ⫹ 80t ⫹ 5502  2

or 

1.421140t 2 ⫹ 3500t ⫹ 21,0002

13t 2 ⫹ 80t ⫹ 5502 2

; 31,312 jobs/year/month

85. ⫺400 sports watches/(dollar price increase)

87. True

89. True

Using Technology Exercises 9.6, page 644

1. 0.5774

3. 0.9390

5. ⫺4.9498

7. 5,414,500 people/year; 2,513,600 people/year

Exercises 9.7, page 652

1. 3e3x

3. ⫺e⫺t

5. e x ⫹ 2x

ex1x ⫺ 12

x2

9.

11. 31e x ⫺ e⫺x2

13. ⫺

2
ew

15. 6e3x⫺1

17. ⫺2xe⫺x 2

19. ⫺ 3e1/x
x2

7. x 2ex1x ⫹ 32

43.

1x 2 ⫺ 12  2
⫺ 3x 2 ⫹ 2x ⫹ 1
12x ⫹ 11x 2 ⫺ 12  2
1t 2 ⫹ 12 1/211
⫺ t 2 ⫹ 2t ⫺ 1
21t ⫹ 11t 2 ⫹ 12 3/2
47. 1019x 2 ⫹ 221x 2 ⫹ 223

45.

221t ⫹ 12 ⫺1/2112 ⫺ 1t ⫹ 12 1/211

221t 2 ⫹ 12 ⫺1/212t2

, or

t 2 ⫹ 1

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

920

CHAPTER 9 ANSWERS

21. 25e x1e x ⫹ 1224

2x
e
22x

23.

25. e3x⫹213x ⫺ 22

29. 16e⫺4x ⫹ 9e3x

31. 6e3x13x ⫹ 22

2ex

27.

1ex ⫹ 12 2
33. y ⫽ 2x ⫺ 2

43.

⫺2
x

45.

211 ⫺ ln x2

x2

2 ln x

51.

57.

x

1
x2

63. ⫺

35.

5
x

8x ⫺ 5

4x2 ⫺ 5x ⫹ 3

3

u ⫺ 2

53.

3x2

61.

59.

65.

x3 ⫹ 1
212 ⫺ x22
1x2 ⫹ 22 2

67. y ⫽ x ⫺ 1

69. ⫺0.1694, ⫺0.1549, ⫺0.1415; the percentage of the total population

relocating was decreasing at the rate of 0.17%/year in 1970,
0.15%/year in 1980, and 0.14%/year in 1990.

71. a. 70,000; 353,700

b. 37,800/decade; 191,000/decade

73. a. 181

b. 0/decade; ⫺27/decade; ⫺38/decade; ⫺32/decade
c. 52/decade

75. 12.9%/year; 10.9%/year; 9.3%/year; and 7.9%/year

77. a. 70°F

b. ⫺14.7°F

c. 30°F

79. a. ⫺1.64¢/bottle; ⫺1.34¢/bottle
b. $231.87/bottle; $217.03/bottle

81. 1.8/$1000 output/decade; ⫺0.11/$1000 output/decade; 

⫺0.23/$1000 output/decade; ⫺0.13/$1000 output/decade

83. 0.0580%/kg; 0.0133%/kg

85. a. 14.42%/year; 2.4%/year

87. False

Using Technology Exercises 9.7, page 656

1. 5.4366

3. 12.3929

5. 0.1861

7. a.

b. 4.2720 billion/half century

9. a. 153,024; 235,181

b. 634; 18,401

11. a. 69.63%

b. 5.09%/decade

Exercises 9.8, page 663
1. a. C1x2 is always increasing because as the number of units x

produced increases, the amount of money that must be spent on
production also increases.

b. 4000

3. a. $1.80; $1.60

b. $1.80; $1.60

5. a.

100 ⫹

200,000

x

200,000

b.

⫺

x 2

c. C苶1x2 approaches $100 if the production level is very high.

37.

1

x ⫹ 1

39.

8
x

41.

1
2x

7.

2000

x

⫹ 2 ⫺ 0.0001x; ⫺2000
x 2

⫺ 0.0001

1

47.

x1x ⫹ 12
2x2ln x
1x ln x ⫹ 12ex

55.

1

x

49. x11 ⫹ 2 ln x2

9. a. 8000 ⫺ 200x

b. 200, 0, ⫺200

c. $40

11. a. ⫺0.04x 2 ⫹ 600x ⫺ 300,000

b. ⫺0.08x ⫹ 600
d. The profit increases as production increases, peaking at 7500

c. 200; ⫺40

units; beyond this level, profit falls.

P(x)

s
r
a
l
l
o
d

 
f
o

 
s
n
o
i
l
l
i

M

2

1.5

1

.5

–.5

2.5

5

7.5

10

12.5

15

x (thousands)

13. a. 600x ⫺ 0.05x 2; ⫺0.000002x 3 ⫺ 0.02x 2 ⫹ 200x ⫺ 80,000

b. 0.000006x 2 ⫺ 0.06x ⫹ 400; 600 ⫺ 0.1x; 

⫺0.000006x 2 ⫺ 0.04x ⫹ 200

c. 304; 400; 96

d.

30

20

10

s
r
a
l
l
o
d

 
f
o

 

s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
t
 
f
o
 
 
s
d
e
r
d
n
u
H

30

20

10

30

20

10

s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
t
 
f
o
 

 
s
d
e
r
d
n
u
H

s
r
a
l
l
o
d

 
f
o

 

s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
 
t
 
f
o

 
s
n
e
T

s
r
a
l
l
o
d

 
f
o

 

C

x

x

3

7
1
Units of a thousand

5

R

x

4

8

12

Units of a thousand

P

3

1
7
Units of a thousand

5

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

15. a.

0.000002x 2 ⫺ 0.03x ⫹ 400 ⫹

b.

0.000004x ⫺ 0.03 ⫺

80,000

x 2

80,000

x

c. ⫺0.0132; 0.0092; the marginal average cost is negative (average

cost is decreasing) when 5000 units are produced and positive
(average cost is increasing) when 10,000 units are produced.

CHAPTER 9 ANSWERS

921

11. 1

12. 1

13.

3
2

14. The limit does not exist.

15.

y

x

5

−2

d.

y ($)

600

500

400

300

200

100

5

1; 1; 1

16.

y

x

10

15

20

Units of a thousand

17. a.

50x

0.01x 2 ⫹ 1

b.

50 ⫺ 0.5x 2
10.01x 2 ⫹ 12  2

c. $44,380; when the level of production is 2000 units, the reve-
nue increases at the rate of $44,380 per additional 1000 units 
produced.

19. 1.21

21. 0.288

23. a. 100xe⫺0.0001x

25. False

b. 10011 ⫺ 0.00012e⫺0.0001x

c. 0$/pair

Chapter 9 Concept Review Questions, page 667

1. f x ; L; a

1

2
2. a. Lr

b. L ⫾ M

c. LM

d.

L
M

; M ⫽ 0

3. a. L; x

b. M; negative; absolute

4. a. right

b. left

c. L; L

b. discontinuous

c. every

b. everywhere

1
b. f x ⫽ 0;  a, b

c. Q x

2

2

1

2

1

1

2

5. a. continuous
6. a. a; a; t a
1
2
1
7. a. [a, b]; f c ⫽ M

2

1

2

2

1
f1a ⫹ h2 ⫺ f1a2

h

9. a.

8. a. f ⬘ a

b. y ⫽ f a ⫹ m x ⫺ a

b. lim
h씮0

c. cf ⬘ x

1

2

2

b.

f1a ⫹ h2 ⫺ f1a2

h

2

1

d. f ⬘ x ⫾ t⬘ x
1
2
t1x2 f ¿1x2 ⫺ f1x2t¿1x2

3 t1x24 2

b. n f x n⫺1f ⬘ x

3

1

42

1

2

10. a. 0

b. nxn⫺1

1

11. a. f x t⬘ x ⫹ t x f ⬘ x
1

2
1
2
12. a. t⬘ f x
42
1

f ⬘ x

1

1
2

2

3

13. marginal cost; marginal revenue; marginal profit; marginal average

cost

1
14. a. e f 1x2f ⬘ x

2

b.

f ¿1x2
f1x2

Chapter 9 Review Exercises, page 668

1. ⫺3

2. 2

3. ⫺21

4. 0

5. ⫺1

6. The limit does not exist.

7. 7

8.

9
2

9. 1

10. 1
2

2

x

4; 2; the limit does not exist.

17. x ⫽ 2

18. x ⫽ ⫺ , 1

1
2

19. x ⫽ ⫺1

20. x ⫽ 0

21. a. 3; 2.5; 2.1

b. 2

22. 4

23.

1
x2

24.

3
2

; y ⫽ x ⫹ 5

3
2

25. ⫺4; y ⫽ ⫺4x ⫹ 4

26. a. Yes

b. No

27. 15x 4 ⫺ 8x 3 ⫹ 6x ⫺ 2

28. 24x 5 ⫹ 8x 3 ⫹ 6x

29.

6
x4

⫺ 3
x2

32. 2x ⫺

35. 2x ⫹

2
x2

3
x5/2

30. 4t ⫺ 9t 2 ⫹ t⫺3/2

1
2

31. ⫺

1
t 3/2

⫺

6
t 5/2

33. 1 ⫺

2
t 2

⫺ 6
t 3

34. 4s ⫹

4
s 2

⫺ 1
s 3/2

12x ⫺ 12112 ⫺ 1x ⫹ 12122

36.

12t 2 ⫹ 1212t2 ⫺ t 214t2

, or 

12t 2 ⫹ 12 2

12x ⫺ 12 2

2t

12t 2 ⫹ 12 2

, or 

⫺

3

12x ⫺ 12 2

37.

38.

39.

40.

1t 1/2 ⫹ 12 1

1x1/2 ⫹ 1211

2 t ⫺1/22

2 t ⫺1/2 ⫺ t 1/211
1t 1/2 ⫹ 12 2
2 x⫺1/22 ⫺ 1x1/2 ⫺ 1211

, or 

1

22t 12t ⫹ 12 2
2 x⫺1/22

, or 

1x1/2 ⫹ 12 2

12x 12x ⫹ 12 2

41.

12t 2 ⫹ 12112 ⫺ t14t2

12t 2 ⫹ 12 2

1 ⫺ 2t 2
12t 2 ⫹ 12 2
1x2 ⫺ 1214x3 ⫹ 2x2 ⫺ 1x4 ⫹ x2212x2

, or 

1x2 ⫺ 12 2
2
42. 3 4x ⫹ 1 2x 2 ⫹ x 2
43. 8 3x 3 ⫺ 2 7 9x 2 , or 72x 2 3x 3 ⫺ 2 72

12
12

1
1

1

2

, or 

2x1x4 ⫺ 2x2 ⫺ 12

1x2 ⫺ 12 2

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

922

CHAPTER 9 ANSWERS

2
44. 5 x 1/2 ⫹ 2 4 ⭈

1

1
2

x⫺1/2, or 

45.

11

2

2t 2 ⫹ 1 ⫺1/2 4t , or 

2

1

2

512x ⫹ 22 4
22x
2t22t 2 ⫹ 1

⫹ 1

51.

1 ⫺ 4t

22te2t

54. 4xe 2x2⫺1

2
57. x ⫹ 1 2ex

1

413t ⫺ 12
13t 2 ⫺ 2t ⫹ 52 3

2

2t 

1

2

2

2

1

2

1

2

1

48. ⫺ 2x 3 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫹ 1 ⫺5/2 6x 2 ⫺ 6x , or 

46. ⫺2t 2 1 ⫺ 2t 3 ⫺2/3, or ⫺

11 ⫺ 2t 
32 2/3
47. ⫺4 3t 2 ⫺ 2t ⫹ 5 ⫺3 3t ⫺ 1 , or ⫺

12
49. 2x ⫹ 1)e 2x

1
13
⫺9x x ⫺ 1 2x 3 ⫺ 3x 2 ⫹ 1 ⫺5/2
1
e x1x2 ⫹ x ⫹ 12
21 ⫹ x2
2

22t

55. 1 ⫺ 2x 2 e⫺x 2

2
2
⫹ 2tet

50.

52.

e t

1

53.

21e 2x ⫹ 22
11 ⫹ e⫺2x2 2
1
2
56. 3e2x 1 ⫹ e2x 1/2
ln x ⫺ 1
1ln x2 2

60.

58. ln t ⫹ 1

59.

2xe x 2
e x 2 ⫹ 1
1

x ⫺ x ln x ⫹ 1
x1x ⫹ 12 2
1r 3 ⫺ r 2 ⫹ r ⫹ 12e r
12x2 ⫹ 2x2 # ln x ⫺ 12ex 2

11 ⫹ r 22 2

4e4x

63.

2
62. x ⫹ 2 ex
e4x ⫹ 3
1 ⫹ ex11 ⫺ x ln x2

65.

x11 ⫹ ex2 2

x11 ⫹ ln x2 2
xb a 1 ⫺ 1
x2b

21x2 ⫹ 121x2 ⫺ 12

, or 

2a x ⫹ 1
12x2 ⫹ 12 2112 ⫺ 11 ⫹ x2212x2 ⫹ 1214x2

x3

61.

64.

66.

67.

68.

212t ⫹ 12 ⫺1/2122 ⫺ 12t ⫹ 12 1/2 # 31t ⫹ 12 2112

, or 

1t ⫹ 12 6

, or 

⫺ 6x2 ⫹ 8x ⫺ 1
12x2 ⫹ 12 3

2
t 2 ⫹ t 4 4t ⫹ 2t 2 ⭈ 4 t 2 ⫹ t 3 2t ⫹ 1 , or 4t 2 5t ⫹ 3 t 2 ⫹ t 3
69.
70. 2x ⫹ 1 3 ⭈ 2 x 2 ⫹ x 2x ⫹ 1 ⫹ x 2 ⫹ x 23 2x ⫹ 1 2 2 , or 

2

1

12
12

2

2

1

12x2 ⫹ 12 4
1
12

1

2

12

12
2

12
2

1
1
1
2 2x ⫹ 1 2 x 2 ⫹ x 7x 2 ⫹ 7x ⫹ 1
2

12
2
113x2 ⫺ 121x2 ⫺ 12 2
1x3 ⫹ 22 1/2112 ⫺ x # 1

22x

12

1

1

1
2

21x3 ⫹ 22 ⫺1/2 # 3x2

x3 ⫹ 2

71. x 1/2 ⭈ 3 x 2 ⫺ 1 2 2x ⫹ x 2 ⫺ 1 3 ⭈ x⫺1/2, or 

1
2

, or 

4 ⫺ x3
21x3 ⫹ 22 3/2

14x ⫺ 32 1

213x ⫹ 22 ⫺1/2132 ⫺ 13x ⫹ 22 1/2142

, or 

72.

73.

74.

⫺

12x ⫹ 25

14x ⫺ 32 2
223x ⫹ 214x ⫺ 32 2
1t ⫹ 12 3 1

⫺

5t ⫹ 2

22t ⫹ 11t ⫹ 12 4

, or 

2t1t 2 ⫺ 122
1t 2 ⫹ 42 3

81.

⫺

9

13x ⫹ 12 2

75. 2 12x2 ⫺ 9x ⫹ 2

2

76.

⫹ 3
1
4x5/2
1t 2 ⫹ 42 21⫺2t2 ⫺ 14 ⫺ t 221221t 2 ⫹ 4212t2

⫺ 1
4x3/2

77.

1t 2 ⫹ 42 4

1

2

1
x

80.

79.

78. 4e⫺2x x ⫺ 1

82. 2 15x4 ⫹ 12x2 ⫹ 6x ⫹ 1

e x11 ⫺ e x2
11 ⫹ e x2 3
2
1
a⫺ 1
1
2b
1
2x2 ⫹ 1 ⫺3/2 4x , or 
12
12
t 2 ⫹ 1 2 14t ⫹ 7t 2 ⫹ 1 2t

83. 2 2x2 ⫹ 1 ⫺1/2 ⫹ 2x 
1

12

84.

2

1

2

1

2

2

2
12
86. ⫺2

85. 0

2

12x2 ⫹ 12 3/2
1

12

2

2 ⫹ 1 2t , or 6t t 2 ⫹ 1 7t 2 ⫹ 3

87. a. 2, ⫺25) and  ⫺1, 14)

b. y ⫽ ⫺4x ⫺ 17; y ⫽ ⫺4x ⫹ 10

1

1

25
3

88. a. Ó⫺2,
Ô and Ó1, ⫺ Ô
23

13
6

13
3

b. y ⫽ ⫺2x ⫹ ; y ⫽ ⫺2x ⫺

1
6

89. y ⫽ ⫺

 23

 x ⫹ 4
3

90. y ⫽ 112x ⫺ 80

3

11

e2

91. y ⫽ ⫺ 2x ⫺ 3

93. ⫺

48

; 

12x ⫺ 12 4

2
a⫺⬁; 

92. y ⫽

1
e

1

2b

傼

a 1

2

, ⬁b

94. 20

95. a. C⬘1x2 gives the instantaneous rate of change of the total manufac-

turing cost C in dollars with respect to the quantity produced
when x units of the product are produced.

b. Positive
c. $20

96. a. 20,430

b. 225 cameras/year

97. a. 15%; 31.99%

b. 0.51%/year; 1.04%/year

98. 200 subscribers/week

99. 75 years; 0.07 year/year

100. a. ⫺0.02x 2 ⫹ 600x

b. ⫺0.04x ⫹ 600

c. 200; the sale of the 10,001st phone will bring a revenue of $200.

101. a. $2.20; $2.20

b.

2500

x

⫹ 2.2; ⫺

2500
x2

102. a. 2000x ⫺ 0.04x 2; ⫺0.000002x 3 ⫺ 0.02x 2 ⫹ 1000x ⫺ 120,000; 

0.000002x 2 ⫺ 0.02x ⫹ 1000 ⫹

120,000

x

b. 0.000006x 2 ⫺ 0.04x ⫹ 1000; 2000 ⫺ 0.08x; ⫺0.000006x 2 ⫺

0.04x ⫹ 1000; 0.000004x ⫺ 0.02 ⫺

120,000

x2

c. 934; 1760; 826
d. ⫺0.0048; 0.010125; at a production level of 5000, the average
cost is decreasing by 0.48¢/unit; at a production level of 8000,
the average cost is increasing by 1.0125¢/unit.

103. a. 1175, 2540, 3289

b. 4000

104. a. $9/unit

b. $8/unit/week

c. $18/unit

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 9 Before Moving On, page 671

1. 2

2. a. 0

b. 1; no

3. ⫺1; y ⫽ ⫺x

4. 6x 2 ⫺

1
x2/3

⫺ 10
3x5/3

5.

4x2 ⫺ 1

22x2 ⫺ 1

6. ⫺

2x2 ⫹ 2x ⫺ 1
1x2 ⫹ x ⫹ 12 2
2x
e
22x

8.

9. 1 ⫹ ln 2

7. ⫺

1

21x ⫹ 12 3/2

; 

3

41x ⫹ 12 5/2

; ⫺

15

81x ⫹ 12 7/2

CHAPTER 10
Exercises 10.1, page 686
1. Decreasing on 1⫺⬁, 02 and increasing on 10, ⬁2
3. Increasing on 1⫺⬁, ⫺12 and 11, ⬁2 and decreasing on 1⫺1, 12
5. Decreasing on 1⫺⬁, 02 and 12, ⬁2 and increasing on 10, 22
7. Decreasing on 1⫺⬁, ⫺12 and 11, ⬁2 and increasing on 1⫺1, 12
9. Increasing on 120.2, 20.62 and 121.7, 21.82, constant on 119.6, 20.22
and 120.6, 21.12, and decreasing on 121.1, 21.72 and 121.8, 22.72

11. a. Positive
e. Negative

b. Positive
f. Negative

c. Zero
g. Positive

d. Zero

15. Decreasing on 

13. Increasing on (⫺⬁, ⬁2
1⫺⬁, 3
22
a ⫺⬁, ⫺

17. Decreasing on 

13

3

, 

13
3 b

a ⫺

and increasing on 

13
3 b  and a

13

3

13
2, ⬁2
, ⬁b

and increasing on 

19. Increasing on 

1⫺⬁, ⫺22 and 10, ⬁2

and decreasing on 1⫺2, 02

21. Increasing on 1⫺⬁, ⬁2
23. Decreasing on 1⫺⬁, 32 and increasing on 13, ⬁2
25. Decreasing on 1⫺⬁, 22 and 12, ⬁2
27. Decreasing on 1⫺⬁, 12 and 11, ⬁2
29. Decreasing on 1⫺⬁, ⬁2
33. Increasing on 1⫺4, 02; decreasing on 10, 42
35. Increasing on (0, 2); decreasing on (⫺⬁, 0) and (2, ⬁)

31. Increasing on 1⫺1, ⬁2

f112 ⫽ 0

37. Increasing on (0, e); decreasing on (e, ⬁)
39. Decreasing on 1⫺⬁, 02 and 10, ⬁2
41. Relative maximum: f102 ⫽ 1; relative minima: f1⫺12 ⫽ 0 and 
43. Relative maximum: f1⫺12 ⫽ 2; relative minimum: f112 ⫽ ⫺2
45. Relative maximum: f112 ⫽ 3; relative minimum: f122 ⫽ 2
47. Relative minimum: f102 ⫽ 2
53. Relative minimum: f122 ⫽ ⫺4
55. Relative maximum: h132 ⫽ 15
59. Relative maximum: t102 ⫽ 5; relative minimum: t122 ⫽ 1
61. Relative maximum: f102 ⫽ 0; relative minima:
f 1⫺12 ⫽ ⫺1

57. None

51. (d)

49. (a)

2

and

f 112 ⫽ ⫺1

2

CHAPTER 10 ANSWERS

923

63. Relative minimum: F132 ⫽ ⫺5; relative maximum:
65. Relative minimum: t132 ⫽ ⫺7
69. Relative maximum: f1⫺32 ⫽ ⫺4; relative minimum: f132 ⫽ 8
f 1⫺12 ⫽ ⫺1

relative minimum:

F1⫺12 ⫽ 17

67. None

3

2

71. Relative maximum:

f 112 ⫽ 1
2;
73. Relative maximum: f112 ⫽ 2e⫺1
75. Relative minimum: f112 ⫽ 1

77.

y

100

2

t

Rising in the time interval 10, 22; falling in the time interval 12, 52;
when t ⫽ 5 sec

79. The number of subscribers is increasing.

ber T.

81. Rising on 10, 332 and descending on 133, T2 for some positive num-
83. f is decreasing on 10, 12 and increasing on 11, 42. The average speed

decreases from 6 A.M. to 7 A.M. and then picks up from 7 A.M. to 
10 A.M.

85. a. Increasing on 10, 102

b. Sales will be increasing.

87. Increasing on (0, 4); decreasing on (4, 5). The cash in the fund will
be increasing from 2005 to 2045 and decreasing from 2045 to 2055.

89. a. 30%; 41.4%

91. Increasing on 10, 4.52 and decreasing on 14.5, 112; the pollution is

increasing from 7 A.M. to 11:30 A.M. and decreasing from 11:30 A.M.
to 6 P.M.

93. b. 4505/year/year; 272 cases/year/year

95. a. 0.0021t 2 ⫺ 0.0061t ⫹ 0.1

b. Decreasing on 10, 1.52 and increasing on 11.5, 152. The gap

(shortage of nurses) was decreasing from 2000 to mid-2001 and
is expected to be increasing from mid-2001 to 2015.

11.5, 0.0962. The gap was smallest 1⬇ 96,0002 in mid-2001.
105. a ⫽ ⫺4; b ⫽ 24

101. False

99. True

c.

97. True

107. a. ⫺2x if x ⫽ 0

b. No

Using Technology Exercises 10.1, page 693

1. a.

3. a.

b. Relative minimum: f1⫺0.29342 ⫽ ⫺2.5435

f is decreasing on 1⫺⬁, ⫺0.29342 and increasing on
1⫺0.2934, ⬁2.
f is increasing on 1⫺⬁, ⫺1.61442 and 10.2390, ⬁2 and decreasing
on (⫺1.6144, 0.23902.
b. Relative maximum: f1⫺1.61442 ⫽ 26.7991; relative minimum:
f10.23902 ⫽ 1.6733
f is decreasing on 1⫺⬁, ⫺12 and 10.33, ⬁2 and increasing on
(⫺1, 0.332.
f1⫺12 ⫽ ⫺0.63

b. Relative maximum: f10.332 ⫽ 1.11; relative minimum:

5. a.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

924

CHAPTER 10 ANSWERS

7. a.

f is decreasing on 1⫺⬁, 0.402 and increasing on 10.40, ⬁2.

b. Relative minimum: f10.402 ⫽ 0.79

9. a.

b.

Increasing on 10, 3.66762 and decreasing on 13.6676, 62

11. Increasing on 10, 4.52 and decreasing on 14.5, 112; 11:30 A.M.; 

164 PSI

inflection point: (0, 02

Exercises 10.2, page 704
1. Concave downward on 1⫺⬁, 02 and concave upward on (0, ⬁2;
3. Concave downward on 1⫺⬁, 02 and 10, ⬁2
5. Concave upward on 1⫺⬁, 02 and (1, ⬁2 and concave downward on 
10, 12; inflection points: 10, 02 and 11, ⫺12
7. Concave downward on 1⫺⬁, ⫺22, 1⫺2, 22, and 12, ⬁2
9. a. Concave upward on 10, 22, 14, 62, 17, 92, and 19, 122 and concave

downward on 12, 42 and 16, 72
2, 14, 22, 16, 22, and 17, 32
12,

5
2

b.

11. (a)

13. (b)

15. a.

D¿11t2 ⬎ 0, D¿21t2 ⬎ 0, D–11t2 ⬎ 0, and D–21t2 ⬍ 0 on 10, 122

b. With or without the proposed promotional campaign, the deposits
will increase; with the promotion, the deposits will increase at an
increasing rate; without the promotion, the deposits will increase
at a decreasing rate.

17. (c)

19. (d)

21. a. Between 8 A.M. and 10 A.M., the rate of change of the rate of

change of the number of smartphones assembled is increasing;
between 10 A.M. and 12 noon, it is decreasing.

b. At 10 A.M.

23. At the time t 0, corresponding to its t-coordinate, the restoration

process is working at its peak.

29. Concave upward on 1⫺⬁, ⬁2
31. Concave downward on 10, ⬁2; concave upward on (⫺⬁, 02
33. Concave upward on 1⫺⬁, 02 and (3, ⬁2; concave downward on (0, 32
35. Concave downward on 1⫺⬁, 02 and (0, ⬁2
37. Concave downward on 1⫺⬁, 42
39. Concave downward on 1⫺⬁, 32; concave upward on (3, ⬁2

26
3 b  and a

26

3

, ⬁b ;

concave 

41. Concave upward on 

downward on 

a ⫺

a ⫺⬁, ⫺
26
26
3 b

3

, 

43. Concave downward on 1⫺⬁, 12; concave upward on 11, ⬁2
45. Concave upward on 1⫺⬁, 02 and 10, ⬁2
47. Concave upward on  ⫺⬁,

; concave downward on 

A

B5

2

5

2A

, ⬁B

49. Concave upward on 10, ⬁2; concave downward on 1⫺⬁, 02
51. Concave upward on 1⫺⬁, ⫺12 and 11, ⬁2; concave downward on 

11, ⫺202
11, 22

63.

57.

a ⫺

272
10, 12 and 12
3, 11
22
22
, 2e⫺1/2b ; a

2

2

, 2e⫺1/2b

69. None

55.

1⫺1, 02 and 10, 12
10, ⫺22
10, 02
1e⫺3/2, ⫺3

2 e⫺32

61.

53.

59.

65.

67. Relative maximum: f112 ⫽ 5
f 1⫺12 ⫽ ⫺7

3

71. Relative maximum:

f 152 ⫽ ⫺115
73. Relative maximum: t1⫺32 ⫽ ⫺6; relative minimum: t132 ⫽ 6

, relative minimum:

3

75. None

77. Relative minimum: f1⫺22 ⫽ 12

relative minimum:

t1⫺12 ⫽ ⫺1

2

79. Relative maximum:

t112 ⫽ 1
2;
f 112 ⫽ 1
83. Relative minimum: f102 ⫽ 0

81. Relative minimum:

e

85.

y

4

3

2

1

–4

87.

89.

1

2

3

4

x

x

4

y

4

y

1

2⫺
2

2
2

x

91. a. N is increasing on 10, 122.

b. N ⬙1t2 ⬍ 0 on 10, 62 and N ⬙1t2 ⬎ 0 on 16, 122

c. The rate of growth of the number of help-wanted advertisements
was decreasing over the first 6 months of the year and increasing
over the last 6 months.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

CHAPTER 10 ANSWERS

925

35.

y

2

4

x

93. f(t) increases at an increasing rate until the water level reaches the
middle of the vase at which time (corresponding to the inflection
point) f(t) is increasing at the fastest rate. The water rises faster
when the vase is narrower. After that, f(t) increases at a decreasing
rate until the vase is filled.

95. b. The rate of increase of the average state cigarette tax was

decreasing from 2001 to 2007.

97. b. The rate was increasing.

99. a. 1.43%; 5.80%

103. a.
c.

⫺ 0.6t 2 ⫹ 3.28t ⫹ 1.31
; 
12.73, 14.932; the rate was increasing least rapidly in late 

⫺ 1.2t ⫹ 3.28

September of 2006.

105. a. 506,000; 125,480

b. The number of measles deaths was dropping from 1999 through

2005.

c. April 2002; approximately ⫺41 deaths/year/year

107. b. 44

109. False

111. True

Exercises 10.3, page 719

1. Horizontal asymptote: y ⫽ 0

3. Horizontal asymptote: y ⫽ 0; vertical asymptote: x ⫽ 0

5. Horizontal asymptote: y ⫽ 0; vertical asymptotes: x ⫽ ⫺1 and x ⫽ 1

7. Horizontal asymptote: y ⫽ 3; vertical asymptote: x ⫽ 0

9. Horizontal asymptote: y ⫽ 0

11. Horizontal asymptote: y ⫽ 0; vertical asymptote: x ⫽ 0

13. Horizontal asymptote: y ⫽ 0; vertical asymptote: x ⫽ 0

15. Horizontal asymptote: y ⫽ 1; vertical asymptote: x ⫽ ⫺2

17. None

19. Horizontal asymptote: y ⫽ 1; vertical asymptotes: t ⫽ ⫺4 and t ⫽ 4

21. Horizontal asymptote: y ⫽ 0; vertical asymptotes: x ⫽ ⫺2 and x ⫽ 3

23. Horizontal asymptote: y ⫽ 2; vertical asymptote: t ⫽ 2

−4

−2

2

−2
−4
−6
−8
−10

y

–3

–2

60
40
20

–1

–20
–40
 
–60

y

20

10

37.

39.

41.

1

2

3

–4

–2

2

4

y

–10

60

40

20

x

x

x

x

25. Horizontal asymptote: y ⫽ 1; vertical asymptotes: x ⫽ ⫺2 and x ⫽ 2

–4

–2

2

4

29. f is the derivative function of the function t.

27. None

31.

v

Terminal velocity

t

2

4

x

33.

−2

y

20
15
10
5

−5
−10
−15
−20

43.

45.

–20

–40

y

30

20

10

–3

–2

–1

1

2

3

y

6

–4

4

t

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

926

CHAPTER 10 ANSWERS

47.

y

2

x

8

49.

y

1

2

3

4

x

5

10

x

–2

–1

–10

–5

51.

53.

8

4

–4

–8

10

5

–5

–10

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

y

y

–6

–4

–2

2

4

6

t

55.

y

t

2

y

1 2

3 4

x

57.

4

2

⫺20

⫺40

⫺60

⫺80

59.

y

2
1

–1

–3

2

4

6

8

x

61. a. x ⫽ 100

b. No

63. a. y ⫽ 0

b. As time passes, the concentration of the drug decreases and

approaches zero.

65.

y

t

t

2

4

6

8

2

4

1

2

3

4

5

x

110

100
90
80
70
60

67.

N

30

69.

T

100
80
60
40
20

71.

C

80

60

40

20

73. a. 30

20

40

60

80

100

x

N t1x2 ⫽

297,000e⫺x
11 ⫹ 99e⫺x2 2

b.

y

3000

0

5

10

15

20

25

x

c.

3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Using Technology Exercises 10.3, page 725

1.

3.

61. a. 2 days after the organic waste was dumped into the pond

b. 3.5 days after the organic waste was dumped into the pond

CHAPTER 10 ANSWERS

927

5. ⫺0.9733; 2.3165, 4.6569

7. 1.5142

9. ⫺0.7680; 1.6873

11.

Exercises 10.4, page 733

1. None

3. Absolute minimum value: 0

5. Absolute maximum value: 3; absolute minimum value: ⫺2

71. a. 2000; $105.8 billion

b. 1995; $7.6 billion

75. R ⫽ r;  watts

E2
4r

79. a. ⫺70 mg/day; ⫺43 mg/day

b. At t ⫽ 1
c. 125 mg

81. False

83. False

87. c.

–1

y

5

–5

x

1

7. Absolute maximum value: 3; absolute minimum value:

⫺27
16

Using Technology Exercises 10.4, page 739

9. Absolute minimum value:

⫺41
8

1. Absolute maximum value: 145.9; absolute minimum value: ⫺4.3834

11. No absolute extrema

13. Absolute maximum value: 1

3. Absolute maximum value: 16; absolute minimum value: ⫺0.1257

15. Absolute maximum value: 5; absolute minimum value: ⫺4

5. Absolute maximum value: 11.8922; absolute minimum value: 0

17. Absolute maximum value: 14; absolute minimum value: 5

7. Absolute maximum value: 2.8889; absolute minimum value: 0

19. Absolute maximum value: 19; absolute minimum value: ⫺1

9. a.

21. Absolute maximum value: 16; absolute minimum value: ⫺1

23. Absolute maximum value: 3; absolute minimum value:

5
3

25. Absolute maximum value:

17
2 ;

absolute minimum value: 5

27. Absolute maximum value ⬇ 1.04; absolute minimum value: ⫺1.5

11. b. approximately 1145

29. No absolute extrema

Exercises 10.5, page 746

31. Absolute maximum value: 1; absolute minimum value: 0

1. 25 ft ⫻ 25 ft

33. Absolute maximum value: 0; absolute minimum value: ⫺3

3. 750 yd ⫻ 1500 yd; 1,125,000 yd2

35. Absolute maximum value: 2; absolute minimum value:

2
e

37. Absolute maximum value: 2e⫺3/2; absolute minimum value: ⫺1

5.

7.

1012 ft  ⫻  4012 ft
16
3  in. ⫻  16
3  in. ⫻  4

3 in.

39. Absolute maximum value: 3 ⫺ ln 3; absolute minimum value: 1

9. 5.04 in. ⫻ 5.04 in. ⫻ 5.04 in.

41. 144 ft

43. 17.72%

45.

f162 ⫽ 3.60, f10.52 ⫽ 1.13; the number of nonfarm, full-time, self-

employed women over the time interval from 1963 to 1993 reached
its highest level, 3.6 million, in 1993.

47. $3600

49. 6000

51. 3333

53. a.

0.0025x ⫹ 80 ⫹

10,000

x

b. 2000

c. 2000

d. Same

57. 533

59. In 7.72 years; $160,208

11. 18 in. ⫻ 18 in. ⫻ 36 in.; 11,664 in.3

13.

15.

46,656

 in.3

 in.; l ⫽ 36 in.; 

r ⫽ 36
p
3 13 9 ft  ⫻ 13 9 ft  ⫻  2

2

p

5 13 9 ft 

17. 250; $62,500; $250

19. 85; $28,900; $340

21. 60 miles/hr

23. w ⬇ 13.86 in.; h ⬇ 19.60 in.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

928

CHAPTER 10 ANSWERS

25. x ⫽ 2250 ft

27. 2.68

10. a.

29. 440 ft; 140 ft; 184,874 sq ft

31. 45; 44,445

1. a.

f1x 12 ⬍ f1x 22

Chapter 10 Concept Review, page 751
b. f1x 12 ⬎ f1x 22
b. f ⬘1x2 ⬍ 0
b. f1x) ⱖ f1c2

f1x2 ⱕ f1c2

increasing

2. a.

3. a.

c. constant

4. a. domain; ⫽ 0; exist
c. relative extremum

b. critical number

5. a.

f ⬘1x2

b. ⬎ 0

c. concavity

d. relative maximum; relative extremum

6.

⫾⬁; ⫾⬁

7. 0; 0

8. b; b

9. a.
b.

f1x2 ⱕ f1c2; absolute maximum value
f1x2 ⱖ f1c2; open interval

10. continuous; absolute; absolute

Chapter 10 Review Exercises, page 752

1. a.

d.

b. No relative extrema

c. Concave down on 1⫺⬁, 12; concave up on 11, ⬁2

f is increasing on 1⫺⬁, ⬁2
11, ⫺17
3 2
f is increasing on 1⫺⬁, ⬁2
f is increasing on 1⫺1, 02 and 11, ⬁2 and decreasing on 
1⫺⬁, ⫺12 and 10, 12
b. Relative maximum value: 0; relative minimum value: ⫺1

c. Concave down on 1⫺⬁, 22; concave up on 12, ⬁2

b. No relative extrema

d.

2. a.

3. a.

12, 02

13
3 b  and a

13

3

, ⬁b ;

concave down 

c. Concave up on 

on 

13
a ⫺
13

3
, ⫺5

, 

a⫺⬁, ⫺
13
3 b
9b ; a

13

3

d. None

d. None

4. a.

5. a.

6. a.

7. a.

8. a.

9. a.

d.

3

, ⫺5
9b

a ⫺
f is increasing on 1⫺⬁, ⫺22 and 12, ⬁2 and decreasing on 
1⫺2, 02 and 10, 22
b. Relative maximum value: ⫺4; relative minimum value: 4
c. Concave down on 1⫺⬁, 02; concave up on 10, ⬁2

f is increasing on 1⫺⬁, 02 and 12, ⬁2; decreasing on 10, 12
and 11, 22

b. Relative maximum value: 0; relative minimum value: 4

b. No relative extrema
d.

b. No relative extrema
d. None

c. Concave up on 11, ⬁2; concave down on 1⫺⬁, 12
f is increasing on 11, ⬁2
c. Concave down on 11, ⬁2
f is decreasing on 1⫺⬁, ⬁2
c. Concave down on 1⫺⬁, 12; concave up on 11, ⬁2
f is increasing on (1, ⬁2
11, 4
32
a 4
f is increasing on 1⫺⬁, ⫺12 and 1⫺1, ⬁2

413
9 b

c. Concave down on 

; concave up on 

14
3, ⬁2

b. No relative extrema

d.

, 

3

b. No relative extrema

c. Concave down on 1⫺1, ⬁2; concave up on 1⫺⬁, ⫺12

d. None

f is decreasing on 1⫺⬁, 02 and increasing on (0, ⬁2
, ⬁b ;

b. Relative minimum value: ⫺1
a ⫺⬁, ⫺

13
3 b  and a

c. Concave down on 

13

3

concave up 

, 

13
a ⫺
13

3
, ⫺3

13
3 b
4b ; a

3

on 

a ⫺

d.

13

3

, ⫺3
4b

11. a. f is increasing on 1⫺⬁, 32 and decreasing on 13, ⬁2
c. Concave up on 1⫺⬁, 22; concave down on 12, ⬁2

b. Relative maximum value: e3

d.

12, 2e22

12. a. f is decreasing on 10, e⫺1/22 and increasing on 1e⫺1/2, ⬁2
b. Relative minimum value: ⫺ e⫺1
c. Concave down on 10, e⫺3/2); concave up on 1e⫺3/2, ⬁)

1
2

d.

1e⫺3/2, ⫺ e⫺32

3
2

13.

y

3

1

(

−1

14.

15.

y

4

5, – 5)

2

4

y

2
1

−1
−2
−3

x

x

1

x

16.

11, 02

−2

−1

y

1

2

−2
−4
−6
−8

1

2

3

x

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

17.

y

12
10
8
6
4
2

18.

19.

x

4

5

6

1

2

3

y

1

−5

x

5

y

−1

3

x

2

20.

y

10

5

−2 −1
−5
−10

−5

−4 −3

1

2

543

x

21.

y

0.5

22.

y

10

1

2

3

x

CHAPTER 10 ANSWERS

929

23. Vertical asymptote:

x ⫽ ⫺3
2

; horizontal asymptote: y ⫽ 0

24. Vertical asymptote: x ⫽ ⫺1; horizontal asymptote: y ⫽ 2

25. Vertical asymptotes: x ⫽ ⫺2, x ⫽ 4; horizontal asymptote: y ⫽ 0

26. Vertical asymptote: x ⫽ 1; horizontal asymptote: y ⫽ 1

27. Absolute minimum value:

⫺25
8

28. Absolute minimum value: 0

29. Absolute maximum value: 5; absolute minimum value: 0

30. Absolute maximum value:

5
3;

absolute minimum value: 1

31. Absolute maximum value: ⫺16; absolute minimum value: ⫺32

32. Absolute maximum value:

33. Absolute maximum value:

1
2;

8
3;

absolute minimum value: 0

absolute minimum value: 0

34. Absolute maximum value:

215
9 ;

absolute minimum value: 7

35. Absolute maximum value:

3
e;

absolute minimum value: ⫺6e2

36. Absolute maximum value: ln 2; absolute minimum value: 0

37. Absolute maximum value:

1
2;

absolute minimum value:

⫺1
2

38. No absolute extrema

¿1t2
R1

of 

¿¿1t2
R1

¿1t2
R2
R–21t2
is positive.

39. a The sign of 

is negative; the sign of 

is positive. The sign

is negative and the sign of 

b. The revenue of the neighborhood bookstore is decreasing at an

increasing rate while the revenue of the new branch of the
national bookstore is increasing at an increasing rate.

40. The rumor spread initially with increasing speed. The rate at which

the rumor is spread reaches a maximum at the time corresponding to
the t-coordinate of the point P on the curve. Thereafter, the speed at
which the rumor is spread decreases.

41. $4000

42. a. 16.25t ⫹ 24.625; sales were increasing.

b. 16.25; the rate of sales was increasing from 2002 to 2005.

43.

1100, 46002; sales increase at an increasing rate until $100,000 is

spent on advertising; after that, any additional expenditure results in
increased sales but at a slower rate of increase.

44. a. Decreasing on 10, 21.42; increasing on 121.4, 302

b. The percentage of men 65 years and older in the workforce was
decreasing from 1970 until mid-1991 and increasing from mid-
1991 through 2000.

45.

1267, 11,8742; the rate of increase is lowest when 267 calculators are

produced.

47. a. 13.0%, 22.2%

x

3

48. a.

b.

1t 
2 ⫹ 102 2
⫺200110 ⫺ 3t 
1t 
2 ⫹ 102 3

I¿1t2 ⫽ ⫺ 200t
I–1t2 ⫽
concave down on a 0, B 10
3 b

22

;

concave up on 

aB 10

3

, ⬁b

; 

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

930

CHAPTER 11 ANSWERS

c.

y

60

58

56

54

52
51

CHAPTER 11
Exercises 11.1, page 766

5. b. y ⫽ 2x ⫹ C

c.

y

5

2

4

6

8

10

t

d. The rate of decline in the environmental quality of the wildlife

was increasing the first 1.8 years. After that time, the rate of
decline decreased.

– 5

5

x

– 5

y ⫽ 1

3 x  3 ⫹ C

7. b.
c.

30
20
10

–10
– 20

– 4

y

C = 5
C = 10

C = 0
C = – 5

2

4

x

9. 6x ⫹ C

11.

1
4 x  4 ⫹ C

⫺ 1
3x  3

⫺ 4
x 1/4

⫹ C

15.

3
5 x 5/3 ⫹ C

⫹ C

19.

⫺ 1
x2

⫹ C

3/2 ⫹ C

2
3 pt 
 x  3 ⫹ 1
2

1
3

23. 3x ⫺ 2x 2 ⫹ C

 x  2 ⫺ 1
2x  2

⫹ C

27. 5e x ⫹ C

49. 168

50. 3000

51. a.

0.001x ⫹ 100 ⫹ 4000
x

b. 2000

52. 10 A.M.

53. a. Decreasing on 10, 12.72; increasing on 112.7, 302

b. 7.9
c. The percentage of women 65 years and older in the workforce
was decreasing from 1970 to Sept. 1982 and increasing from
Sept. 1982 to 2000. It reached a minimum value of 7.9% in Sept.
1982.

55. 74.07 in.3

56. Radius: 2 ft; height: 8 ft

57. 1 ft ⫻ 2 ft ⫻ 2 ft

58. 20,000 cases

59. a ⫽ ⫺4; b ⫽ 11

60.

c ⬎ 3
2

62. a.

f ⬘(x) ⫽ 3x 2 if x ⫽ 0

b. No

Chapter 10 Before Moving On, page 755
1. Decreasing on 1⫺⬁, 02 and 12, ⬁2; increasing on 10, 12 and 11, 22
2. Rel. max: 11, 4e⫺12; inflection point: 12, 8e⫺22

3. Concave downward on 

11
962
4, 83

1⫺⬁, 1
42;

concave upward on 

11
4, ⬁2;

4.

–4

–2

y

10

8

6

4

2

–2

–4

2

4

6

x

5. Abs. min. value: ⫺5; abs. max. value: 80

6. r ⫽ h ⫽ 113 p

 1ft2

13.

17.

21.

25.

33.

37.

41.

45.

49.

29.

x ⫹ 1

2 x  2 ⫹ e 

x ⫹ C

31.

2
7 x 7/2 ⫹ 4

5 x 5/2 ⫺ 1

2 x  2 ⫹ C

35.

x  4 ⫹ 2
x

⫺ x ⫹ C

3 x3/2 ⫹ 41x ⫹ C

2

1
9 u 3 ⫹ 1

3 u 2 ⫺ 1

3 u ⫹ C

39.

2
3 t  3 ⫺ 3

2 t  2 ⫺ 2t ⫹ C

1
3

x 3 ⫺ 2x ⫺ 1
x

⫹ C

43.

1
3 s 3 ⫹ s 2 ⫹ s ⫹ C

e⫹1

et ⫹ t 

e ⫹ 1

⫹ C

47.

1
2

x 2 ⫹ x ⫺ ln 0x0 ⫺ 1

x

⫹ C

ln0 x 0 ⫹ 41x

⫺ 1
x

⫹ C

51.

3
2

x 2 ⫹ x ⫹

1
2

53. x 3 ⫹ 2x 2 ⫺ x ⫺ 5

55.

x ⫺ 1
x

⫹ 3

57.

x ⫹ ln 0x0

1x
s1t2 ⫽ 4

59.

65.

3 t 3/2

61.

e 

x ⫹ 1

2 x  2 ⫹ 2

63. Branch A

67. $3370

69. 5000 units; $34,000

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

71. a. 0.0029t 2 ⫹ 0.159t ⫹ 1.6

b. $4.16 trillion

Exercises 11.3, page 788

73. a. ⫺0.125t 3 ⫹ 1.05t 2 ⫹ 2.45t ⫹ 1.5

b. 24.375 million

75. a. ⫺1.493t 3 ⫹ 34.9t 2 ⫹ 279.5t ⫹ 2917

b. $9168

77. a. 3.133t 3 ⫺ 6.7t 2 ⫹ 14.07t ⫹ 36.7

b. 103,201

79. a. 4.096t 3 ⫺ 75.2797t 2 ⫹ 695.23t ⫹ 3142

b. $3766.05

81. 21,960

83. ⫺t 3 ⫹ 96t 2; 59,400 ft

85. a. 0.75t 4 ⫺ 5.9815t 3 ⫹ 14.3611t 2 ⫹ 26.632t ⫹ 108

b. $321.25 million

87. a. ⫺0.0000124t 3 ⫹ 0.00186t 2 ⫺ 0.186t ⫹ 9.3

b. 7030

c. 6610

91.

7
9 
9

ft/sec2; 396 ft

93. 0.924 ft/sec2

89.

1

2 k1R 2 ⫺ r 22
1612

3

95. a.

 t 3/2 ⫺ 8t 4

b. 2.2 in.

97. True

99. True

Exercises 11.2, page 778

1. 4.27

3. a. 6

y

6
5
4
3
2
1

0.5

1

1.5

2

b. 4.5

c. 5.25

d. Yes

5. a. 4

y

y = 4 – 2x

4

3

2

1

x

x

1

514x ⫹ 32 5 ⫹ C

3.

1

31x  3 ⫺ 2x2  3 ⫹ C

0.5

1

1.5

2

b. 4.8

c. 4.4

d. Yes

CHAPTER 11 ANSWERS

931

y = 3x

1.

5.

9.

13.

17.

29.

33.

37.

41.

43.

45.

47.

49.

51.

57.

61.

63.

1

⫺

1

212x  2 ⫹ 32  2
101x 2 ⫺ 12 10 ⫹ C
ln1x ⫺ 22 2 ⫹ C
3 ln03x 2 ⫺ 10 ⫹ C

1

⫹ C

7.

2

31t  3 ⫹ 22 3/2 ⫹ C
5 ln0 1 ⫺ x  5 0 ⫹ C

11.

⫺1

15.

1

2 ln10.3x  2 ⫺ 0.4x ⫹ 22 ⫹ C

19.

⫺1

2 e⫺2x ⫹ C

21. ⫺e2⫺x ⫹ C

23.

⫺1

2 e⫺x 

2 ⫹ C

25. e x ⫹ e⫺x ⫹ C

1

2

1

⫺

1

2

39.

35.

31.

61e3x ⫹ x  32  2

2 ln1x  2 ⫹ 22 ⫹ C

27. 2 ln11 ⫹ ex2 ⫹ C
⫹ C
2 1ln 5x2 2 ⫹ C
3 1ln x2 3/2 ⫹ C

2e1x ⫹ C
81e2x ⫹ 12 4 ⫹ C
2 ln0ln x0 ⫹ C
2 ex 2 ⫺ 1
1
3 11x ⫺ 12  3 ⫹ 311x ⫺ 12  2 ⫹ 811x ⫺ 12 ⫹ 4 ln0 1x ⫺ 1 0 ⫹ C
16x ⫹ 121x ⫺ 12 6
41x ⫺ x ⫺ 4 ln11 ⫹ 1x2 ⫹ C
252 11 ⫺ √2 7128√ 2 ⫹ 7√ ⫹ 12 ⫹ C
2312x ⫺ 12 5 ⫹ 54
e⫺x 2⫹1 ⫺ 1
21,000 ⫺

55. 17,341,000

; 6858

⫹ C

⫺ 1

53.

59.

42

1

20,000

11 ⫹ 0.2t

250216 ⫹ x  2

30112t ⫹ 4 ⫺ 22; 14,400 p ft 2

65.8793

1 ⫹ 2.449e⫺0.3277t

⫹ 0.3; 56.22 in.

65.

r

a 11 ⫺ e⫺at2

7. a. 18.5

b. 18.64

c. 18.66

9. a. 25

b. 21.12

c. 19.88

d. ⬇18

2
3

d. ⬇19.9

11. a. 0.0625

b. 0.16

c. 0.2025

d. ⬇0.2

13. 4.64

15. 0.95

17. 9400 sq ft

Exercises 11.4, page 799

1. 6

3. 8

5. 12

7. 9

9. ln 2

11.

17 

1
3

13.

18 

1
4

15. e 2 ⫺ 1

17. 6

19. 6

29. ln 4

31. 56

21.

56
3

33.

256
15

23.

35.

4
3

2
3

25.

45
2

37.

8
3

41. a. $4100

b. $900

43. a. $2800

b. $219.20

27.

39.

7
12

39
2

45. a. 0.86t 0.96 ⫹ 0.04

b. $4.84 billion

47.

10,133 

1
3

ft

49. a. 0.2833t 3 ⫺ 1.936t 2 ⫹ 5t ⫹ 5.6

b. 12.8%

c. 5.2%

51. 15,477

53. 149.14 million

55.

23
15

57. False

59. False

Using Technology Exercises 11.4, page 802

1. 6.1787

3. 0.7873

5. ⫺0.5888

7. 2.7044

9. 3.9973

11. 46%; 24%

13. 333,209

15. 3,761,490

Exercises 11.5, page 809

1. 10

3.

19
15

5.

484
15

11.

32
15

13.

272
15

15.

19. 0

21. ln 4

23.

25. 2e4 ⫺ 2e2 ⫺ ln 2

13 ⫺ 1

7.

9.

1031

5

1
2 e 2 ⫹ 5
6

17.

e4 ⫺ 1
31ln 19 ⫺ ln 32

1

67. True

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

932

CHAPTER 11 ANSWERS

27.

1

21e⫺4 ⫺ e⫺8 ⫺ 12

29. 6

31.

1
2

35. 5

37.

17
3

39. ⫺1

41.

13
6

43.

45. 120.3 billion metric tons

33.

211e ⫺ 1
e2
4 1e4 ⫺ 12

1

47. $2.24 million

49. $40,339

51. $3.24 billion/year

53. a. 160.7 billion gal/year

b. 150.1 billion gal/year/year

55. $297.9 million

57. $6 million

1
3

59. 0.071 mg/cm3

61. $14.78

63. 80.7%

71. Property 5

73. 0

75. a. ⫺1

b. 5

c. ⫺13

77. True

79. False

81. True

Using Technology Exercises 11.5, page 813

1. 7.71667

3. 17.56487

5. 10,140

7. 60.45 mg/day

Exercises 11.6, page 820

1. 108

3.

2
3

5.

8
3

7.

3
2

9. 3

11.

10
3

13. 27

15. 21e2 ⫺ e⫺12

17.

38
3

19.

10
3

21.

19
4

23. 12 ⫺ ln 4

25. e2 ⫺ e ⫺ ln 2

27.

5
2

29.

22
3

31.

3
2

33.

e 3 ⫺ 4 ⫹ 1
e

35.

125
6

 

37.

1
12

39.

71
6

41. 18

43. S is the additional revenue that Odyssey Travel could realize by

S ⫽ 兰 b

0  3t1x2 ⫺ f 1x24 dx

switching to the new agency; 

45.

Shortfall ⫽ 兰 2050

2010   3   f 1t2 ⫺ t1t24 dt

47. a. A2 ⫺ A1

b. The distance car 2 is ahead of car 1 after T sec

49.

840 ⫺ 兰 12

0   f 1t2 dt

51. 42.8 billion metric tons

53. 57,179

55. True

57. False

Using Technology Exercises 11.6, page 825

1. a.

3. a.

b. 1074.2857

b. 0.9961

5. a.

7. a.

9. a.

11. a.

b. 10.5144

13. 207.43

b. 3.5799

Exercises 11.7, page 835

1. $11,667

3. $6667

5. $11,667

7. a. 1257/month

b. $48,583

9. $199,548

11. Consumers’ surplus: $13,333; producers’ surplus: $11,667

13. $824,200

15. $148,239

17. $43,788

19. $47,916

21. $142,423

23. $24,780

25. a.

y

1

b. 0.175; 0.816

y = f (x)

x

1

27. a. 0.31; 0.49

b. college teachers

Using Technology Exercises 11.7, page 838

1. Consumers’ surplus: $18,000,000; producers’ surplus: $11,700,000

3. Consumers’ surplus: $33,120; producers’ surplus: $2880

5. Investment A

Chapter 11 Concept Review, page 840
1. a. F⬘1x2 ⫽ f1x2
c兰 f 1x2 dx

b. F1x2 ⫹ C
兰 f 1x2 dx ⫾ 兰t1x2 dx
4. t⬘1x2 dx; 

3. a. unknown

b. function

2. a.

b.

兰

f1u2 du

f  ¿1x2 dx
a 3    f 1x2 ⫺ t1x24 dx
兰 b

8.

5. a.

a  f 1x2 dx
兰 b

b. minus

6. a. F1b2 ⫺ F1a2; antiderivative

b.

兰 b
a   

 冮 b

a

1

b.

9. a.

7. a.

b. area; area

f 1x2 dx
b ⫺ a
0  D1x2 dx ⫺ p x
兰 x
0  R1t2e⫺rt dt
erT兰 T
 1erT ⫺ 12

p x ⫺ 兰 x
0  R1t2e⫺rt dt
兰 T
0  3x ⫺ f 1x24 dx
2兰 1
Chapter 11 Review Exercises, page 841

mP
r

10. a.

11.

12.

b.

0  S1x2 dx

b. 5.4603

b. 25.8549

1.

3.

1
4 x  4 ⫹ 2

 x 5 ⫺ 1

1
5

3 x  3 ⫺ 1
2   x 4 ⫺ 1

x

2 x  2 ⫹ C

2.

1
12 x  4 ⫺ 2

3 x  3 ⫹ 8x ⫹ C

⫹ C

4. 3

4 x 4/3 ⫺ 2

3 x 3/2 ⫹ 4x ⫹ C

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

5.

7.

9.

11.

1
2 x  4 ⫹ 2

1
3 x  3 ⫺ 1

6.

2
7 x 7/2 ⫺ 1
5 x 5/2 ⫹ C
2 x  2 ⫹ 2 ln0 x 0 ⫹ 5x ⫹ C

3 x  3 ⫹ 2

3 x 3/2 ⫺ x ⫹ C
312x ⫹ 12 3/2 ⫹ C

1

8.

3

813x  2 ⫺ 2x ⫹ 12 4/3 ⫹ C
2 ln1x  2 ⫺ 2x ⫹ 52 ⫹ C

1

1x  3 ⫹ 22 11

33

10.

⫹ C

12. ⫺e⫺2x ⫹ C

13.

1
x 
2 e 

2⫹x⫹1 ⫹ C

14.

1

e⫺x ⫹ x

⫹ C

15.

1

6 1ln x2 6 ⫹ C

16.

18.

20.

17.

1ln x22 ⫹ C
15 13x ⫺ 221x ⫹ 12 3/2 ⫹ C
21x ⫺ 221x ⫹ 1 ⫹ C

2

111x  2 ⫺ 121x  2 ⫹ 12 11

⫹ C

264

19.

3 1x ⫹ 421x ⫺ 2 ⫹ C

2

21.

1
2

22. ⫺6

23.

17
3

24. 242

25. ⫺80

26.

132
5

27.

1
2

ln 5

28.

1
15

29. 4

30.

1 ⫺ 1
e 2

31.

e ⫺ 1
211 ⫹ e2

32.

1
2

33. f1x2 ⫽ x 3 ⫺ 2x 2 ⫹ x ⫹ 1
35. f1x2 ⫽ x ⫹ e⫺x ⫹ 1

36.

f 1x2 ⫽ 2x  2 ⫹ 1
21ln x2  2 ⫺ 2

34.

f 1x2 ⫽ 1

37. a. It gives the distance Car A is ahead of Car B.

b.

t ⫽ 10,

0  3   f 1t2 ⫺ t1t24 dt
兰 10

38. a. It gives the amount by which the revenue of Branch A exceeds

that of Branch B.
t ⫽ 10,

0  3   f 1t2 ⫺ t1t24 dt
兰 10

b.

39. ⫺4.28

40. $6740

41. a. ⫺0.015x 2 ⫹ 60x
b. ⫺0.015x ⫹ 60
42. V1t2 ⫽ 19001t ⫺ 1022 ⫹ 10,000; $40,400
43. a. 0.05t 3 ⫺ 1.8t 2 ⫹ 14.4t ⫹ 24

b. 56°F

44. a. ⫺0.01t 3 ⫹ 0.109t 2 ⫺ 0.032t ⫹ 0.1

b. 1.076 billion

45. 3.375 ppm

15,00011 ⫹ 0.4t ⫹ 85,000; 112,659

47.

46. 3000t ⫺ 50,00011 ⫺ e⫺0.04t2; 16,939

48. 26,027

49.

240
5 ⫺ x

⫺ 30

50. $3100

51. 37.7 million

52. a. 205.89 ⫺ 89.89e⫺0.176t

b. $161.43 billion

1

21e4 ⫺ 12

53. 15

54.

55.

2
3

56.

9
2

57. e2 ⫺ 3

58.

3
10

59.

1
2

60. 234,500 barrels

61.

1
3

62. 26°F

63. 49.7 ft/sec

64. 67,600/year

65. $270,000

66. Consumers’ surplus: $2083; producers’ surplus: $3333

67. $197,652

68. $174,420

69. $505,696

CHAPTER 12 ANSWERS

933

70. a.

y

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8

1.0

b. 0.1017; 0.3733

c. 0.315

x

71. 90,888

Chapter 11 Before Moving On, page 844

1
2 x  4 ⫹ 2
2x  2 ⫹ 1 ⫹ C

3 x 3/2 ⫹ 2 ln0 x 0 ⫺ 41x ⫹ C
31212 ⫺ 12

4.

1

1.

3.

2.

ex ⫹ 1

2 x  2 ⫹ 1

5.

9
2

CHAPTER 12
Exercises 12.1, page 853
1. f10, 02 ⫽ ⫺4; f11, 02 ⫽ ⫺2; f10, 12 ⫽ ⫺1; f11, 22 ⫽ 4; 
3. f11, 2) ⫽ 7; f12, 1) ⫽ 9; f1⫺1, 2) ⫽ 1; f12, ⫺1) ⫽ 1
t11, 42 ⫽ 12; t14, 12 ⫽ 16; t10, 42 ⫽ 2; t14, 92 ⫽ 56

f12, ⫺12 ⫽ ⫺3

5.

7. h11, e2 ⫽ 1; h1e, 12 ⫽ ⫺1; h1e, e2 ⫽ 0
9. t11, 1, 12 ⫽ e; t11, 0, 12 ⫽ 1; t1⫺1, ⫺1, ⫺12 ⫽ ⫺e

11. All real values of x and y
13. All real values of u and √ except those satisfying the equation u ⫽ ⫺√

15. All real values of r and s satisfying rs ⱖ 0

17. All real values of x and y satisfying x ⫹ y ⬎ ⫺5

19.

y

21.

z = –1
z = – 2  

– 2

23.

–1

y
z = 0

2

⫺2

⫺2

z = 4
2

⫺4⫺4

x

z = 2
z = 1
z = 0

z = 1

z = 2
z = 3

x

44

y

2

x

z = 2
z = 1
z = 0
z = –1
z = – 2  

2x 2 ⫹ y 2 ⫽ 5

25.

27. b

29. No

31. 9p ft 3

33. a. 24.69

b. 81 kg

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

934

CHAPTER 12 ANSWERS

35. a.

⫺1

4 y2 ⫺ 1

5 x 2 ⫺ 1

5 xy ⫹ 200x ⫹ 160y
b. The set of all points (x, y) satisfying 
4 y ⱖ 0, x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

10 x ⫺ 1

160 ⫺ 1

200 ⫺ 1

5 x ⫺ 1

10 y ⱖ 0,

37. a. ⫺0.005x 2 ⫺ 0.003y 2 ⫺ 0.002xy ⫹ 20x ⫹ 15y
b. The set of all ordered pairs 1x, y2 for which 
20 ⫺ 0.005x ⫺ 0.001y ⱖ 0
15 ⫺ 0.001x ⫺ 0.003y ⱖ 0, x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

39. a. The set of all ordered pairs 1P, T 2, where P and T are positive

numbers
b. 11.10 L

41. $7200 billion

43. 103

45. a. $1798.65; $2201.29

b. $2509.32

47. 40.28 times gravity

49. The level curves of V have equation 

kT
P

⫽ C

(C, a positive constant). 

The level curves are a family of straight lines 

T ⫽ a C

k b P

lying in 

the first quadrant, since k, T, and P are positive. Every point on the
level curve V ⫽ C gives the same volume C.

51. False

53. False

55. False

Exercises 12.2, page 866

1. a. 4; 4

39.

41.

2
y 

fxx ⫽

fyy ⫽

1x 
22 3/2
2 ⫹ y 
x 2
2 ⫹ y22 3/2
1x 
fx x ⫽ 1
 e⫺x/y; fx y ⫽
y2
3a x
 fyy ⫽ x
y 

y

⫺ 2b e⫺x /y

; fx y ⫽ fy x ⫽ ⫺

xy
2 ⫹ y 

1x 

;

22 3/2

y ⫺ x

y3

 e⫺x/y ⫽ fy x;

43. a. 7.5; 40

b. Yes

45. px ⫽ 10—at (0, 1), the price of land is changing at the rate of

$10/ft2/mile change to the right; py ⫽ 0—at (0, 1), the price of land is
constant/mile change upward.

47. Complementary commodities

49. $30/unit change in finished desks; ⫺$25/unit change in unfinished
desks. The weekly revenue increases by $30/unit for one additional
finished desk produced (beyond 300) when the level of production of
unfinished desks remains fixed at 250; the revenue decreases by
$25/unit when one additional unfinished desk (beyond 250) is pro-
duced and the level of production of finished desks remains fixed at
300.

51. a. 20°F

53.

0N
0x

⬇ 1.06; 

b. ⫺0.3°F
0N
0y

⬇ ⫺2.85

b.

c.

fx(2, 1) ⫽ 4 says that the slope of the tangent line to the curve of
intersection of the surface z ⫽ x2 ⫹ 2y2  and the plane y ⫽ 1 at
the point (2, 1, 6) is 4. fy(2, 1) ⫽ 4 says that the slope of the tan-
gent line to the curve of intersection of the surface z ⫽ x2 ⫹ 2y2
and the plane x ⫽ 2 at the point (2, 1, 6) is 4.
fx(2, 1) ⫽ 4 says that the rate of change of f(x, y) with respect to x
with y held fixed with a value of 1 is 4 units/unit change in x. 
fy(2, 1) ⫽ 4 says that the rate of change of f(x, y) with respect to y
with x held fixed with a value of 2 is 4 units/unit change in y.

55. 0.039 L/kelvin; ⫺0.014 L/mm of mercury. The volume increases by
0.039 L when the temperature increases by 1 kelvin (beyond 300 K)
and the pressure is fixed at 800 mm of mercury. The volume de-
creases by 0.014 L when the pressure increases by 1 mm of mercury
(beyond 800 mm) and the temperature is fixed at 300 K.

61. True

63. False

Using Technology Exercises 12.2, page 870

5. tx ⫽ 6x; ty ⫽ 2

7.

fx ⫽ ⫺

4y
3

x 

;  fy ⫽ 2
2
x 

1. 1.3124; 0.4038

3. ⫺1.8889; 0.7778

5. ⫺0.3863; ⫺0.8497

Exercises 12.3, page 877

3. fx ⫽ 2; fy ⫽ 3
tu ⫽ 2√

9.

1u ⫹ √2 2

; t√ ⫽ ⫺ 2u

1u ⫹ √2 2

11. fs ⫽ 312s ⫺ t)1s2 ⫺ st ⫹ t 2)2; ft ⫽ 312t ⫺ s)1s2 ⫺ st ⫹ t 2)2

13.

fx ⫽

8x
2 ⫹ y 

22 1/3;  fy ⫽

312x 

4y
2 ⫹ y 

312x 

22 1/3

15. fx ⫽ ye xy⫹1; fy ⫽ xe xy⫹1

17.

fx ⫽ ln y ⫹

y
x

;  fy ⫽

x
y

⫹ ln x

19.

tu ⫽ e 

u

u ln √; t√ ⫽ e 
√

21. fx ⫽ yz ⫹ y 2 ⫹ 2xz; fy ⫽ xz ⫹ 2xy ⫹ z 2; fz ⫽ xy ⫹ 2yz ⫹ x 2

25. fx12, 12 ⫽ 5; fy12, 12 ⫽ 8

29. fx12, 12 ⫽ 1; fy12, 12 ⫽ ⫺2

23. hr ⫽ sterst; hs ⫽ rterst; ht ⫽ rserst
27. fx12, 12 ⫽ 1; fy12, 12 ⫽ 3
31. fx11, 12 ⫽ e; fy11, 12 ⫽ e
33. fx11, 0, 22 ⫽ 0; fy11, 0, 22 ⫽ 8; fz11, 0, 22 ⫽ 0
35. fxx ⫽ 2y; fxy ⫽ 2x ⫹ 3y 2 ⫽ fyx; fyy ⫽ 6xy

1.

3.

5.

7.

9.

11.

13.

15.

17.

19.

and 11, 52; saddle point:

10, 02; relative maximum value: f10, 02 ⫽ 1
11, 22; saddle point: 11, 2, 42
18, ⫺62; relative minimum value: f18, ⫺62 ⫽ ⫺41
11, 22 and 12, 22; saddle point: 11, 2, ⫺12; relative minimum value:
f12, 22 ⫽ ⫺2
3 2
1⫺1
3, 11
value: f11, 52 ⫽ ⫺13
10, 02 and 11, 12; saddle point: 10, 0, ⫺22; relative minimum value:
f11, 12 ⫽ ⫺3
12, 12; relative minimum value: f12, 12 ⫽ 6
10, 02; saddle point: 10, 0, ⫺12
10, 02; relative minimum value: f10, 02 ⫽ 1
10, 02; relative minimum value: f10, 02 ⫽ 0

27 2
3 , ⫺319

1⫺1
3, 11

; relative minimum 

21. 200 finished units and 100 unfinished units; $10,500

37. fxx ⫽ 2; fxy ⫽ fyx ⫽ ⫺2; fyy ⫽ 4

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11
2, 12

z ⫽ 2x 

10.

2 ⫹ y 
2

23. Price of land 1$200/ft22 is highest at 

25.

27.

10, 12 gives desired location.
r ⫽ 130
3p

 in., l ⫽ 130
3

 in.; 

2,197,000

27p

 in.3

29. 10⬙ ⫻10⬙ ⫻5⬙; 500 in. 3

31. 30⬙ ⫻40⬙ ⫻10⬙; $7200

33. False

35. False

37. True

Chapter 12 Concept Review, page 880

1. xy; ordered pair; real number; f(x, y)

2. Independent; dependent; value

3. z ⫽ f(x, y); f; surface

4. f(x, y) ⫽ k; level curve; level curves; k

5. Constant; x

6. Slope; (a, b, f(a, b)); x; b

7. ⱕ; (a, b); ⱕ; domain

8. Domain; fx(a, b) ⫽ 0 and f y(a, b) ⫽ 0; exist; candidate

Chapter 12 Review Exercises, page 881

1.

0, 0, 1

2; no

2.

e, 

2
e 

1 ⫹ ln 2

, 

2e

1 ⫹ ln 2

; no

3. 2, ⫺1e ⫹ 12, ⫺1e ⫹ 12
4. The set of all ordered pairs (u, √) such that u ⫽ √ and u ⱖ 0

5. The set of all ordered pairs (x, y) such that y ⫽ ⫺x

6. The set of all ordered pairs (x, y) such that x ⱕ 1 and y ⱖ 0

7. The set of all triplets (x, y, z) such that z ⱖ 0 and x ⫽ 1, y ⫽ 1, and

z ⫽ 1

8. z ⫽ x 2 ⫹ 2y

9. z ⫽ y ⫺ x 2

y

1

0
⫺1

1

x
z ⫽ 2

z ⫽ ⫺2

z ⫽ 0

y

z = 2

4

z = – 2  

x

2

CHAPTER 12 ANSWERS

935

y

4
3
2
1

y

x

1

2

3

4

3
2
1

z = 1

⫺3 ⫺2 ⫺1
z = 3

⫺1
⫺2
⫺3

z = 3

x

1

2

3

z = 2

11. z ⫽ exy

12.

13.

14.

f x ⫽ 2xy 

f x ⫽ 1y ⫹
√ 
22u√ 

fu ⫽

y

2y 

2 ⫺ 2

3 ⫹ 3y 

2 ⫹ 1

21x

2 ⫹ 6xy ⫺ x
y  ;  fy ⫽ 3x 
2
y 
⫹ 1x
21y
 ;  fy ⫽ x
u√2u√ 
 ;  fy ⫽ ⫺ 3x
1   y ⫹ 2x2 2
y1  y 
22
2 ⫺ x 
22 2
1x 
2 ⫹ y 

1   y ⫹ 2x2 2
x1x 
22
2 ⫺ y 
22 2
1x 
2 ⫹ y 

 ; ty ⫽

2 ⫺ 2u

2 ⫺ 2u

 ;  f√ ⫽

3y

15.

f x ⫽

16.

tx ⫽

17. hx ⫽ 10y12xy ⫹ 3y 224; hy ⫽ 101x ⫹ 3y212xy ⫹ 3y 224

18.

f x ⫽

y
e 

21xe 

y ⫹ 12 1/2

 ;  fy ⫽

y

xe 

21xe 

y ⫹ 12 1/2

19.

f x ⫽ 2x11 ⫹ x 2 ⫹ y22ex2⫹y2; f y ⫽ 2y11 ⫹ x 2 ⫹ y22ex2⫹y2

20.

f x ⫽

4x
2 ⫹ 4y4
1 ⫹ 2x 

 ;  fy ⫽

16y3

1 ⫹ 2x 2 ⫹ 4y4

21.

fx ⫽ 2x
2 ⫹ y 
2

x 

 ;  fy ⫽ ⫺ 2x 

2

y1x 

2 ⫹ y 

22

22. fxx ⫽ 6x ⫺ 4y; fxy ⫽ ⫺4x ⫽ fyx; fyy ⫽ 2

23. fxx ⫽ 12x 2 ⫹ 4y 2; fxy ⫽ 8xy ⫽ fyx; fyy ⫽ 4x 2 ⫺ 12y 2
24. fxx ⫽ 1212x 2 ⫹ 3y 22110x 2 ⫹ 3y 22; 
fxy ⫽ 144xy12x 2 ⫹ 3y 22 ⫽ fyx; 
fyy ⫽ 1812x 2 ⫹ 3y 2212x 2 ⫹ 15y 22
2y1x ⫺ y 22
txx ⫽
22 3
1x ⫹ y 

 ; txy ⫽

⫽ tyx ;

25.

2

⫺2y 
1x ⫹ y 
22 3
2 ⫺ x2
2x13y 
1x ⫹ y22 3

tyy ⫽

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

936

CHAPTER 12 ANSWERS

26. txx ⫽ 211 ⫹ 2x 22 ex 2⫹y2; txy ⫽ 4xyex2⫹y2 ⫽ tyx; 

tyy ⫽ 211 ⫹ 2y 22 ex2⫹y2

; hst ⫽ hts ⫽ 0; htt ⫽

1
2
t 

27. hss ⫽

⫺ 1
s 

2

28. 3; 3; ⫺2

29. (2, 3); relative minimum value: f(2, 3) ⫽ ⫺13

30. (8, ⫺2); saddle point: (8, ⫺2, ⫺8)

13
42
2, 9
42 ⫽ ⫺27
f  1  
3
2, 9
16
1⫺1
3 2
3, 13
f 13, 112 ⫽ ⫺35
value:

32.

, (3, 11); saddle point:

31. (0, 0) and 

; saddle point: (0, 0, 0); relative minimum value:

 1⫺1
3, 13

27 2
3 , ⫺445

; relative minimum

33. (0, 0); relative minimum value: f(0, 0) ⫽ 1

34. (1, 1); relative minimum value: f(1, 1) ⫽ ln 2

35.

k ⫽ 100 m

c

m

10
8
6
4
2

I ⫽ 180

I ⫽ 120
I ⫽ 100
I ⫽ 90

2

4

6

8 10

c

36. a. R(x, y) ⫽ ⫺0.02x 2 ⫺ 0.2xy ⫺ 0.05y 2 ⫹ 80x ⫹ 60y
b. The set of all points satisfying 0.02x ⫹ 0.1y ⱕ 80,

0.1x ⫹ 0.05y ⱕ 60, x ⱖ 0, y ⱖ 0

c. 15,300; the revenue realized from the sale of 100 16-speed and

300 10-speed electric blenders is $15,300.

37. Complementary

38. The company should spend $11,000 on advertising and employ 14

agents to maximize its revenue.

39. 337.5 yd ⫻ 900 yd

Chapter 12 Before Moving On, page 882

1. All real values of x and y satisfying x ⱖ 0, x ⫽ 1, y ⱖ 0, y ⫽ 2

2.

–3

z = –3
z = –2

y

2

−2

x

3

3. 14; 29; at the point (1, 2), f (x, y) increases at the rate of 14 units for

each unit increase in x with y held constant at a value of 2; f (x, y)
increases at the rate of 29 units per unit increase in y with x held
fixed at 2.

4. fx ⫽ 2xy ⫹ ye xy; fxx ⫽ 2y ⫹ y2e xy; fxy ⫽ 2x ⫹ 1xy ⫹ 12e xy ⫽ fyx; 

fy ⫽ x 2 ⫹ xe xy; fyy ⫽ x 2exy

5. Rel. min. value: f (1, 1) ⫽ ⫺7

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Unless otherwise noted, all content on this page is © Cengage Learning.

INDEX

Abscissa, 70
Absolute extrema, 726, 871
Absolute value, 60–61
Amortization, 220–224

formula, 220
schedule, 221

Annuity, 208–211
amount of, 831
certain, 208
compound amount factor, 210
future value, 210
ordinary, 208
present value, 211, 833
simple, 209
term, 208

Antiderivative, 758
Antidifferentiation, 760
Area

between curves, 814–818
under a curve, 792–793, 805–806

Arithmetic progression, 234–236

common difference, 235
nth term, 235
sum, 236

Asymptotes, 712–715

horizontal, 714
vertical, 712

Augmented matrix, 258
Average, 516
Average cost function, 659
Average rate of change, 587
Average value, 806–808
Axes, 70

Base, 7, 158
Basic solution, 361
Basic variables, 360
Bayes’ Theorem, 496
Birthday problem, 476–477
Book value, 71, 114, 239, 651
Break-even analysis, 117–119
Break-even point, 117

Carbon-14 dating, 178
Cartesian coordinate system, 70

coordinate, 70
ordered pair, 70
origin, 70

quadrants, 71
three-dimensional, 849

Chain Rule, 632–633

for exponential functions, 647
for logarithmic functions, 650
for powers of functions, 634–638

Change of variable, 772
Chebychev’s inequality, 533
Closed interval, 55
Cobb-Douglas production function, 861
Coefficient matrix, 258
Coefficient of inequality, 834
Column matrix, 283
Column vector, 283
Combinations, 432–436
Combinatorics, 415
Common factors, 15–16
Common logarithm, 166
Complement of an event, 442
Complement of a set, 409
Complementary commodities, 862
Completing the square, 47–48
Complex fraction, 23
Composite function, 108
Composition of functions, 107–109
Compound interest, 191–194. See also

Interest

Concavity, 694–696

intervals, 695
test for, 695

Conditional probability, 481–483
Conjugates, 42
Constant of integration, 760
Consumers’ surplus, 826–827
Continuity, 570–572
on an interval, 571
at a number, 570
of polynomial and rational functions, 572

Continuous compound interest, 194–195
Continuous function, 571
Continuous random variable, 506
Contour map, 851
Conversion period, 192
Coordinates, 70
Cost function, 106, 115, 657–658
Counting problem, 415
Critical number, 751
Critical point, 872

Cube root, 37
Curve sketching, 715–718

Decay constant, 177
Decimal representation, 3
Decreasing function, 674
Definite integral, 785

as area, 782–785
evaluation of, 793–794
geometric interpretation, 786–787
as a limit of a sum, 785
limits of integration, 785
method of substitution, 803–805
properties of, 802–803
Degree of a polynomial, 9
Demand function, 129
De Morgan’s Laws, 410
Dependent variable, 91, 846
Depreciation

book value, 71, 239
double-declining balance, 239–240
linear, 114–115
straight line, 71, 114
sum-of-the-years’-digits, 241

Derivative

definition, 588
four-step process, 589
higher-order, 621–623
instantaneous rate of change, 587
notation, 588
partial, 858–861
as a rate of change, 588
second, 621
second-order partial, 863–864

Derivative rules, 603–605, 616–618

chain, 633
constant, 603
constant multiple of a function, 605
for exponential functions, 645, 647
for logarithmic functions, 648, 650
Power Rule, 604, 635
Product Rule, 616
Quotient Rule, 618
Sum Rule, 605

Difference quotient, 587
Differential equations, 763–764
Differentiable function, 594
Discontinuous function, 571

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

937

938

INDEX

Discriminant, 51
Disjoint sets, 409
Domain

of a function of one variable, 91
of a function of two variables, 846

Dual problem, 385

e, 161
Effective rate of interest, 196
Empty set, 415
Equality properties, 32
Equation, 31
Equations of straight lines, 81
Equilibrium
price, 131
quantity, 131
Events, 441–443

complement of, 442
elementary, 450
independent, 488–490
intersection of, 442
mutually exclusive, 443, 450
probability of, 450–451
simple, 450
union of, 442

Expected value, 517
Experiment, 441

event, 441
outcome, 441
sample point, 441
sample space, 441

Exponent, 7, 27–29, 158
Exponential decay, 177
Exponential function, 158
applications of, 175–181
base e, 161
derivative of, 645
graph of, 161
indefinite integral of, 762
properties of, 160

Exponential growth, 175
Exponential notation, 7
Extraneous solution, 34

Factorial, 429
Factoring by regrouping, 18
Factoring polynomials, 15–18
Fair game, 521
Feasible set, 346
Feasible solution, 346
Finite interval, 55
Finite sample space, 441
Finite stochastic process, 485
First Derivative Test, 681
Fixed costs, 106

Function, 89

average cost, 659
average value of, 806–808
composite, 108–109
continuous, 571
cost, 106, 115
decreasing, 674
demand, 129
dependent variable, 91
differentiable, 594
domain, 89
exponential, 158
graph of, 92
increasing, 674
independent variable, 91
linear, 113
logarithmic, 170
marginal average cost, 659
marginal cost, 658
marginal profit, 662
marginal revenue, 661
objective, 338
piecewise-defined, 94
polynomial, 9, 138
power, 141
probability, 450
product of, 106
profit, 107, 115
quadratic, 126
range, 90 
rational, 140
revenue, 115
zero of, 574

Functions of several variables, 846–852

critical points, 872
dependent variable, 846
domain, 846
independent variable, 846
maxima and minima, 870–877
partial derivative of, 858–861
saddle point, 872
Second Derivative Test, 873

Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, 

790–797

Fundamental Theorem of Duality, 388
Future value, 198

Graph

of an equation, 95
of a function, 92, 849–850
of linear inequalities, 330–335

Growth constant, 175

Half-life, 177
Half-open interval, 55
Half-planes, 330
Higher-order derivative, 621–622
Histogram, 508
Horizontal asymptote, 714

Identity matrix, 299
Income stream, 829–831
Increasing function, 674
Indefinite integral, 760

of a constant, 760
of a constant multiple of a function, 

761

of an exponential function, 762
Power Rule, 761
Sum Rule, 762

Independent events, 488–490
Independent variable, 91, 846
Indeterminate forms, 554
Index, 38
Inequalities, 56–59
Infinite interval, 55
Inflection point, 697
Initial-value problem, 764
Instantaneous rate of change, 587
Integer, 2
Integer exponents, 27–29
Integral

change of variable, 772
of a constant, 760
of a constant multiple of a function, 

761

definite, 785
of an exponential function, 762
indefinite, 760
notation, 760
Power Rule for, 761
properties of, 802–803
sign, 760
Sum Rule for, 762

Gauss-Jordan elimination method, 255–265

row operations, 260
steps in, 262

Generalized multiplication principle, 423
Geometric progression, 236–239

common ratio, 236
nth term, 237
sum, 238

Integrand, 760
Integration. See also Integral

constant of, 760
limits of, 785
rules, 760–763
by substitution, 771–776, 

803–805

Intercepts, 78

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Interest

compound, 191–194

accumulated amount, 190
formula, 193
future value, 193
present value, 198
principal, 193

continuous compound, 194–195, 

199

accumulated amount, 195
present value, 199

conversion period, 192
effective rate of, 196–198
simple, 190

accumulated value, 190
formula, 190

Intermediate Value Theorem, 

574

Intersection of lines, 116–117
Intersection of sets, 409
Interval(s), 55–56

closed, 55
finite, 55
half-open, 55
infinite, 55
open, 55

Inventory control, 745–746
Inverse of a matrix, 310
Irrational number, 2
Isoprofit line, 347
Isotherms, 852

Laws of exponents, 27, 159
Laws of logarithms, 167
Learning curves, 178–179
Level curves, 851
Limits, 548–562

of a function, 551
at infinity, 557
of integration, 785
left-hand, 569
properties of, 572
right-hand, 569

Linear depreciation, 114
Linear equations, 31–34

forms of, 81
general form, 81, 251
intercepts, 78
point-slope form, 77
slope-intercept form, 79
vertical lines, 81

Linear function(s), 113–115
break-even analysis, 117
simple depreciation, 114
Linear inequality, 330–333

INDEX

939

Linear programming

feasible set, 346
feasible solution, 346
graphical solution, 346–352
maximization problems, 338, 359–361
method of corners, 348
minimization problems, 384–391
objective function, 338
optimal solution, 346
problem, 338, 385

basic solution, 361
dual, 385
existence of a solution, 348
primal, 385
standard, 359, 385

simplex method, 359–374, 364, 384–394

basic variables, 360
initial simplex tableau, 363
nonbasic variables, 363
optimal solution(s), 346
pivot column, 362
pivot element, 362
pivot row, 362
simplex tableau, 363
slack variables, 359
steps in, 364–365

Line of complete equality, 834
Lines. See Linear equations
Logarithmic functions, 170–172

derivative of, 648–650
graph of, 170
properties of, 170

Logarithmic notation, 166
Logarithms, 166–169

common, 166
laws of, 167
natural, 166

Logistic curve, 180
Logistic growth function, 180–181
Lorenz curves, 833–834

Marginal

analysis, 657–663
average cost function, 659
cost, 658
cost function, 658
productivity, 861
profit function, 662
revenue, 661

Market equilibrium, 131–132
Mathematical models, 137–143
Matrix, 258, 283

addition, 286–287
augmented, 258
coefficient, 258

column, 283
definition, 283
dimension, 283
elements, 283
entries, 283
equality, 284
identity, 299
ijth entry (aij), 283
inverse, 310
inverse of a 2 ⫻ 2 matrix, 314
multiplication, 295–301
nonsingular, 311
pivot element, 261
product, 296
production, 300
representation, 301
row, 283
row operations, 260–261
row-reduced form, 259
scalar product, 288
singular, 311
size, 283
square, 283
subtraction, 285
transpose, 287
zero, 287

Maxima and minima
absolute, 726, 871
relative, 679–680, 871

Mean, 516
Median, 524
Method of corners, 348
Method of integration by substitution, 

771–776, 803–805

Minima. See Maxima and minima
Mode, 524
Modeling, 137–143
Multiplication principle, 422–425
Mutually exclusive events, 443, 450

Natural logarithm, 166
Natural number, 2
Nominal rate, 191
Nonbasic variables, 360
nth roots, 37
Number line, 3–4

Objective function, 338
Odds, 521–523
Open interval, 55
Operations, 4
Optimal solution, 346
Optimization, 726–733, 740–746
Ordered pair, 70
Ordered triple, 846

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

940

INDEX

Order of operations, 12
Ordinary annuity, 208
Ordinate, 70
Origin, 70
Outcome, 441

Parabola, 94, 126
Parallel lines, 74
Parameter, 249
Partial derivative
first-order, 858
second-order, 863–864

Partition, 495
Permutations, 427–432
n distinct objects, 431
n objects, 430

Perpendicular lines, 78
Piecewise-defined function, 94
Pivot column, 362
Pivot element, 261, 362
Pivoting, 261, 361–363
Pivot row, 362
Polynomial(s), 8–12

addition, 10
factoring, 14–18
function, 138
multiplication, 10–12
in one variable, 9
subtraction, 10

Power function, 141
Power Rule

for differentiation, 604, 635
for integration, 761

Present value, 198
Primal problem, 385
Probability

addition principle, 452, 460
a posteriori, 495
a priori, 495
Bayes’ Theorem, 496
conditional, 481–485
counting techniques, 474–476
distribution, 450
elementary event, 450
empirical, 450
of an event, 450
expected value, 517
experiment, 441
function, 450
independent event, 488
mutually exclusive events, 443, 450, 459
Product Rule, 484
properties, 459–462
relative frequency, 450
rule of complements, 461

sample point, 441
sample space, 441

event, 441
finite, 441
infinite, 445
reduced, 481
uniform, 451

simple event, 450
tree diagram, 422, 485–487

Producers’ surplus, 827
Production function, 861–862
Product Rule, 484, 616
Profit function, 107, 115, 662

Quadrant, 71
Quadratic equations, 46–51
Quadratic formula, 48
Quadratic function, 126–131
Quotient Rule, 616

Radical(s), 38

index, 38
sign, 38
simplification of, 40–43

Radicand, 38
Radioactive decay, 177–178
Random variable, 505

continuous, 506
expected value, 517–518
finite discrete, 506
infinite discrete, 506
probability distribution of, 506
standard deviation of, 531
variance, 530

Range, 90
Rate of change, 587–588

average, 587
instantaneous, 587

Rational expression(s), 20–24

addition, 22–23
multiplication, 21–22
simplification, 20
subtraction, 22–23

Rationalization, 41–42
Rational number, 2
Real number(s), 2–6

decimal representation, 3
line, 3
operations, 4–6
order of operations, 12
properties, 4–5

Real number system, 2–6

integers, 2
irrational numbers, 2
natural numbers, 2

rational numbers, 2
whole numbers, 2

Relative extrema, 680, 871, 873
Relative frequency, 450
Relative maximum, 679

test for, 681, 873

Relative minimum, 680

test for, 681, 873

Repeating decimal, 3
Revenue function, 115, 661–662
Riemann sum, 785
Roulette, 520
Row matrix, 283
Row operations, 260–261
Row-reduced form, 259
Rule of complements, 461

Saddle point, 872
Sample space, 441

finite, 441
infinite, 445
reduced, 481
uniform, 451

Scalar, 288
Secant line, 586
Second derivative, 621
Second Derivative Test, 701, 873
Second-order partial derivative, 

863–864
Set(s), 406–411

complement, 409–410
De Morgan’s Laws, 410
definition, 406
disjoint, 409
elements, 406
empty, 407
equal, 406
intersection, 409
members, 406
notation

roster, 406
set-builder, 406

number of elements in, 415–418
operations, 409
proper subset, 407
subset, 407
union, 409
universal, 408
Venn diagrams, 408

Simple depreciation, 114
Simple interest, 243
Simplex method. See Linear programming
Simplex tableau, 363
Singular matrix, 311
Sinking fund, 225, 833

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

INDEX

941

Slack variables, 359
Slope, 72

of a tangent line, 586–588

Solution of an equation, 32
Solution set

bounded, 334
unbounded, 334
Square matrix, 283
Square root, 37
Standard deviation, 531
Standard linear programming problem, 359,

384

Standard minimization problem, 385
Stochastic process, 485
Straight-line depreciation, 71, 114
Subset, 407
Substitute commodities, 862
Supply function, 130
Systems of linear equations, 248–252

dependent, 250
equivalent, 256
Gauss-Jordan elimination method,

255–265

inconsistent, 250
solution by inverses, 315–317
solution by substitution, 248–252

Systems of linear inequalities, 

330–333

half-planes, 330
procedure for graphing, 332

Tangent line, 586
Terminating decimal, 3
Test for independent events, 488–489
Total cost function, 115
Trace, 850
Transportation problem, 340–341
Transpose of a matrix, 286
Tree diagram, 422–424, 485–487
Triangle inequality, 60

Uniform sample space, 451, 474
Union of events, 442
Union of sets, 409
Unit column, 260
Universal set, 408

Variable(s)

basic, 360
dependent, 91, 846
independent, 91, 846
nonbasic, 360
random, 505
slack, 359

Variable costs, 115
Variance, 530
Velocity

average, 550–551, 587, 592
instantaneous, 550–551, 587

Venn diagrams, 408
Vertical asymptotes, 712
Vertical Line Test, 95

Warehouse problem, 341–342
Whole number, 2

Zero exponent, 28
Zero matrix, 287
Zero-product property, 46
Zero of a function, 574

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

How–To Technology Index

Page
86
101
102
135

149, 184

270, 281

205
205
205
217
217
232
232

1. Graph a straight line
2. Graph a function
3. Evaluate a function
4. Find the point(s) of intersection of two graphs
5. Construct mathematical models
6. Find the accumulated amount of an investment
7. Find the effective rate of interest
8. Find the present value of an investment
9. Find the future value of an annuity
10. Find the present value of an annuity
11. Find the payment needed to amortize a loan
12. Find the payment needed for a sinking fund
13. Solve a system of linear equations using the Gauss-Jordan method
14. Perform matrix operations
292
15. Perform matrix multiplication
307
16. Find the inverse of a square matrix
321
17. Use the simplex method to solve a linear maximization programming problem 380
18. Use the simplex method to solve a linear minimization programming problem 397
19. Evaluate n!, P(n, r), and C(n, r)
440
20. Simulate an experiment
451
21. Graph a histogram for a given set of data
513
22. Find the mean and standard deviation of a random variable
540
23. Find the limit of a function
566
24. Find the points of discontinuity of a function
582
25. Graph a piecewise-defined function
582
26. Graph a function and its tangent line
600
27. Find the derivative of a function at a given point
600
28. Find the rate of change of a function at a given value
614
29. Find the second derivative of a function at a given point
630
30. Find the derivative of a composite function
643
31. Use the first derivative to analyze a function
723
32. Analyze the properties of a function
723
33. Find the x-intercepts on the graph of a function
724
34. Find the absolute extrema of a function
739
35. Evaluate a definite integral
801
36. Evaluate a definite integral for a piecewise-defined function
813
37. Find the area between two curves
825
38. Find the partial derivative of a function at a given point
869

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Basic Rules of Differentiation

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

Basic Rules of Integration

1.

2.

3.

4.

1c, a constant2

du
dx
⫾ d√
dx

1c, a constant2

⫹ √ 

du
dx
d√
dx

⫺ u
√ 2

d
dx

d
dx

d
dx

d
dx

d
dx

 

 1c2 ⫽ 0
 1u n2 ⫽ nu n⫺1
 1u ⫾ √2 ⫽ du
 1cu2 ⫽ c 
 1u√2 ⫽ u 
√ 

du
dx
d√
dx

dx

du
dx

d

dx  a u
√ b ⫽
 1eu2 ⫽ eu
 1ln u2 ⫽ 1

d
dx

d
dx

u

 

du
dx
# du
dx

冮 du ⫽ u ⫹ C
冮 kf 1u2 du ⫽ k 冮 f 1u2 du    1k, a constant2
冮 3  f 1u2 ⫾ t1u24 du ⫽ 冮 f 1u2 du ⫾ 冮 t1u2 du
冮 u n du ⫽ u n⫹1
n ⫹ 1
冮 eu du ⫽ eu ⫹ C
du
⫽ ln0 u 0 ⫹ C
u

⫹ C    1n ⫽ ⫺12

5.
6. 冮 

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Formulas

Equation of a
Straight Line

Compound Interest

Effective Rate
of Interest

Future Value of
an Annuity

Present Value of 
an Annuity

Amortization 
Formula

Sinking Fund
Payment

The Number of 
Permutations of n Distinct
Objects Taken r at a Time

The Number of 
Permutations of n Objects,
Not All Distinct

The Number of
Combinations of n Distinct
Objects Taken r at a Time

The Product Rule
for Probability

Bayes’ Formula

Expected Value of 
a Random Variable

a. point-slope form:
y ⫽ mx ⫹ b
b. slope-intercept form:
c. general form: Ax ⫹ By ⫹ C ⫽ 0

y ⫺ y1 ⫽ m1x ⫺ x12

A ⫽ P11 ⫹ i2 n

1i ⫽ r>m, n ⫽ mt2

where A is the accumulated amount at the end of n conversion periods, P is the principal,
r is the interest rate per year, m is the number of conversion periods per year, and t is the
number of years.

reff ⫽ 

a1 ⫹ r

mb m

⫺ 1

where reff is the effective rate of interest, r is the nominal interest rate per year, and m is
the number of conversion periods per year.

S ⫽ R

P ⫽ R

i

c 11 ⫹ i2 n ⫺ 1
d
c 1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ i2 ⫺n

i

d

R ⫽

Pi

1 ⫺ 11 ⫹ i2 ⫺n

R ⫽

iS

11 ⫹ i2 n ⫺ 1

P1n, r2 ⫽ n!

1n ⫺ r2!

n!

n1! n2! . . . nm!

, where n1 ⫹ n2 ⫹ . . . ⫹ nm ⫽ n

n!

C1n, r2 ⫽
r!1n ⫺ r2!
P1A 艚 B2 ⫽ P1A2 # P1B0 A2
P1Ai2 # P1E 冨 Ai2

P1A12 # P1E 冨 A12 ⫹ P1A22 # P1E 冨 A22 ⫹ . . . ⫹ P1An2 # P1E 冨 An2

E1X2 ⫽

x1p1 ⫹ x2p2 ⫹ . . . ⫹ xnpn

P1Ai 0 E2 ⫽

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

List of Applications

BUSINESS 
AND ECONOMICS

401(k) investors, 466, 740
401(k) retirement plans, 305
Access to capital, 539
Accumulated value of an income stream, 830
Accumulation years of baby boomers, 644
Adjustable-rate mortgage, 224, 231
Advertising, 342, 344, 356, 377, 396, 632, 697
Age distribution of company directors, 540
Agriculture, 266, 267, 319, 343
Ailing financial institutions, 579, 632
Aircraft structural integrity, 686
Airline safety, 457
Air travel, 185, 653
Allocation of funds, 343, 355
Alternative energy sources, 466, 823
Alternative minimum tax, 163, 709
Amusement park attendance, 644
Annual retail sales, 122, 602
Annuities, 212, 214, 216, 217, 220, 228, 244, 832, 837
Assembly-time studies, 179, 448, 467, 796
Asset allocation, 343, 344, 377, 378
Asset depreciation, 651
ATM cards, 426
Auditing tax returns, 492
Automatic tellers, 448
Automobile financing, 216, 230, 245, 807
Automobile leasing, 216, 245
Automobile options, 411
Auto replacement parts market, 146
Average age of cars in the United States, 726
Average price of a commodity, 670, 811
Average single-family property tax, 144
Balloon payment mortgage, 230
Banking, 94, 291, 767
Beverage research, 502
Bidding for contracts, 438
BlackBerry subscribers, 145
Black Monday, 711
Book design, 50, 148, 747
Bookstore inventories, 291
Bounced-check charges, 113
Box-office receipts, 254, 268, 269, 304, 564, 627, 722
Brand selection, 479
Break-even analysis, 117, 121
Bridge loans, 203
British deficit, 823
Broadband Internet households, 120
Broadband versus dial-up, 122
Budget deficit and surplus, 105
Business travel expenses, 269
Cable television, 527
Cable TV subscription, 670, 769, 779, 811
Canadian oil-sands production, 800
Capital expenditures, 316
Case-Shiller Home Price Index, 707
CDs, 244
Cell-phone ad spending, 800, 810
Charter revenue, 143, 148, 748
Chip sales, 145
City planning, 568
Coal production, 809, 823
Cobb-Douglas production function, 866, 868
COLAs, 242
Cold formula production, 345, 378
Commissions, 579
Commodity prices, 579, 580, 811
Common stock transactions, 204, 238, 244, 326, 448
Company sales, 236, 238, 244
Complementary commodities, 863, 867
Computer game sales, 185
Computer resale value, 842
Computer sales projections, 777
Computing phone bills, 305
Consolidation of business loans, 204
Construction jobs, 148, 632, 642
Consumer decisions, 203, 241
Consumer demand, 592, 612, 627
Consumer price index, 612, 700
Consumer surveys, 416, 419, 455, 465
Consumers’ surplus, 828, 835, 836, 844
Consumption of boiled water, 150
Consumption of electricity, 203, 797

Contract bidding, 438
Corporate bonds, 203
Cost of a commodity, 84
Cost of drilling, 241
Cost of the health-care bill, 146
Cost of producing DVDs, 670
Cost of producing guitars, 768
Cost of producing loudspeakers, 306
Cost of producing solar cell panels, 775
Cost of producing smartphones, 111
Cost of producing surfboards, 598
Cost of removing toxic waste, 627, 722, 763
Creation of new jobs, 112, 632, 642
Credit cards, 245, 470, 768
Cruise ship bookings, 642
Customer service, 448
Decision analysis, 118, 122, 820
Demand for Bluetooth headsets, 130, 131
Demand for CD players, 882
Demand for computers, 183
Demand for digital camcorder tapes, 844
Demand for DVD players, 187, 671
Demand for electricity, 797
Demand for RNs, 708
Demand for wristwatches, 642
Dependency ratio, 710
Depreciation, 240, 810
Designing a metal container, 54
Dialup Internet households, 120
Digital TV services, 84
Digital TV shipments, 150
Digital versus film cameras, 122
Disability benefits, 628
Disability rates, 163
Double-declining balance depreciation, 240, 242
Dow-Jones Industrial Average, 711
Downloading music, 466
Driving costs, 142, 602
Durable goods orders, 454
DVD sales, 842
Economic surveys, 420
Effect of advertising on bank deposits, 706
Effect of advertising on profit, 129, 133, 598
Effect of advertising on revenue, 111, 822
Effect of advertising on sales, 183, 612, 700, 753
Effect of budget cuts on drug-related crimes, 708
Effect of housing starts on jobs, 642
Effect of inflation on salaries, 204
Effect of luxury tax on consumption, 641
Effect of mortgage rates on housing starts, 112
Effect of TV advertising on car sales, 823
Efficiency studies, 800
Electricity consumption, 203
Electricity generation, 466
Employee education and income, 493
Energy conservation, 814
Energy consumption, 579
Energy efficiency of appliances, 690
Expected auto sales, 527
Expected demand, 526
Expected home sales, 527
Expected product reliability, 526
Expected profit, 518, 526, 544
Expected sales, 526
Federal budget deficit, 105
Federal debt, 183, 186
Female self-employed workforce, 734
Fighting inflation, 454
Financial analysis, 229, 402
Financial planning, 217, 229, 245
Financing a car, 212, 229, 230
Financing a college education, 203, 229
Financing a home, 228, 229, 230, 231
Foreign exchange, 304
Franchise, 836
Fuel economy of cars, 615, 674
Gasoline sales, 289, 293, 294, 326
Gift cards, 145
Gini index, 834
Global mobile data traffic, 145
Global supply of plutonium, 156
Google’s revenue, 709
Great recession, 455
Green companies, 457
Gross domestic product, 59, 598, 609, 612, 628, 703, 

721, 736

Growth in a health club membership, 637

Growth of HMOs, 616
Growth of managed services, 688
Growth of national health-care costs, 768
Growth of Websites, 163
Health-care costs, 769
Health-care plan options, 426
Health-care spending, 14, 109, 151
Health club membership, 155, 637
Hedge funds, 100, 616
Hiring lobbyists, 104, 151
Home affordability, 223, 224, 231
Home equity, 222
Home financing, 245
Home mortgages, 221, 227, 228, 848, 855
Home refinancing, 230, 231
Home sales, 291
Home-shopping industry, 584
Hospital costs, 203
Hotel occupancy rate, 156, 642
Hotel rates, 100
Hours worked in some countries, 538
Housing appreciation, 203, 204, 457
Housing loans, 493
Housing prices, 537, 808
Housing starts and construction jobs, 112
Illegal ivory trade, 146
Income distributions, 497, 834
Income stream, 830
Incomes of American families, 645, 656
Increasing crop yields, 656
Indian gaming industry, 149
Industrial accidents, 534
Inflation, 624
Installment contract sales, 844
Instant messaging accounts, 144, 612
Insurance claims, 291
Insurance probabilities, 526, 544
Interest rate prediction, 526
Internet advertising, 799
Internet gaming sales, 184
Internet usage, 651
Internet users in China, 163, 165
Inventory control and planning, 48, 579, 745, 749, 750, 754
Investment analysis, 213, 214, 216, 230, 471, 514, 527, 

536, 830

Investment clubs, 254, 268, 319
Investment options, 201, 204, 424, 435
Investment planning, 254, 356
Investment portfolios, 290, 326
Investments, 203, 254, 268, 279, 304, 326, 419
IRAs, 201, 213, 215, 216, 229, 832, 837
Keogh accounts, 216
Land prices, 867
Launching a fighter aircraft, 771
LCDs versus CRTs, 122
Leasing, 121
Life insurance premiums, 526
Linear depreciation, 36, 120, 155
Loan amortization, 225, 226, 656
Lobbying, 810
Locating a power station, 878
Locating a TV relay station, 876
Lorenz curves, 833, 834, 837
Machine scheduling, 327
Magazine circulation, 765
Management decisions, 254, 268, 279, 432, 437, 438, 

447, 456

Manufacturing capacity, 693
Marginal average cost functions, 659, 660, 664, 665
Marginal cost functions, 657, 658, 664, 799, 842
Marginal productivity of labor and capital, 862, 865
Marginal profits, 662, 664, 665, 799
Marginal propensity to consume, 665
Marginal propensity to save, 665
Marginal revenue functions, 664, 665, 799, 842
Market equilibrium, 131, 134, 136, 156, 828
Market for cholesterol reducing drugs, 124, 125
Marketing surveys, 417, 418
Market research, 357
Market share, 292, 597, 766
Maximizing crop yield, 748
Maximizing profit, 133, 349, 402, 734, 753, 754, 875, 

877, 878

Maximizing revenue, 133, 735, 736, 882
Maximum capacity of an oil well, 735
Maximum power output, 737
Meeting profit goals, 63

(continued)

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

List of Applications (continued)

Meeting sales targets, 63
Membership in credit unions, 844
Metal fabrication, 747
Mexico’s hedging tactic, 823
Minimizing average costs, 731, 735, 754
Minimizing construction costs, 747, 754
Minimizing container costs, 743, 747
Minimizing costs of laying cable, 749
Mobile enterprise IM accounts, 152
Minimizing fencing costs, 882
Minimizing heating and cooling costs, 879
Minimizing mining costs, 343, 344, 345, 355, 402
Minimizing packaging costs, 747, 754
Minimizing production costs, 735, 747
Minimizing shipping costs, 340, 341, 356, 396
Minimizing travel time, 749
Mining production, 343, 355, 402
Money market mutual funds, 205
Money market rates, 512
Movie attendance, 445, 454
Municipal bonds, 203
Music venues, 457
Mutual funds, 203, 245
Net investment flow, 809
New construction jobs, 632
Newsmagazine shows, 779
Newspaper advertisements, 438
Newspaper subscriptions, 421
Nielsen television polls, 583, 596
Nuclear plant utilization, 83
Occupancy rate, 518, 537
Office vacancy rate, 152
Oil production, 810, 843
Oil production shortfall, 822
Oil spills, 54, 148
Online ad sales, 769
Online banking, 185
Online buyers, 611, 654
Online retail sales, 204, 843
Online video viewers, 145, 611
Optimal charter flight fare, 748
Optimal market price, 732
Optimal selling price, 735
Optimal speed of a truck, 748
Optimal subway fare, 743
Optimizing production schedules, 279
Organizing production data, 283, 285, 288
Outsourcing of jobs, 146, 640, 709
Packaging, 53, 91, 147, 156, 741, 743, 747, 754, 879
PC shipments, 186
Pension funds, 203, 204
Personal consumption expenditure, 665
Personal loans, 230
Personnel selection, 438, 479, 502
Petroleum production, 327
Plans to keep cars, 466
Predicting sales figures, 79
Prefab housing, 345, 378
Present value of a franchise, 844
Present value of an income stream, 830
Price of ivory, 146
Price of perfume, 654
Pricing, 319
Prime interest rate, 579
Producers’ surplus, 829, 836
Product design, 748
Product reliability, 494, 501, 506, 526, 539
Product safety surveys, 455
Production costs, 110, 663, 795
Production planning, 288, 300, 305, 306, 338, 371
Production scheduling, 250, 265, 269, 279, 342, 343, 344,

345, 355, 356, 376, 377, 402
Productivity fueled by oil, 654
Productivity of a country, 866
Profit from sales of loudspeaker systems, 662
Profit from sales of pagers, 111
Profit of a vineyard, 53, 148, 748
Projected Provident funds, 689
Projected U.S. gasoline usage, 810
Projection TV sales, 843
Promissory notes, 199
Public transportation budget deficit, 709
Purchasing a home, 216
Purchasing power, 204
Quality control, 63, 437, 447, 448, 454, 456, 461, 768
Racetrack design, 749
Rate comparisons, 203, 204
Rate of bank failures, 632
Rate of change of DVD sales, 619
Real estate, 200, 204, 254, 304, 463, 527, 789, 808, 814

Recycling, 470
Refinancing a home, 230, 231
Reliability of a home theater system, 494
Reliability of computer chips, 183, 565
Reliability of security systems, 493
Resale value, 182
Restaurant revenue, 110
Retirement planning, 216, 217, 226
Revenue growth of a home theater business, 204
Revenue of a charter yacht, 748
Revenue of a travel agency, 599
Revenue of Polo Ralph Lauren, 144
Revenue projection, 527
Reverse annuity mortgage, 837
Ridership, 254, 268
Risk of an airplane crash, 467
Roth IRAs, 215, 217
Royalty income, 215
Salary comparisons, 241, 242
Sales forecasts, 79
Sales growth and decay, 241
Sales of camera phones, 753
Sales of digital cameras, 611
Sales of GPS equipment, 83
Sales of mobile processors, 753
Sales of MP3 players, 155
Sales of prerecorded music, 154
Sales promotions, 654
Satellite radio subscriptions, 768
Satellite TV subscribers, 81
Selling price of DVD recorders, 146, 647
Shipping costs, 344, 345, 356
Shoplifting, 456
Shortage of nurses, 614
Shuttle bus usage, 448
Sickouts, 740
Sinking funds, 225, 229, 295, 833
Social Security beneficiaries, 585
Social Security benefits, 120
Social Security contributions, 83
Solvency of the Social Security system, 139, 152
Spam messages, 111
Spending on Medicare, 612
Staffing, 427
Starting salaries, 539
Stock transactions, 59, 204, 296, 302, 448, 464
Substitute commodities, 863, 867
Sum-of-the-years’-digits method of depreciation, 241
Supply and demand, 53, 133, 155
Switching Internet service providers, 493
Switching jobs, 466
Tax planning, 212
Tax preparation, 465
Telecommunications industry revenue, 151
Television pilots, 512
Television programming, 437
Testing new products, 446, 452, 453
TiVo owners, 151
Tour revenue, 317
Tracking with GPS, 162
Transportation, 343, 396, 456
Transportation problem, 340
Treasury bills, 191
Trust funds, 191, 203, 229, 242
TV on cell phones, 779
TV households, 464
TV mobile phones, 644, 725
TV-viewing patterns, 583, 596
Unemployment rates, 526
Union bargaining issues, 426
U.S. financial transactions, 122
U.S. health-care information technology spending, 100
U.S. sales of organic milk, 770
Use of brokers, 419
Value of an investment, 111
Venture-capital investments, 736
Wages, 528, 594
Waiting lines, 437, 508, 512, 516, 517, 528
Warehouse problem, 341, 391
Warranties, 426, 461
Waste disposal, 811
Web conferencing, 150
Web hosting, 689
Wilson lot size formula, 855
Worker efficiency, 19, 100, 612, 722, 754
World production of coal, 809
Worldwide PC shipments, 186
Yahoo in Europe, 654
Yield of an apple orchard, 148
Zero coupon bonds, 204, 205

SOCIAL SCIENCES

Accident prevention, 454
Age distribution in a town, 541
Age distribution of renters, 501
Age of drivers in crash fatalities, 689
Aging drivers, 145
Aging population, 613, 641, 800
Air pollution, 21, 63, 641, 689, 693, 725, 736, 778
Arrival times, 455
Arson for profit, 854
Assembly time, 706
Auto-accident rates, 502, 526
Automobile pollution, 108
Average life span, 709
Birthrates, 536
Bursts of knowledge, 573
Car pools, 437
Car theft, 492
Closing the gender gap in education, 99
College admissions, 83, 155, 305, 493
College majors, 503
College savings program, 245
Committee selection, 434
Commuter options, 425
Commuting times, 524
Commuter trends, 419, 843
Compliance with seat belt laws, 500
Conservation of oil, 818
Consumer decisions, 203
Consumer surveys, 455
Continuing education enrollment, 641
Correctional supervision, 456
Cost of removing toxic waste, 63, 564, 627
Course enrollments, 465
Course selection, 438
Court judgment, 203
Crime, 501, 628, 685, 721, 736
Cube rule, 100
Curbing population growth, 613
Demographics, 183
Dependency ratio, 710
Disposition of criminal cases, 456
Dissemination of information, 184
Distracted driving, 467
Distribution of families by size, 512
Distribution of incomes, 63, 497, 645, 834, 837
Drivers’ tests, 438
Driving age requirements, 535
Education and income, 493
Educational level of voters, 492
Effect of budget cuts on crime rate, 708
Effect of smoking bans, 709
Efforts to stop shoplifting, 456
Elderly workforce, 753
Elections, 471, 498
Election turnout, 539
Exams, 426, 438, 512, 528
Family composition, 445, 447, 456
Financing a college education, 203, 212
Foreign-born medical residents, 736
Gender gap, 100, 502
Grade distributions, 454
Growth of HMOs, 616
Gun-control laws, 467
Health-care spending, 109, 151
Immigration, 146, 181
Increase in juvenile offenders, 656
Index of environmental quality, 753
Jury selection, 438
Lay teachers at Roman Catholic schools, 183
Learning curves, 182, 573, 579, 627, 780
Library usage, 510
Life expectancy, 292
Logistic curves, 180
Lorenz curves, 833, 834, 837, 844
Marijuana arrests, 802
Marital status of men, 537
Married households, 163
Married households with children, 611
Mass transit, 743
Median age of women at first marriage, 693
Medical school applicants, 689
Mortality rates, 291
Motorcycle deaths, 111
Narrowing gender gap, 83
Oil spills, 148, 641, 779

Copyright 2011 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ß²±¬¸»® ±®·¹·²¿´ «°´±¿¼ º®±³ ÅÍ¬±®³ÎÙÃ

Ñ°·²·±² °±´´­ô ìïçô ìîêô ììèô ìëìô ìëêô ìëéô ìêêô ìêé
Ñ®¹¿²·¦·²¹ ­±½·±´±¹·½¿´ ¼¿¬¿ô ëïîô ëíé
Ñª»®óïðð °±°«´¿¬·±²ô êëí
Ñª»®½®±©¼·²¹ ±º °®·­±²­ô ïïïô êçð
Ð¿®»²¬¿´ ·²º´«»²½»ô ìëê
Ð»®½»²¬¿¹» ±º º»³¿´»­ ·² ¬¸» ´¿¾±® º±®½»ô êëê
Ð»®½»²¬¿¹» ±º °±°«´¿¬·±² ®»´±½¿¬·²¹ô êëí
Ð¸¿®³¿½»«¬·½¿´ ¬¸»º¬ô êëí
Ð´¿²­ ¬± µ»»° ½¿®­ô ìêê
Ð±´·¬·½¿´ °±´´­ô ìîêô ììèô ìëê
Ð±´·¬·½­ô ïððô ìïíô ìëë
Ð±°«´¿¬·±² ¹®±©¬¸ô ïëëô îìîô êïíô êîèô êíîô éêçô ééçô 

èðîô èîí

Ð±°«´¿¬·±² ¹®±©¬¸ ·² Ý´¿®µ ½±«²¬§ô ïëïô éðçô éçì
Ð±°«´¿¬·±² ¹®±©¬¸ ·² ¬¸» îï­¬ ½»²¬«®§ô ïèíô ïèë
Ð®·­±² °±°«´¿¬·±²ô ïìô ïïïô êçð
Ð­§½¸±´±¹§ »¨°»®·³»²¬­ô ìîê
Ð«¾´·½ ¸±«­·²¹ô ìéç
Î»­»¿®½¸ º«²¼·²¹ô íïç
Î·­·²¹ ³»¼·¿² ¿¹»ô ïðð
Î±´´±ª»® ¼»¿¬¸­ô ìêë
Î«³±®­ ±º ¿ ®«² ±² ¿ ¾¿²µô éðê
Í¿º» ¼®·ª»®­ô ïðì
ÍßÌ ­½±®»­ô ìîðô ìëç
Í»½«®·¬§ ¾®»¿½¸»­ô ìëé
Í»´»½¬·±² ±º Í»²¿¬» ½±³³·¬¬»»­ô ìíìô ìèð
Í»´»½¬·±² ±º Í«°®»³» Ý±«®¬ ¶«¼¹»­ô ëðî
Í»²·±®­ ·² ¬¸» ©±®µ°´¿½»ô éíìô éëì
Í·²¹´» º»³¿´»ó¸»¿¼»¼ ¸±«­»¸±´¼­ ©·¬¸ ½¸·´¼®»²ô èðð
Í³±µ·²¹ ¿²¼ »¼«½¿¬·±²ô ëðì
Í±½·¿´ ´¿¼¼»®ô ëðí
Í±½·¿´ °®±¹®¿³­ °´¿²²·²¹ô íììô íëê
Í°®»¿¼ ±º ®«³±®ô éëí
Í¬«¼»²¬ ¼®±°±«¬ ®¿¬»ô ìîð
Í¬«¼»²¬ »²®±´´³»²¬ô ìçîô ééç
Í¬«¼»²¬ º·²¿²½·¿´ ¿·¼ô ìçí
Í¬«¼»²¬ ´±¿²­ô îîç
Í¬«¼»²¬ °±°«´¿¬·±²ô ïëð
Í¬«¼»²¬ ®»¿¼·²¹ ¸¿¾·¬­ô ìîð
Í¬«¼»²¬ ­«®ª»§­ô ìîðô ìéð
Í¬«¼§ ¹®±«°­ô ìíé
Í«®ª»·´´¿²½» ½¿³»®¿­ô ïðì
Í©·¬½¸·²¹ ¶±¾­ô ìêê
Ì»¿½¸»® ¿¬¬·¬«¼»­ô ìêë
Ì»¿½¸·²¹ ¿­­·­¬¿²¬­¸·°­ô ìíè
Ì»´»ª·­·±²óª·»©·²¹ °±´´­ô ìîê
Ì¸«®­¬±² ´»¿®²·²¹ ³±¼»´­ô ïëëô êìï
Ì®¿ºº·½óº´±© ¿²¿´§­·­ô îéêô îéçô êìîô éîî
Ì®¿ºº·½ ­«®ª»§­ô ìëë
ÌÊóª·»©·²¹ °¿¬¬»®²­ô ëèíô ëçê
ËòÒò Í»½«®·¬§ Ý±«²½·´ ª±¬·²¹ô ìíëô ìíè
ËòÍò ¾·®¬¸®¿¬»ô ëíê
ËòÍò ½»²­«­ô êíîô èìí
ËòÍò ½·¬·¦»²­ êë ¿²¼ ±´¼»®ô èðð
ËòÍò ²«®­·²¹ ­¸±®¬¿¹»ô êéì
ËòÍò °±°«´¿¬·±² ¾§ ¿¹»ô ëïí
Ê±¬»® ¿ºº·´·¿¬·±²ô íðë
Ê±¬»® ¬«®²±«¬ ¾§ ·²½±³»ô ëðí
Ê±¬»® ¬«®²±«¬ ¾§ °®±º»­­·±²ô ëðí
Ê±¬·²¹ ¯«±®«³ô ìíç
É¿¬»® ­«°°´§ô íìíô íëê
É±³»² ·² ¬¸» ´¿¾±® º±®½»ô êëê
É±®µ·²¹ó¿¹» °±°«´¿¬·±²ô ïìé
É±®µ·²¹ ³±¬¸»®­ô êìð
É±®´¼ °±°«´¿¬·±² ¹®±©¬¸ô ïèîô êëíô êëêô êçìô éíê

Ô×ÚÛ ÍÝ×ÛÒÝÛÍ

ß¾­±®°¬·±² ±º ¼®«¹­ô ïêíô ïêëô ïéìô ïèëô ïèèô éîîô éíéô 

èïíô èïì

ß¼³·²·­¬®¿¬·±² ±º ¿² ×Ê ­±´«¬·±²ô ëéç
ß¼«´¬ ±¾»­·¬§ô êéð
ß¹®·½«´¬«®»ô îëíô îëìô íïç
ß×ÜÍ ·² Ó¿­­¿½¸«­»¬¬­ô èïí
ß·® °«®·º·½¿¬·±²ô èððô èîî
ß³±«²¬ ±º ¹´«½±­» ·² ¬¸» ¾´±±¼­¬®»¿³ô éèð
ß²·³¿´ ²«¬®·¬·±²ô íëé
ß²¬·½·°¿¬»¼ ®·­» ·² ß´¦¸»·³»®K­ °¿¬·»²¬­ô ïðí
ß®¬»®·±­½´»®±­·­ô êíèô êìî
ßª»®¿¹» ©»·¹¸¬­ ¿²¼ ¸»·¹¸¬­ ±º ·²º¿²¬­ô ëçêô éèð
Þ¿½¬»®·¿ ¹®±©¬¸ô îìî
Þ·®¬¸®¿¬» ±º »²¼¿²¹»®»¼ ­°»½·»­ô ïïð
Þ·®¬¸®¿¬»­ô ëíê
Þ´±±¼ ¿´½±¸±´ ´»ª»´ô êëì
Þ´±±¼ º´±© ·² ¿² ¿®¬»®§ô ééðô èðð
Þ´±±¼ °®»­­«®»ô ïéí
Þ´±±¼ ¬§°»­ô ììéô ìëì
Þ±¼§ ³¿­­ô èëí

Þ®¿·² ½¿²½»® ­«®ª·ª¿´ ®¿¬»ô êìï
Þ®¿·² ¹®±©¬¸ ¿²¼ ×Ï­ô éíê
Ý¿²½»® ­«®ª·ª±®­ô ïíí
Ý¿®¾±²óïì ¼¿¬·²¹ô ïéèô ïèî
Ý¿®¾±² ³±²±¨·¼» ·² ¬¸» ¿·®ô ïïðô êïêô êìïô ééèô èìî
Ý¸·´¼ ±¾»­·¬§ô êïî
Ý¸±´»­¬»®±´ ´»ª»´­ô îçð
Ý´¿®µK­ Î«´»ô ïëë
Ý±´±® ¾´·²¼²»­­ô ìèí
Ý±²½»²¬®¿¬·±² ±º ¿ ¼®«¹ ·² ¿² ±®¹¿²ô éèð
Ý±²½»²¬®¿¬·±² ±º ¿ ¼®«¹ ·² ¬¸» ¾´±±¼­¬®»¿³ô êíô ëêìô êîéô

êèçô éîïô éíéô èðèô èïï

Ý±²­»®ª¿¬·±² ±º ­°»½·»­ô êðéô êïí
Ý±²¬®¿½¬·±² ±º ¬¸» ¬®¿½¸»¿ ¼«®·²¹ ¿ ½±«¹¸ô éíð
Ý±®®»½¬·ª» ´»²­ «­»ô ìëê
Ý±©´·²¹K­ Î«´»ô íê
Ý®·½µ»¬ ½¸·®°·²¹ ¿²¼ ¬»³°»®¿¬«®»ô ïîï
Ý®±° °´¿²²·²¹ô îëíô îêêô îêéô íïçô íìíô íëëô íéé
Ý®±° §·»´¼ô ëçêô êëêô èïí
Ü»¿¬¸ ¼«» ¬± ­¬®±µ»­ô êëí
Ü·»¬¿®§ °´¿²²·²¹ô îëìô îêèô íðêô íììô íëêô íçê
Ü·»¬ó³·¨ °®±¾´»³­ô îéçô íïç
Ü·­¿¾·´·¬§ ®¿¬»­ô ïêí
Ü±±³­¼¿§ ­·¬«¿¬·±²ô ëêì
Ü®«¹ ¼±­¿¹»­ô ïîïô êîé
Ûºº»½¬ ±º ¾¿½¬»®·½·¼»ô êíô ëçéô êîé
Ûºº»½¬ ±º »²¦§³»­ ±² ½¸»³·½¿´ ®»¿½¬·±²­ô éîï
Û²»®¹§ »¨°»²¼»¼ ¾§ ¿ º·­¸ô ëèðô éíé
Û²ª·®±²³»²¬ ±º º±®»­¬­ô êèè
Û¨¬·²½¬·±² ­·¬«¿¬·±²ô ëêè
Ú»®¬·´·¦»® ³·¨¬«®»­ô îëíô îêèô íïç
Ú·­¸»®·»­ô êïî
Ú´·¹¸¬­ ±º ¾·®¼­ô éìç
Ú´±© ±º ¾´±±¼ ·² ¿² ¿®¬»®§ô èïï
Ú±®»²­·½ ­½·»²½»ô ïéì
Ú±®»­¬®§ô ëçê
Ú±®³¿´¼»¸§¼» ´»ª»´­ô êîé
Ú´« »°·¼»³·½ô ïèé
Ù¿­¬®·½ ¾§°¿­­ ­«®¹»®·»­ô éêè
Ù»²»¬·½¿´´§ ³±¼·º·»¼ ½®±°­ô éêè
Ù´±¾¿´ »°·¼»³·½ô èðî
Ù´±¾¿´ ©¿®³·²¹ô ïíèô éðèô èïð
Ù®±©¬¸ ±º ¿ ½¿²½»®±«­ ¬«³±®ô ççô êïï
Ù®±©¬¸ ±º ¾¿½¬»®·¿ô ïéêô ïèîô ïèéô ëçè
Ù®±©¬¸ ±º º®«·¬ º´§ °±°«´¿¬·±²ô ïèí
Ø¿®¾±® ½´»¿²«°ô ïðð
Ø»·¹¸¬­ ±º ½¸·´¼®»²ô ééð
Ø»·¹¸¬­ ±º ¬®»»­ô ïéì
Ø»·¹¸¬­ ±º ©±³»²ô ëìïô ëìì
×¼»¿´ ¸»·¹¸¬­ ¿²¼ ©»·¹¸¬­ º±® ©±³»²ô èì
×³°±®¬¿²½» ±º ¬·³» ·² ¬®»¿¬·²¹ ¸»¿®¬ ¿¬¬¿½µ­ô êíð
×²½®»¿­·²¹ ½®±° §·»´¼­ô êëê
×²º¿²¬ ³±®¬¿´·¬§ ®¿¬»­ ·² Ó¿­­¿½¸«­»¬¬­ô ïìë
Ô»²¹¬¸­ ±º º·­¸ô ïéìô ïèí
Ô·º» »¨°»½¬¿²½§ ¿º¬»® ¿¹» êëô çç
Ô·º» »¨°»½¬¿²½§ ±º ¿ º»³¿´»ô êíçô ééç
Ô·ª·²¹ ©·¬¸ Ø×Êô ïèí
Ô±¹·­¬·½ ¹®±©¬¸ º«²½¬·±²ô ïèì
Ó¿´» ´·º» »¨°»½¬¿²½§ô êéð
Ó»¿­´»­ ¼»¿¬¸­ô ïëîô éïð
Ó»¼·½¿´ ¼·¿¹²±­»­ô ëðì
Ó»¼·½¿´ ®»­»¿®½¸ô ìçíô ëðî
Ó»¼·½¿´ ­«®ª»§­ô ìèç
Ó»¬»±®±´±¹§ô ìëì
Ò·½±¬·²» ½±²¬»²¬ ±º ½·¹¿®»¬¬»­ô ïëî
Ò«½´»¿® º¿´´±«¬ô ïèî
Ò«¬®·¬·±²ô îéçô íïçô ííçô íëð
Ñ¾»­» ½¸·´¼®»² ·² ¬¸» Ë²·¬»¼ Í¬¿¬»­ô ïìêô ëðí
Ñ¾»­·¬§ ·² ß³»®·½¿ô êïíô êîè
Ñ®¹¿²·¦·²¹ ³»¼·½¿´ ¼¿¬¿ô îçð
Ñ«¬°¿¬·»²¬ ­»®ª·½» ½±³°¿²§ô ééð
Ñ¨§¹»² ½±²¬»²¬ ±º ¿ °±²¼ô ëíô ëêéô ëèðô êîðô éîîô éíê
Ñ¦±²» °±´´«¬·±²ô éêç
Ð¸±¬±­§²¬¸»­·­ô ëêë
Ð±·­»«·´´»K­ Ô¿©ô ïíìô éíêô ééðô èððô èïïô èëì
Ð±´·± ·³³«²·¦¿¬·±²ô êçð
Ð®»ª¿´»²½» ±º ß´¦¸»·³»®K­ °¿¬·»²¬­ô ïðíô ïííô êíïô éðç
Ð®±¾¿¾·´·¬§ ±º ¬®¿²­°´¿²¬ ®»¶»½¬·±²ô ìçì
Ð«´­» ®¿¬»­ô êìïô èîî
Ï«¿´·¬§ ±º »²ª·®±²³»²¬ô éëí
Î¿¼·±¿½¬·ª» ¼»½¿§ô ïééô ïéèô ïèîô ïèìô ïèé
Î¿¬» ±º ¹®±©¬¸ ±º ¿ ¬«³±®ô ïèë
Î»¿½¬·±² ±º ¿ º®±¹ ¬± ¿ ¼®«¹ô ïìë
Î»¿½¬·±² ¬± ¿ ¼®«¹ô îðô éíé
Î»´·¿¾·´·¬§ ±º ³»¼·½¿´ ¬»­¬­ô ëðï
Î·­µ ±º Ü±©² Í§²¼®±³»ô éêè
Í³±µ·²¹ ¿²¼ »³°¸§­»³¿ô ìèç
Í°»»¼ ±º ¿ ½¸»³·½¿´ ®»¿½¬·±²ô ëêë
Í°®»¿¼ ±º º´« »°·¼»³·½ô îðô ïèðô ïèíô ëêëô éîðô éîî
Í°®»¿¼ ±º Ø×Êô êïê

Í¬±®·²¹ ®¿¼·±¿½¬·ª» ©¿­¬»ô éìç
Í¬®¿·² ±º ª»®¬»¾®¿»ô êëì
Í«®º¿½» ¿®»¿ ±º ¬¸» ¸«³¿² ¾±¼§ô ééðô èëìô èêè
Í«®¹»®·»­ ·² °¸§­·½·¿²­K ±ºº·½»­ô êçí
Ì·³» ®¿¬» ±º ¹®±©¬¸ ±º ¿ ¬«³±®ô ïèë
Ì±¬¿´ µ²»» ®»°´¿½»³»²¬ °®±½»¼«®»­ô èïð
Ì±¨·½ °±´´«¬¿²¬­ô ëêì
ËòÍò ·²º¿²¬ ³±®¬¿´·¬§ ®¿¬»ô ïèé
Ê»´±½·¬§ ±º ¾´±±¼ô êïïô éíê
Ê»¬»®·²¿®§ ­½·»²½»ô íëé
É¿´µ·²¹ ª»®­«­ ®«²²·²¹ô ïìê
É¿¬»® °±´´«¬·±²ô éðê
É»·¹¸¬ ±º ©¸¿´»­ô èí
É»·­­K­ Ô¿©ô ëèð
É¸¿´» °±°«´¿¬·±²ô êðé
Ç·»´¼ ±º ¿² ¿°°´» ±®½¸¿®¼ô ïìèô éìè

ÙÛÒÛÎßÔ ×ÒÌÛÎÛÍÌ

ß½½»´»®¿¬·±² ±º ¿ ½¿®ô êîèô ééð
ß³±«²¬ ±º ®¿·²º¿´´ô íêô ëêèô ééï
ß¬³±­°¸»®·½ °®»­­«®»ô ïèî
ß«¬±³±¾·´» ±°¬·±²­ô ìïï
ßª»®¿¹» ¸·¹¸©¿§ ­°»»¼ ±º ¿ ª»¸·½´»ô êïíô êèçô éíì
ßª»®¿¹» ª»´±½·¬§ ±º ¿ ¬®«½µô èìì
Þ¿´´¿­¬ ¼®±°°»¼ º®±³ ¿ ¾¿´´±±²ô éêç
Þ·®¬¸¼¿§ °®±¾´»³ô ìéêô ìèð
Þ´¿½µ¶¿½µô ìîëô ìéç
Þ±­¬±² Ó¿®¿¬¸±²ô êèê
Þ«­ ®±«¬·²¹ô ìíç
Ý¿®®·»® ´¿²¼·²¹ô ééð
Ý»´­·«­ ¿²¼ Ú¿¸®»²¸»·¬ ¬»³°»®¿¬«®»ô êîô ïîï
Ý±¼» ©±®¼­ô ìîê
Ý±³°«¬»® ¼¿¬·²¹ô ìîê
Ý®±­­·²¹ ¿ º·²·­¸ ´·²»ô ééð
Ü»­·¹²·²¹ ¿ ¹®¿·² ­·´±ô éìè
Ü»­·¹²·²¹ ¿ Ò±®³¿² ©·²¼±©ô ïíìô éìè
Ü®¿·²·²¹ ¿ ¬¿²µô ééð
Ü®·ª·²¹ ®¿²¹» ±º ¿ ½¿®ô êî
Ûºº»½¬ ±º ­¬±°°·²¹ ±² ¿ª»®¿¹» ­°»»¼ô êïï
Û²¹·²» »ºº·½·»²½§ô èêè
Û¨»®½·­» °®±¹®¿³ô îìï
Ú¿³·´§ º±±¼ »¨°»²¼·¬«®»ô îðí
Ú»²½·²¹ ¿ ¹¿®¼»²ô ïïéô ïìíô éìï
Ú´·¹¸¬ ±º ¿ ®±½µ»¬ô êïíô êèèô éíìô éêç
Ú´·¹¸¬ °¿¬¸ ±º ¿ °´¿²»ô ëèìô éîë
Ú±®½» ¹»²»®¿¬»¼ ¾§ ¿ ½»²¬®·º«¹»ô èëë
Ù¿³» ­¸±©­ô ììè
Ù±´¼»² ®¿¬·±ô ëí
×²º´¿¬·²¹ ¿ ¾¿´´±±²ô ïëê
×²¬»®²¿¬·±²¿´ ß³»®·½¿K­ Ý«° Ý´¿­­ô èëë
×Ï­ô èëíô èèî
Õ»»°·²¹ ©·¬¸ ¬¸» ¬®¿ºº·½ º´±©ô ïðì
Õ·²»¬·½ »²»®¹§ ±º ¿ ¾±¼§ô èêè
Ô¿«²½¸·²¹ ¿ º·¹¸¬»® ¿·®½®¿º¬ô ééï
Ô·½»²­» °´¿¬» ²«³¾»®­ô ìîê
Ô·¹¸¬²·²¹ ¼»¿¬¸­ô ìëê
Ô±¬¬»®·»­ô îïêô ìîéô ìéçô ëîêô èíé
Ó¿¹²·¬«¼» ±º »¿®¬¸¯«¿µ»­ô ïéí
Ó¿²²»¼ ¾±³¾»® ®»­»¿®½¸ô ìçè
Ó»¿­«®·²¹ ¬»³°»®¿¬«®»ô èîì
Ó»²« ­»´»½¬·±²ô ìîíô ìîê
Ó±¬·±² ±º ¿ ³¿¹´»ªô ëìèô ëëìô ëéíô ëèìô êîíô éëèô éêì
Ò»©¬±²K­ Ô¿© ±º Ý±±´·²¹ô ïéìô ïèëô èðç
Ð±µ»®ô ìíìô ìíçô ìêìô ìéï
Ð±­¬¿´ ®»¹«´¿¬·±²­ô ëéèô éìéô èéç
Î¿ºº´»­ô ìêì
Î±«´»¬¬»ô ìëêô ëîðô ëîîô ëîéô ëîè
Í½¸»¼«´·²¹ °»®º±®³¿²½»­ô ìíë
Í´±¬ ³¿½¸·²»­ô ìîéô ìéç
Í±«²¼ ·²¬»²­·¬§ô ïéì
Í°»»¼¾±¿¬ ®¿½·²¹ô èðð
Í°±®¬­ô ìíèô ìíçô ììèô ëîè
Í¬¿§·²¹ ·² ¬±«½¸ô ìëé
Í¬±°°·²¹ ¼·­¬¿²½» ±º ¿ ®¿½·²¹ ½¿®ô êïî
Í¬®»²¹¬¸ ±º ¿ ¾»¿³ô éìè
Í©»»°­¬¿µ»­ô ìëê
Ì»¿³ ­»´»½¬·±²ô ìéï
Ì»®³·²¿´ ª»´±½·¬§ô éîð
Ì®¿ª»´ ±°¬·±²­ô ìîìô ìîë
Ì«®¾±ó½¸¿®¹»¼ »²¹·²» °»®º±®³¿²½»ô èîí
Ê¿½¿¬·±² ½±­¬­ô îêç
Ê»´±½·¬§ ±º ¿ ½¿®ô ëçîô ëçèô éêéô èïð
É¿®¼®±¾» ­»´»½¬·±²ô ìîë
É»¿¬¸»®ô ëîè
É·²¼ ½¸·´´ º¿½¬±®ô èêé
É±³»²K­ ­±½½»®ô éïð
Æ±¼·¿½ ­·¹²­ô ìèð

Ý±°§®·¹¸¬ îðïï Ý»²¹¿¹» Ô»¿®²·²¹ò ß´´ Î·¹¸¬­ Î»­»®ª»¼ò Ó¿§ ²±¬ ¾» ½±°·»¼ô ­½¿²²»¼ô ±® ¼«°´·½¿¬»¼ô ·² ©¸±´» ±® ·² °¿®¬ò Ü«» ¬± »´»½¬®±²·½ ®·¹¸¬­ô ­±³» ¬¸·®¼ °¿®¬§ ½±²¬»²¬ ³¿§ ¾» ­«°°®»­­»¼ º®±³ ¬¸» »Þ±±µ ¿²¼ñ±® »Ý¸¿°¬»®ø­÷ò

Û¼·¬±®·¿´ ®»ª·»© ¸¿­ ¼»»³»¼ ¬¸¿¬ ¿²§ ­«°°®»­­»¼ ½±²¬»²¬ ¼±»­ ²±¬ ³¿¬»®·¿´´§ ¿ºº»½¬ ¬¸» ±ª»®¿´´ ´»¿®²·²¹ »¨°»®·»²½»ò Ý»²¹¿¹» Ô»¿®²·²¹ ®»­»®ª»­ ¬¸» ®·¹¸¬ ¬± ®»³±ª» ¿¼¼·¬·±²¿´ ½±²¬»²¬ ¿¬ ¿²§ ¬·³» ·º ­«¾­»¯«»²¬ ®·¹¸¬­ ®»­¬®·½¬·±²­ ®»¯«·®» ·¬ò

