Flowering Plants

Flowering Plants

Structure and Industrial Products

Aisha Saleem Khan

Forman Christian College
Lahore
Pakistan

This edition first published 2017
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, 
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, 
except as permitted by law. Advice on how to obtain permission to reuse material from this title is available 
at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.

The right of Dr Aisha Saleem Khan to be identified as the author(s) of this work has been asserted in 
accordance with law.

Registered Offices
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK

Editorial Office
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK

For details of our global editorial offices, customer services, and more information about Wiley products 
visit us at www.wiley.com.

Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats and by print‐on‐demand. Some content that 
appears in standard print versions of this book may not be available in other formats.

Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty
The publisher and the authors make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy 
or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including 
without limitation any implied warranties of fitness for a particular purpose. This work is sold with 
the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. The advice 
and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for every situation. In view of ongoing research, 
equipment modifications, changes in governmental regulations, and the constant flow of information 
relating to the use of experimental reagents, equipment, and devices, the reader is urged to review and 
evaluate the information provided in the package insert or instructions for each chemical, piece of 
equipment, reagent, or device for, among other things, any changes in the instructions or indication of 
usage and for added warnings and precautions. The fact that an organization or website is referred to in 
this work as a citation and/or potential source of further information does not mean that the author or the 
publisher endorses the information the organization or website may provide or recommendations it may 
make. Further, readers should be aware that websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared 
between when this works was written and when it is read. No warranty may be created or extended by any 
promotional statements for this work. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for any damages 
arising herefrom.

Library of Congress Cataloging‐in‐Publication Data
Names: Khan, Aisha Saleem, author.
Title: Flowering plants : structure and industrial products / Dr. Aisha Saleem Khan.
Description: First edition. | Hoboken, NJ : John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2017. |  

Includes bibliographical references and index.

Identifiers: LCCN 2016051233 (print) | LCCN 2016052638 (ebook) |  

ISBN 9781119262770 (cloth) | ISBN 9781119262800 (pdf) | ISBN 9781119262787 (epub)

Subjects: LCSH: Angiosperms. | Angiosperms–Utilization.
Classification: LCC QK495.A1 K43 2017 (print) | LCC QK495.A1 (ebook) |  

DDC 582.13–dc23

LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016051233
Cover image: Courtesy of the author
Cover design: Wiley

Set in 10/12pt Warnock by SPi Global, Pondicherry, India

10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1

Dedicated to my dear and loving father without his support I would not have been able 
to write this book

vii

Contents

Preface  xv
Acknowledgements  xvii

1 
1.1 

1.2 
1.2.1 
1.2.2 

1.2.4 

1.2.7 
1.2.8 

An Introduction to Flowering Plants: Monocots and Eudicots  1
An Introduction to Major Group of Angiosperms: Monocots, Eudicots 
and Basal Angiosperms  1
Plant Cell: Revisions and Few Updates  5
A Cellulosic Cell Wall is Crucial for all Plant Cells  7
Plant Plasma Membrane Allows Molecules to Enter Only Through Their 
Respective Channels  11

1.2.3  Mitochondria Convert Energy of Glucose in ATP and in Reducing 

Powers  13
Plant Vacuoles Store Water, Pigments and Compounds of Defensive 
Nature  14
Golgi Apparatus  15

1.2.5 
1.2.6  Nucleus Encodes Genes Required for Enzymes Forming Products 

of Commercial Applications  15
Plastids are Sites of Sugar and Fragrance Formation  16
Tannosomes are Chloroplast‐Derived Organelles Which Contain 
Polymers of Tannins  17
Ribosomes  17

1.2.9 
1.2.10  Endoplasmic Reticulum  17
1.2.11  Peroxisomes  18
1.2.12  Oleosomes  19
1.3 

1.4 
References  23
Further Reading  23

Intracellular and Extracellular Communications are Crucial for Cells’ 
Metabolic Demands  19
Future Perspectives  22

2 
2.1 
2.2 

2.3 

An Introduction to Angiosperm Natural Products  31
Introduction  31
Glucose Serves as a Precursor for Formation of Primary and Secondary 
Metabolites in Plants  32
Classification of Natural Products of Angiosperms  33

viii

Contents

2.3.1 

2.3.2 

2.3.3 
2.3.4 

2.4 

Alkaloids Provide Defense Against Herbivory Due to Their Bitter Taste 
in Plant Organs  33
Flavonoids are Important Pollination Pigments and Increase Plants’  
Demands in Floriculture  35
Glycosides are Sugar‐Containing Natural Products  37
Terpenoids Make Fragrances and are Used in Perfume 
and Cosmetic Products  39
Techniques for Isolation of Secondary Metabolites With Future 
Perspectives  44

References  46
Further Reading  47

Diversity in Sclereids  59
Vascular Tissues: Xylem and Phloem  61
Xylem  61

Leaf Morphology and Venation  62
Tracheary Elements  63

Plant Tissues Organization of Angiosperms  53
Introduction to Plant Tissues  53
Diversity of Plant Cell  53
Parenchyma is the Main Ground Tissue of Plants  55
Collenchyma: Introduction and Distribution  55
Sclerenchyma is the Mechanical Tissue of Plants  57
Fibers Types in Plants  57
Commercially Important Fibers  57

3 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
3.4 
3.5 
3.5.1 
3.5.2 
3.5.3  Making of Fabrics From Corn Fibers  59
3.5.4 
3.6 
3.6.1 
3.6.2  Why is There a Need of Water Transport?  61
3.6.3 
3.6.4 
3.6.5  Why Tracheids and Vessels are Water‐Transporting Cells?  65
3.6.6 
3.6.7 
3.6.8 
3.6.9 

Significance of Lignification in Xylem  65
Genetic Modification of Lignin for Bioenergy Crops  65
Pits and Pit Membranes  66
Proteomic Analysis of Xylem Sap Provides Evidences of Proteins 
Translocation Through Xylem Sap  66

3.6.10  Water Channels in Plant Membranes  69
3.7 
3.7.1 
3.7.2 
3.7.3 
3.8 
References  72
Further Reading  73

Phloem  69
Significance of Callose Deposition  69
Companion Cells  69
Evaluation of Phloem Sap Through Modern Techniques  71
Future Perspectives  72

4 
4.1 

4.2 
4.2.1 

Floral Cell Biology and Diversity in Floral Cells  77
Introduction to Angiosperms Flowers:  
Monocots and Eudicots  77
Morphological & Anatomical Characteristics of Eudicot Flowers  77
Sepals Morphology and Anatomy  79

Contents

ix

Petals Morphology in Response to Their Pollinators  81
Epidermal Cell of Petals and Elaiophores  85
Anatomical Characteristics of Eudicot Petals  87

4.2.2 
4.2.3 
4.2.4 
4.2.5  Morphological and Anatomic Features of Carpels  87
4.2.6  Ovule Anatomy  90
4.2.7 
4.2.8 
4.2.9 
4.3 
4.3.1 
4.4 
4.5 
References  102
Further Reading  103

Stamens: Morphology and Anatomy  93
Vascular Supply to Stamens  94
Stamen Anatomy and Pollen Development  94
Morphology of Monocots Flowers  95
An Account of Economic Importance of Z. mays (Corn)  96
Channels and Transporters Within Floral Cells  98
Future Perspectives  102

5 
5.1 
5.2 

5.3 

Signaling During Sexual Reproduction in Angiosperms  107
Introduction  107
Angiosperms Show Diversity in Their Sporophytic and Gametophytic 
Generations  108
Angiosperms Spend Most Part of Their Lives as Sporophytes and Produce 
Gametophytes for a Shorter Period of Time  108
Septs From Pollination to Fertilization  111
Stigma of Angiosperms May be Dry or Wet  111
Pollen Landing on Stigma (Rehydration)  119
Style Anatomy and Types in Angiosperms  119
Growth of Pollen Tube  120
Physiological Activities Within Pollen Tube  123
Cysteine Rich Proteins (CRP) Facilitate Pollen and Pistil Interaction  124
Steps Involved in Fertilization  124
Sperm Cell in Angiosperms  127

5.4 
5.4.1 
5.4.2 
5.4.3 
5.4.4 
5.4.5 
5.4.6 
5.4.7 
5.4.8 
5.4.9  Molecular Basis of Reproduction  127
5.4.10  Temperature Affects Pollination  127
5.5 
References  128
Further Reading  129

Future Perspectives  128

6 
6.1 
6.2 

6.3 

6.4 

6.5 

Physiologically Active Metabolic Pathways in Floral Cells  135
Introduction to Floral Physiology  135
Glucose Fates in Floral Cells Differ According to Their Metabolic 
Demands  137
PPP Provides Floral Cells With Their Nucleotides and Important 
Pigments  141
ATP and NADPH Produced Through Photochemical Reactions Provide 
Energy for Sugar Formation in Stroma of Chloroplasts  143
Floral Photosynthesis Contributes to Sugar Requirements of Floral 
Whorls  145

x

Contents

6.5.1 

6.5.2 

6.5.3 

6.5.4 
6.6 
References  155
Further Reading  156

Presence of Stomata and Chloroplasts in Flowers Facilitate 
Sugar Formation  149
Sepals of Angiosperms have Developed Many  
Adaptations for Foliar Photosynthesis  150
Photosynthesis in Anthers is Required for Metabolic  
Demands of Developing Pollen Grains  150
Chloroplasts in Exocarp of Fruits are Modified and are Photosynthetic  151
Future Perspectives  155

7 
7.1 

7.2 

7.3 
7.4 
7.5 

7.5.1 
7.5.2 
7.5.3 
7.5.4 
7.5.5 
7.5.6 
7.5.7 

Anthocyanins: Accumulation in Plants and Role in Industries  161
Anthocyanins Accumulation in Different Organs Is Indicative of Their 
Multiple Roles  161
Anthocyanidin Biosynthesis Takes Place in Cytosol of Cells, However, 
They are Accumulated in Vacuoles  162
Anthocyanins Exist in Modified Forms in Cells  165
Anthocyanins Transport to Vacuoles  168
Anthocyanins Role is Dependent Upon Their Location 
and Accumulation  168
Accumulation are Defensive Pigments in Vegetative Organs  168
Accumulation and Role in Leaves  171
Anthocyanins are Involved in Senescence of Leaves  174
Anthocyanins as Defensive Pigments Against Insects  175
Anthocyanins Protect Plants Against UV Light  176
Role in Scavenging Reactive Molecular O2  176
Anthocyanins are Crucial for Pollination and Seed Dispersal in many 
Eudicots  176
Accumulation in Fruits  178
Industrial Applications of Anthocyanins  178
Future Perspectives  181

7.5.8 
7.6 
7.7 
References  182
Further Reading  184

8 
8.1 

8.2 

8.3 

8.4 

8.5 

8.6 
8.7 

Carotenoids: Introduction, Classification and Industrial Uses  189
Carotenoids are Vital for Leaves as Light Absorbing Pigments and for Flowers 
to Attract Their Pollinators  189
Oxygenated and De‐oxygenated Carotenoids are Major Carotenoids 
in Angiosperms  190
Carotenoid Biosynthesis is Under the Control of Transcriptional 
Regulation  193
Carotenoids are Localized in Plastids in Form of Crystals 
and Plastoglobuli  193
Carotenoids Accumulation Takes Place in Chromoplasts of Autumn Leaves 
of Eudicots  197
Carotenoids Pigments in Flowers and Pollens  197
Lutein are Important Antenna and Photoprotective Pigments in Thylakoids 
of Chloroplasts  199

Contents

xi

Capsaicin is a Carotenoid Derivative Which Causes Hotness of Capsicum 
spp.  200
Carotenoid Accumulation in Epidermal Cells of Many Fruits is 
Due to Conversion of Chloroplast Into Chromoplasts  202
Transcriptional Regulation of Carotenoids in Fruits  203
Application in Food, Pharmaceutical, Cosmetic, Textile and Nutracuetical 
Industries  203
Future Challenges  205

8.12 
References  207
Further Reading  208

8.8 

8.9 

8.10 
8.11 

9 
9.1 

9.2 

9.2.2 
9.3 
9.4 
9.4.1 
9.4.2 
9.4.3 

9.4.4 
9.4.5 
9.5 
9.5.1 
9.6 
9.7 

Alkaloids Biosynthesis, Translocation and Industrial Products  213
Alkaloids are Nitrogen‐Containing Natural Products Which Provide Defense 
Against Herbivores  213
An Account of Historical Uses of Alkaloids  214

9.1.1 
9.1.2  Many Alkaloids are Psychoactive Compounds 

and Act as Neurotransmitters  215
Alkaloids are Synthesized in Cytosol and Accumulated in Vacuoles as They 
are Toxic for Plant Cells  216

9.2.1  Monoterpenoids Indole Alkaloids (MIA) Derivatives are Synthesized 

From Tryptophan  216
Tropane Alkaloids are Tyrosine Derivatives  216
Purine Nucleotides Serve as Precursors of Caffeine Synthesis  219
History of Discovery of Caffeine  222
Caffeine is a Popular Stimulant Alkaloid in Coffee and Teas  223
Industrial Steps in Coffee Making Determines Their Aroma and Taste  223
Supercritical CO2 Method is Efficient for Producing Decaffeinated 
Coffee  224
Teas are Representative of Culture, Tradition and Civilization  224
Black, Green and Oolong Teas  226
Theobromine is an Alkaloid Widely Used in Chocolates and Teas  227
Chocolate Formation: From Cacao Beans to Markets  227
Clinical Applications of Alkaloids are Due to Their Mode of Action  228
Development of Physiologically Functional Food Containing Alkaloids 
as Food Vaccines  230
Development of Transgenic Caffeine Resistant Plants  230
Use of Caffeine in Cosmetic Products  231
Alkaloids in Medicinal Products  231
Future Challenges for Agriculture and Cosmetic Industries  235

9.7.1 
9.7.2 
9.7.3 
9.7.4 
References  236
Further Reading  237

Nectaries, Carnations and Ornamental Hybrid Flowers in Floriculture  241
Introduction  241
Nectaries are Nectar Synthesizing Structures of Plants  242

10 
10.1 
10.2 
10.2.1  Nectar Guides  242
10.2.2  Nectar Secretion and Important Metabolites  243
10.2.3  Molecular Basis of Nectar Secretion  245

xii

Contents

Ornamental Transgenic Plants in Floriculture  247

Dianthus spp. are Major Carnations in Floriculture  250

10.3 
10.3.1  Development of Transgenic Roses  247
10.3.2  Ornamental Hybrids in Floriculture  248
10.4 
10.4.1  Economic Importance of Carnations  254
10.4.2  Genetically Modified Carnations and Ornamental Plants  254
10.5 
References  255
Further Reading  256

Future Perspectives in Floriculture Industries  255

11 

11.1 

11.2 

Floral Essential Oils: Biosynthesis, Classification and Commercial 
Applications  261
Fragrance Formation is a Unique and Genetically Controlled Characteristic 
of Many Angiosperms  261
Number of Carbon and Hydrogens Atoms in Isoprene Units Determine 
Their Roles in Plants  263

11.2.1  Two Isoprene Units (Monoterpenes) are Responsible for Giving 

11.2.2  Secretory Structures and Mechanisms Involved in Release of Essential 

Fragrances  263

Oils  264

11.2.3  Formation of Monoterpenoids Like Menthol is a Part of Chemical Defense 

of Mint and Other Plants  266

11.2.4  Linalool is a Defensive Terpenoid and a Volatile Attractant  266
11.2.5  Geraniol: A Volatile Attractant and Defensive Essential Oil in Cosmetic 

and Medicinal Products  270

11.3  Many Terpenoids are Insecticidal and Act as Allelochemicals  272
11.4 
11.5 

Sesquiterpenes are Defensive Terpenoids of Many Plants  272
Diterpenoids are Important Phytohormones Which Comprise of Four 
Isoprenoid Inits  274
Terpenoid Biosynthesis in Plants Proceeds in Two Different Cellular 
Compartments  276

11.6 

Economically Important Terpenoids  278

11.6.1  Vanillin Biosynthesis  278
11.7 
11.7.1  Bio‐engineered Terpenoids  281
11.8 
References  282
Further Reading  283

Future Challenges  282

12 
12.1 
12.2 
12.3 
12.4 

Aromatic Molecules From Flowers in Perfume and Cosmetic Industries  287
Introduction and Overview of Perfume and Cosmetic Industries  287
History of Perfume Making  288
Aromatic Flowers, Leaves and Woods Used in Perfumery  289
Traditional and Modern Techniques of Distillation and Isolation of Fragrant 
Molecules  290

12.4.1  Collection & Extraction of Essential Oils are Prerequisite Steps in Traditional 

Perfume Making  291

12.4.2  Enfleurage & Maceration Through Grease and Fats  291

Contents

xiii

12.4.3  Solvent Extraction Convert Aromatic Molecules in Concrete 

and Absolute  291

12.4.4  Eau De Parfum, Eau De Toilette and Eau De Cologne  294
12.4.5  Perfume Notes  294
12.5 

CO2 as a Solvent to Extract Fragrant Molecules in Super‐critical CO2 Fluid 
Extraction Method  294

12.6  Modern Perfume Making Machines  296
12.7 
12.8 
12.9 
12.10  Anti‐Aging Properties of Some Plants and Their Applications in Cosmetic 

Aromatherapy: Relaxation Through Aromatic Molecules  296
Cosmetic Industry: An Overview and History  298
Popular Plants and Their Products in Cosmetic Products  300

Products  301
Bioengineered Aromatic Bacteria With Lemon and Rose Fragrances  302
Future Considerations  307

12.11 
12.12 
References  307
Further Reading  308

Glossary  311
Index  321

xv

Preface

My inspiration for writing a book on Applied Plant Biology came from many authors 
whose  work  has  captivated  my  imagination,  since  I  was  an  undergraduate  student. 
I have been teaching Applied Plant Biology to undergraduate and postgraduate students 
for the last 12 years. It is not only my area of specialization but my passion as well.

Being  a  botanist,  I  always  felt  the  urge  for  a  book  which  relates  plant  structure 
with their important functional products and commercial applications. I believe that 
angiosperms structure and their important products need to be discussed together in 
order to have a clear understanding of how the plant architect influences the formation 
of important products.

The following book relates morphological aspects of flowering plants alongwith their 
products in different industries in a unique, informative, more conceptual and an inter-
esting  way  with  research‐based  and  updated  knowledge.  There  is  a  strong  need  to 
c orrelate flowers of angiosperms with their compounds of industrial importance as it is 
rare to find books which characterize and highlight important products of angiosperms 
from flowers, fruits and seeds alongwith their morphology. I am sure that with the 
n ecessary topics covered, the following book can be introduced as a textbook for all 
students of plant biology as it will capture their interest towards plants biology. Students 
all over the world find the study of plants more or less difficult or dry, which does not 
always aspire their general interest. One of the reason behind this is that the general 
consensus amongst the academic scientific community has negated the plant sciences 
its  real  position  due  to  other  emerging  trends  in  biological  sciences.  Consequently, 
s ubjects characterized in the realm of fundamental sciences are loosing their inert value 
as one of the integral components in comprehending biology.

Although this book is primarily designed for the students of plant sciences, it is also be 
helpful for researchers who are associated with the different industries, as it covers plants 
products of commercial value that are being used by food, agriculture, pharmaceutical, 
beverages, textile, dye, floriculture, perfume, and cosmetic industries.

This book covers topics like making of bioengineered bacterial perfumes from roses, 
development of transgenic herbivores resistant plants, modern trends in developing 
ornamental  medicinal  plants,  plant‐derived  nutraceuticals,  plant  pigments  as  dye‐
sensitized cells and also the role of plant hormones as antiaging molecules. Various 
distillation methods and techniques like supercritical CO2 methods for extraction of 
essential  oils,  gas  chromatographic  and  mass  spectrometric  techniques  are  also 
included. Life cycles of plants and evolutionary relationships in molecular phylogenet-
ics are included with future perspectives to develop student’s interests in plant biology. 

xvi

Preface

It also explains diversity in floral cells which relate their metabolic activities, how cells 
of sepals differ from petals, ovary and stamens, and how they manage carbohydrates to 
fulfill  their  energy  demands?  In  addition,  it  also  covers  the  formation  of  important 
products within floral cells, intercellular and intracellular communications and different 
steps which are involved in making them commercial; molecular aspects of pollination, 
pigmentation and reproduction events in angiosperms are also discussed.

xvii

Acknowledgements

I am thankful to my dear students who motivated me and suggested me to write a book 
on the following subject. I am extremely thankful to Sara Dar, designer, for drawing 
computer  illustrations  of  this  book.  I  am  also  thankful  to  Dr.  Samina  Mehnaz,  my 
c hairperson for motivating me throughout writing of this book and also to my c olleagues 
Dr. Aafia Aslam and Dr. Asma Maqbool. My sincere thanks are to my family members, 
my siblings and my dear friends.

I am also thankful to John Wiley & Sons for giving me this opportunity and for m aking 

my dream come true.

1

1

An Introduction to Flowering Plants: 
Monocots and Eudicots

There is no doubt about it that plants are main producers of ecosystem and important 
in every aspect of our daily lives. Many products which are used in food, nutraceutical, 
pharmaceutical, textile, cosmetics, perfumery, coffee, tea and beverage industries are in 
fact derived from plants. They are biosynthesized in different parts of plants and are 
known as natural products or secondary metabolites. Many of these compounds are 
defensive in nature which are produced during primary metabolic activities in plants. 
Many pigments in flowering plants are also secondary metabolites which are crucial for 
their pollination. Secondary metabolites include alkaloids, flavonoids, betalains, glyco­
sides, tannins, terpenoids and saponins. They will be introduced in the next chapter.

This book deals with flowering plants, that is, angiosperms as they make one of the 
abundant group of plants of economic importance. However, before discussing major 
products of angiosperms, their biosynthesis and applications, it is important to discuss 
what are angiosperms? How did they evolve? What is their body organization and what 
kind of cells they have? So in the next section, a brief introduction of angiosperms and 
their classification is discussed.

1.1  An Introduction to Major Group of Angiosperms: 
Monocots, Eudicots and Basal Angiosperms

All  plants  are  considered  to  be  a  group  of  related  organisms  which  are  capable  to 
 synthesize their own sugars during photosynthesis, possess the cell wall, and generally 
with the differentiation of their bodies in roots, stems, leaves, flowers or flower‐ like 
structures. But recent trends in molecular phylogenetics have shown that they are not 
as much closely related as thought before. In fact, plants can be best described as ‘a 
group of different organisms which evolved independently during course of evolution 
and share similar characteristics like ability to synthesize their own food within their 
chloroplasts, have chlorophyll a as a necessary photosynthetic pigment and possess the 
cell wall which largely comprises of cellulose’. Their body is differentiated in vegetative 
and  reproductive  organs  (spore  or  seed‐producing  structures)  and  are  therefore 
 classified in one kingdom plantae. Division within kingdom plantae is based either on 
the presence or absence of vascular tissues (xylem and phloem) or spore‐producing 
structures. Bryophytes like liverworts, hornworts and mosses are non‐vascular spore 
producing  plants  while  pteridophytes  are  vascular  plants  which  produce  spore,  for 

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products, First Edition. Aisha Saleem Khan. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.2

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

example, ferns, horsetails and clubmossses. Other two major groups are seed‐producing 
plants, that is, gymnosperms which produce seeds which are not enclosed within their 
ovaries, and angiosperms or flowering plants, in which seeds develop within carpels and 
are covered by ovary wall.

Angiosperms also known as flowering plants are the largest monophyletic group of 
seed  producing  plants  which  have  evolved  many  efficient  ways  of  survival  over  the 
period of time. They are unique from other group of plants due to the development of 
endosperm  (nutritive  tissue  around  embryo  within  seeds),  flowers  with  carpels  and 
 stamens having two pairs of pollen sacs and phloem for transportation of sugars. Their 
fossils are over 135 million years old. Angiosperms are considered to be close relatives 
of living gymnosperms but some recent evidence suggested that seed ferns represent 
sister group to angiosperms. They are relatively evolved group of plants as compared 
with gymnosperms as they possess several mechanisms which ensure successful asexual 
and sexual reproduction, one of the main reason which makes them one of the abun­
dant group of seed plants.

Although monocots (angiosperms with one cotyledons) and dicots (angiosperms with 
two cotyledons) are referred as two main groups of angiosperms but modern classifica­
tion which is based on molecular evidences have characterized angiosperms as core and 
basal  angiosperms  according  to  their  monophyletic  origin  (descendants  of  common 
ancestors) and facts provided by molecular data including studies from DNA sequences 
from  chloroplasts  gene  rbcL.  Therefore,  modern  system  of  plant  taxonomy,  that  is, 
Angiosperms Phylogeny Group (APG) system is a molecular‐based systematics which 
retains order and families of Linnean systems and includes groups which are monophy­
letic. APG I was published in 1998 which was followed by APG II in 2003 (Chase et al., 
2003) and APG III in 2009 (Bremer et al., 2009) and then APG IV in 2016. However, 
further development in molecular techniques, advancement in techniques related to 
metabolomics and proteomics is exploring the molecular phylogenetics which will form 
foundation of evidence‐based classification of flowering plants.

Evolutionary  evidences  suggest  that  basal  angiosperms  which  are  characterized  by 
absence  of  xylem  vessels  are  primitive,  however,  some  recent  phylogenetic  analysis 
reported that Amborella trichopoda is sister to all extant angiosperms and is at the base 
of angiosperms phylogenetic tree. They are composed of only few species which include 
many aquatic plants like water lilies (Figure 1.1), Amborella and star anise. Core angio­
sperms are represented by monocots and core eudicots. They include three major groups 
including monocots, eudicots and magnoliids, and the latter group was once considered 
to be dicots but now it is placed in a separate group. Important magnoliids include plants 
like avocado, black pepper, magnolia, nut‐meg, bay leaf, tuliptree or yellow poplar.

Eudicots also known as true dicots, composed of more than 75% of angiosperms and 
are  characterized  by  their  monophyletic  origin  and  presence  of  tricolpate  pollens 
( having  three  apertures).  This  group  of  angiosperms  represents  abundant  clade  of 
angiosperms. Figure 1.2 shows a cladogram of flowering plants based on information 
from APG I, II and III. A cladogram represents an evolutionary diagram which is used 
to explain evolutionary relationships within a group of related organisms which share 
common  ancestors.  Orders  of  basal  angiosperms  (Amborellales,  Nymphaeales  and 
Austrobaileyales) represent primitive groups whereas core eudicots are represented as 
advanced or modern group of flowering plants. Magnoliids like Laureales, Magnoliales, 
Canellales  and  Piperales  are  evolved  with  monocots.  Eudicots  represent  abundant 
group of flowering plants, among which core eudicots include two highly evolved and 

An Introduction to Flowering Plants: Monocots and Eudicots

3

Figure 1.1  (a‐b) Basal 
angiosperms, (a) Nymphaea 
alba from family 
Nymphaeaceae, (b) Magnolia 
sp. is another basal 
angiosperm which belongs to 
family Magnoliaceae.

(a)

(b)

diverse  clades  which  evolved  separately  are  asterids  (lamiids  and  campanulids)  and 
rosids (fabids and malvids) (based on APG III) which are classified on the basis of their 
tendency to produce fused or free petals (Figures 1.3 and 1.4). Evolutionary traits, apo­
morphies, which are important in classification are represented where the origin of a 
clade takes place. Eudicots represent group of many economically important plants like 
members  of  family  Apiaceae,  Asteraceae,  Brassicaceae,  Cucurbitaceae,  Fabaceae, 
Malvaceae, Rosaceae and Solanaceae.

Other main group of flowering plants, that is, monocots represent one of the highly 
evolved clade with monophyletic origin (Figure 1.5). They are characterized by presence 
of only one cotyledon, non‐woody stem, fibrous roots, long and slender leaves with par­
allel venation and scattered vascular bundles. They produce inconspicuous, mostly non‐
fragrant flowers with floral parts in multiple of three often which are arranged to form a 
spikelet  in  case  of  grasses.  Table  1.1  shows  comparison  of  monocots  and  eudicots. 
Commelinid clade represents most derived group of angiosperms which includes many 
plants from Arecales, Commelinales, Poales and Zingiberales. Monocots include palms, 
orchids and grasses which evolved about 60 millions years ago and are composed of 
almost 10,000 species. Fossils of palms and members from arum family are the oldest 
known monocots which are reported to found in rocks almost 100 millions years old. 
Monocots include many economically important plants which make our staple food like 
all cereals and grasses are monocots. They are important source of biofuel and bioenergy.

Angiosperms ((cid:31)owering plants)

Core eudicots (75% (cid:31)owering plants)

Rosids

Asterids

Basal

angiosperms 

Magnoliids

Monocots

 (25%)

M

C

A

 

A

N

m

y

u

str

C

h
l
o
r
a

o

b

m

b

o

p

a

h

rellale

e

aile
ale
s

s

y

n
t
h

L

a

a

c

ale
s

e

a

e

u
r
a
l
e

s

C

a

n

M

a

g

n

o

e
ll
a
l
e

s

li
a
l
e

s

d

o

n

s

P
i
p

e
r
a
l
e

s

o

n

o

c

e

r

a
t
o

o
t
y
l
e

p

h

R

a

n

T
r
o

c

h

o

G

S

a

u

n

c

y
l
l
a
l
e

s

P
r
ote

S

a

d

u

e

n

n

n

B

D

ill

e

x

if
r
a

u

x

biale

d
r
a
ale
l
e
s

s

ale
s

e
r
ale

s

s

n

g

a
l
e

s

a
l
e

s

u
l
a
l
e

s

V

it
a
l
e

s

M

a
l
v
i
d

s

F

a

b
i
d

s

C

a

r

y

S

a

o

p

L

a

m

h

n
t
a
l
a
l
e

y
l
l
a
l
e

s

s

i
i
d

s

Free
petals

(Brassica)

(Daisy)

C

a

m

p

a

n

u
l
i
d

s

Fused petals

(Grass
(cid:31)ower
)

Flower in multiple of 3
Pollen monocolpate
No vascular cambium
Scattered vascular bundles

Parallel venation 

Vascular bundles

Tricolpate pollen

vascular bundles

Vascular cambium present, vascular bundles not scattered

Reticulate venation 

Seed with one cotyledon

Sieve tubes with companion cells for conducting carbohydrates

Companion cell

Ovules with 2 integuments
Presence of endosperm in ovule

Male gametophyte with 3 nuclei

Stamen with 2 lacteral theca

Female gametophyte with 8 nuclei

Carpels

Flowers

Phloem (as seive tube member)

Figure 1.2  A cladogram of angiosperms based on information from the Angiosperms Phylogeny Group (APG III, 2009) (Bremer et 
al., 2009).

An Introduction to Flowering Plants: Monocots and Eudicots

5

(b)

(d)

(a)

(c)

(e)

Figure 1.3  (a‐e) Rosids (fabids and malvids) are characterized by the presence of free petals 
(a) Quisqualis indica, (b) Chamelaucium uncinatum, (c) Millettia peguensis is an economically important 
plant with insecticidal properties and antiviral activities, (d) Tropaleum majus is an ornamental 
member of family Tropaeolaceae, and (e) Rosa sp. which belongs to Rosaceae is one of the popular 
ornamental and medicinal shrub.

Before  describing  the  functional  products  of  angiosperms,  their  biosynthesis  and 
industrial uses, it is important to revise and update knowledge about angiosperms cell. 
So the following section will be dealing with the structure of an angiosperm cell along 
with some updates.

1.2  Plant Cell: Revisions and Few Updates

All plant cells are surrounded by the cell wall which not only protects them but also 
gives them definite shape. A lipoprotein bilayer, that is, plasma membrane is present 
next to the cell wall and regulates the movement of molecules in and out of plant cells. 

6

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 1.4  (a‐d) Asterids (lamiids and campanulids) are core eudicots which are differentiated from 
other eudicots due to the presence of fused petals (a) Petunia hybrid, (b) Daisy, (c) Lycopersicon 
esculentum, (d) Duranta erecta.

(a)

Figure 1.5  (a‐e) Monocots are composed of many economically important plants: (a) Wheat (Triticum 
aestivum) is a major cereal, bioenergy crop and a staple food worldwide. 

An Introduction to Flowering Plants: Monocots and Eudicots

7

(c)

(b)

(d)

(e)

Figure 1.5 (Cont’d)  (b) Arum lily (Zentedeschia aethiopica) showing spadix (in yellow) and spathe, 
(c) Epipremnum aureum is a popular house plant which removes many indoor pollutants, such as 
formaldehyde, xylene and benzene, (d) Bambusa sp., (e) Canna indica also known as canna lily is 
used in constructed wetland for the removal of organic pollutants and heavy metals.

Plasma membrane encloses many membrane‐bound structures, that is, organelles which 
are present within a fluid cytosol which is the site for main metabolic activities of cell. 
Main organelles which are part of almost every plant cell include nucleus,  mitochondria, 
plastids, vacuoles, endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus and ribosomes. However, in 
addition to this, plant cell may also contain microbodies, tannosomes, anthocyanoplasts 
and oil bodies depending upon their physiological role (Figure 1.6).

1.2.1  A Cellulosic Cell Wall is Crucial for all Plant Cells
Angiosperms show diversity in chemical composition of their cell wall which is the 
outermost covering of every plant cell whether it is a cell of root, leaf, stem, flower, fruit 
or seed. Each cell of these organs possess their own cell wall which gives them rigidity, 
support and a definite shape along with cytoskeleton which is composed of a network of 
microtubules and actin filaments. Cytoskeleton is involved in orientation of cellulose 

Table 1.1  A comparison of two major group of core angiosperms.

Characteristics

Monocots

Eudicots

Root

Stem

Fibrous, vascular bundles are 
collateral
Soft, herbaceous with scattered 
vascular bundles
Wheat (Triticum aestivum)

Taproot, xylem in centre

Soft in non‐woody herbs or woody but 
vascular bundles are compactly arranged
Coriander (Coriandrum sativum)

Leaf

Parallel venation

Reticulate venation

Flower

Ear of wheat

Umbel inflorescence of coriander

Fruit

Wheat hull or husk

Coriander fruit

Seed

Wheat grains (monocots)

Seeds showing two cotyledons (eudicots)

Pollination
Pollen grains

Mostly wind pollinated
Monocolpate

Pollination through insects and animals
Tricolpate

(a)

Peroxisome

Golgi body

Nuclear 
membrane
Ribosomes

Nucleolus

Smooth 

endoplasmic reticulum

Rough 

endoplasmic reticulum

Chromatin

Plasma

 membrane

Plasmodesmata

(b)

(c)

Oleosomes

Palisade cell of leaf

Seed cell 

(d)

(e)

Storage vacoule

Crystals

Tannosome

Cell wall

Chloroplast

Anthocyanoplasts

Mitochondrion

Lytic vacoules

Figure 1.6  (a‐e) Plant cells show differences depending upon their role: (a) A typical plant cell, (b) Cells of mesophyll of leaves contain 
abundant chloroplasts due to their role in photosynthesis, (c) Seed cells of many plants store lipid in form of oil bodies or oleosomes, 
(d) Cells of petals of many eudicots contain large vacuoles for storing water soluble pigments in order to attract their pollinators, (e) 
Vacuoles of sepals and petals (perianth) of most monocots are not as conspicuous as in eudicots, as many of them are pollinated by 
wind. (See insert for color representation of the figure.)

Eudicot petal cell

Monocot (cid:157)oral cell

10

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

microfibrils  and  organizes  the  plane  of  cell  division.  Cellulose  exists  in  the  form  of 
 crystals in the cell wall and forms microfibrils which are embedded within the cell wall. 
The cell wall is also crucial for cell growth and development. Structural and chemical 
differences in the cell wall may exist within a tissue or and even within a cell. The cell 
wall of roots epidermal cells may be different from the cell wall of epidermal cell of 
stem, leaf or flower depending upon its physiological role.

Primary cell wall is characteristic of all plants cells and is composed largely of cellu­
lose microfibrils which are embedded in a matrix of pectin and cross‐linking glycans. 
The matrix of the cell wall is laid down in cell plate followed by synthesis of cellulose 
microfibrils after the plate has reached the side of cells. However, secondary cell wall is 
characteristic of xylem tracheary elements and fibers and involves deposition of lignin, 
a phenolic compound.

Primary cell wall is composed of almost 35% of cellulose, 35% pectin and 25% hemi­
celluloses compounds. Cellulose is the main carbohydrate of cell wall which exists as 
unbranched  polymer  of  D‐glucose  molecules  connected  by  ß‐1,4  glycosidic  linkage. 
Major hemicelluloses (branched polymer) of the cell wall are xylans, glucomannans, 
xyloglucans and ß‐D‐glucans. The protein part of the cell wall includes cyclins and 
expansins which are important for growth and development of the cell wall.

Pectin compounds are important constituents of the cell wall which are present in 
middle lamella which is the outer cementing layer of the cell wall. Galactouronic acids 
connected by α‐1,4‐D are basic units of pectins. Incorporation of methyl groups to 
 carboxylic groups of these units make them esterified. Their linkage with Ca++ and 
Mg++ makes pectic compounds insoluble, thus, limiting cell wall application in food 
industry. Pectic compounds like galactouronic acids, rhamnogalactouronins (RGI and 
II)  prevent  the  cell  wall  from  dehydrating,  give  them  shape  and  cause  expansion. 
However, RGII in primary cell walls exists in form of dimer cross‐linked with borate. 
This dimer provides enough support to the cell wall for its growth.

Secondary cell wall is different from primary cell wall in having more cellulose and 
due to the presence of lignin. Both are attached with each other by means of covalent 
bonding. In addition, secondary cell wall is composed of hemicellulose and lignin which 
is deposited between plasma membrane and primary wall and prevents enlargement of 
the cell. Precursors of secondary wall synthesis like monolignols are secreted into the 
cell wall space and become randomly cross‐linked depending upon reactive oxygen spe­
cies, generated by laccases and peroxidases which makes the cell wall resistant against 
pathogens and also gives structural support to the cell wall. Some alcohols like coniferyl, 
caumaryl and sinaply groups are also part of secondary cell wall along with deposition 
of lignin.

Monocots are different from eudicots in many ways. Some differences also exist in the 
cell wall, that is, presence of different polymers type and their abundance in the cell 
wall, presence of SiO2 forming phytoliths, especially cell walls of commeliinids includ­
ing grasses contain relatively small amount of pectin and structural proteins. The cell 
walls of monocots are composed of upto 30% cellulose, 25% hemicelluloses, 30% pectin 
and up to 10% glycoproteins with an increased amount of ferulate in plants like wheat, 
maize,  rice  and  sugarcane  which  are  linked  with  glucurunoarabinoxylans  (GAX) 
(Molinari et al., 2013). Furthermore, a unique feature of the cell walls of grasses includes 
accumulation of β‐glucan in addition to GAX during their elongation.

An Introduction to Flowering Plants: Monocots and Eudicots

11

Presence of gelatin‐like properties of the cell wall which is due to O‐acetylated of the 
cell wall polymers, increases its applications in food industry. However, their presence 
also limits their use in biofuel technology and modern research is focusing on reduction 
of O‐acetylation of plants’ cell wall (Gille & Pauley, 2012). In the cell walls of dicots, only 
side chains of galactosyl‐residue in xyloglucans are O‐acetylated, however, in mono­
cots‐like grasses glucosly‐residues of xyloglucans are O‐acetylated.

Recent emerging trends in cell wall technology include determination, modification 
and  isolation  of  cell  wall  polymers  for  use  in  biomaterial,  pharmaceutical  and  food 
industries  through  techniques  like  NMR  and  mass  spectrometry.  Orientation  of 
 cellulose fiber in the cell wall can be determined through Raman micro spectroscopic 
methods in herbaceous plants (Sun et al., 2016). Recently, cotton fibre is considered to 
be a single‐cell model for cell wall and cellulose research.

The cell wall not only provides protection to the cell but also provides passages for the 
entry and exit of molecules in the form of pores, known as plasmodesmata which are 
extensions  of  smooth  endoplasmic  reticulum  and  regulate  transport  of  molecules 
within range of 900 daltons. A typical plant cell may have more than 10,000 plasmodes­
mata on all sides of the cell wall, the exception being the outer side of epidermal cells.

Plasmodesmata  provide  connections  among  cells  for  the  transport  of  molecules, 
 however, transport through plasmodesmata is not specific like cell membrane. There 
may be up to 1,000 to 10,000 or even more number of plasmodesmata present within a 
single  plant  cell.  Plasmodesmata  are  of  two  kinds,  primary  and  secondary.  Primary 
 plasmodesmata are formed during cell division. They are extensions of smooth endo­
plasmic reticulum in the form of tube, that is, desmotubules which are lined with plasma 
membrane  through  filamentous  proteins  (Figure  1.7).  Secondary  plasmodesmata  are 
branched  which  develop  during  cell  expansion.  Plasmodesmata  play  important  role 
 during floral development and also involved in intercellular signaling especially in ovules.

1.2.2  Plant Plasma Membrane Allows Molecules to Enter Only Through Their 
Respective Channels
Plasma membrane is the lipid and protein part of a plant cell next to the cell wall which 
regulates the transport of molecules. The lipid part of membrane makes a bilayer of 
phospholipids which provides a barrier for transport of molecules due to its hydropho­
bicity. Significance of bilayer is to give support to many protein channels which are 
embedded within plasma membrane, and also for better trapping of molecules inside 
the cytosol. Non‐lipid part of plasma membrane is composed of proteins which makes 
up to 75% of membrane and allows transport of molecules which cannot simply cross 
the membrane through diffusion. They include polar and large molecules like sugars or 
charged molecules like amino acids, nitrates, sodium, potassium, calcium, and so on. 
Concept of plasma membrane is just like a room, whereas proteins make the gates, 
where molecules will cross their respective gates or channels (Figure 1.8). Plasma mem­
brane also regulates the movement of water molecules through aquaporins channels. 
Water molecules pass in a single row through this pore.

Although  plasma  membrane  is  the  main  membrane  of  cell,  but  organelles  like 
 mitochondria, chloroplasts, nucleus, vacuoles also have their own lipids bilayers which 
perform  role  of  plasma  membrane.  Plant  membranes  also  are  composed  of  several 

12

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(a)

Secondary

plasmodesmata

Primary

plasmodesmata
Plasma membrane

Middle lamella

Cell wall

(c) 

Flimentous protein

Desmotubule
Central rod 

Cell wall

Plasma membrane

Flimentous protein
Central rod on desmotubules
Plasma membrane

(b)

Middle lamella

Smooth ER

(d)

Figure 1.7  (a‐d) (a) Plasmodesmata are extensions of smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER) and main 
connections within the cell wall which allow transfer of water and other molecules from one cell to 
other, (b) Detailed structure of plasmodesmata showing desmotubule which extends from one cell to 
next through smooth ER, (c) Cross section of a desmotubule, (d) A view of plasmodesmata view 
within plant cell.

An Introduction to Flowering Plants: Monocots and Eudicots

13

Plasma membrane

Protein channels on
plasma membrane

(top view)

Apoplast

Plasmodesmata

Cell wall

Figure 1.8  Plasma membrane of plant cells is enclosed in the cell wall which surrounds it from all 
sides (top view). Round circles on plasma membrane represent proteins which provide passage for 
regulation through plasma membrane. Gaps in the cell wall indicate plasmodesmata.

 sterols, for example, sitosterols, stigmasterol being the most abundant one. However, 
membrane sterol composition is dependent upon ecophysiological conditions involved 
in growth and development.

1.2.3  Mitochondria Convert Energy of Glucose in ATP and in Reducing Powers
Mitochondria are the site of cellular respiration and synthesize energy in the form of 
ATP for various metabolic needs of cells. Mitochondria multiply by division and are 
maternally inherited.

Mitochondria have two membranes, outer and inner which are made up of phospho­
lipid  bilayers.  However,  outer  membrane  of  mitochondria  comprises  mostly  lipids, 
whereas the inner membrane contains almost equal amount of lipids as well as proteins. 
The inner membrane is folded to increase surface area for metabolic processes like the 
electron transport chain and these invaginations are known as cristae. Outer  membrane 
of mitochondria have proteins, that is, porins through which they communicate with 
the cytosol of cell and allow transfer of molecule upto 10KD, such as glucose and many 
ions. However, inner membrane is more permeable to molecules like CO2, H2O having 
pores for transport of molecules like ATP, ADP and pyruvate. Many proteins which are 
required  for  metabolic  activities  of  mitochondria  are  carried  through  binding  with 
receptor in an energy‐dependent transport.

Space between two membranes is inter membrane space and fluid part of mitochon­
drion within cristae is known as mitochondrial matrix which is site of many processes 
that are crucial for providing energy to the cell. Products from glucose breakdown are 
transported to mitochondria for further breakdown in order to release energy.

Mitochondria  have  their  own  DNA  which  is  present  in  from  of  loops  similar  to 
 bacterial DNA. It is present in multiple copies in matrix along with ribosomes. However, 
mitochondrial genome encodes only a few proteins, most of them are encoded in the 

14

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

nucleus. Mitochondrial genome of plants is larger in plants as compared with humans, 
and its size varies among different plants as in Arabidopsis it is 20 times larger, whereas 
in melon it is 140 times higher than in humans.

Mitochondria synthesize energy in the form of ATP (adenosine triphosphate), there­
fore, protein channels in membranes allow for transfer of ADP (adenosine diphosphate), 
Pi and ATP (also known as ATP and ADP translocators). ATP formation is immediately 
followed  by  its  export  through  translocators  to  other  organelles  or  cytosol  of  cell 
 wherever energy is required within cell. ATP and ADP transport is important for cell as 
many processes, such as DNA replication, transcription, formation of larger molecules, 
translation, secondary metabolite formation and cell division are all dependent upon 
the availability of ATP. Therefore, mitochondria also accumulate near the site where 
energy demand is high in germinating pollen grain.

Mitochondria also play role in cell adaptation to abiotic stress and regulate metabo­
lism of proteins which regulate homeostasis and are involved in programmed cell death. 
They are also source of providing energy to rapidly growing pollen tube cells.

1.2.4  Plant Vacuoles Store Water, Pigments and Compounds 
of Defensive Nature
Vacuole of plant cells serve as lytic and storage compartment, which maintains turgor 
and  homeostasis  under  stress  conditions.  Storage  vacuoles  store  water,  pigments, 
 nutrients, crystals, starch, protein bodies for the plant cell and also involved in growth 
of cell and also help in signaling. Molecules like calcium, sodium, potassium, magne­
sium, chloride, nitrate and water are stored in vacuoles and help increase in height and 
surface area. Calcium and potassium are required for many processes within plant cells, 
therefore, vacuoles serve to store them and facilitate their transport within the cell. 
Vacuoles  have  many  enzymes  which  convert  toxic  products  into  non‐toxic  forms. 
Therefore, they also detoxify harmful products like xenobiotics, as revealed by experi­
mental techniques involving isolation of vacuoles and through replacement of vacuolar 
content and mutants of vacuoles.

Just like membranes of many other organelles, vacuolar membrane or tonoplast is also 
a lipid bilayer with protein transporters. Vacuoles of floral cells occupy more parts of cell 
as  they  store  pigments  for  pollination.  They  also  modulate  turgor  during  growth. 
Vacuoles  also  digest  old  organelles  due  to  hydrolytic  enzymes  which  are  no  longer 
required by cells and are therefore known as lytic vacuoles. Mitochondria are transferred 
to vacuoles by endocytosis.

Aquaporins were first discovered in the vacuolar membrane of seeds so named r‐TIP 
(tonoplast intrinsic proteins). Vacuoles of many pollens are elongated and tubular in 
shape. In the petals of many flowers, sometimes vacuoles of neighbouring cells store 
different shades of pigments within the same petal, which differentiates it from the rest 
of petal, thus making contrasting patterns known as a nectar guide which serve as a 
guide for pollinators.

Vacuolar pH is important factor in determining the color of flowers as an increase in 
pH may give the blue shade in morning glory (Yagamuchi et al., 2001). This increase in 
pH is due to an active transport of Na+/K+ from cytosol into the vacuole with the help of 
Na+/K+ pump. Vacuoles of epidermal cells store pigments like anthocyanin which pro­
tect them against UV radiations. Tonoplast of vacuoles storing anthocyanins pigments 
require transporters like ATP binding cassettes (ABC). Vacuoles, like protein‐storing 

An Introduction to Flowering Plants: Monocots and Eudicots

15

vacuoles, transfer nutrients to germinating seeds and main source of storing nutrients 
like Ca, Fe, Mg, P and Zn, thereby serving important role in nutrition. Vacuoles of all 
plants are composed of H + ‐ATPase, V‐PPase and TIP, such as aquaporins which may 
differ in their role depending upon their location.

Plants vacuoles are also the site for storage of industrially important products like 
alkaloids and anthocyanins which are widely used in textile and food industries and are 
reported to have anti‐cancerous properties. Anthocyanins are known to accumulate in 
pigmented  structures  within  vacuoles  known  as  anthocyanoplasts  in  plants  like  red 
cabbage, which may also contain enzymes for anthocyanins biosynthesis.
Channels like H+‐antiports, electrogenic uniport ion and ABC transporters facilitate 
transfer and accumulation of secondary metabolites in vacuoles. Two proton pumps on 
vacuolar membrane, that is, V‐ATPases and V‐PPases develop gradient across tono­
plast membrane. Vacuoles are crucial for storage of plants’ defensive compounds in 
order to prevent toxicity to the rest of the cell. They are also important for synthesis of 
saponarin which is inhibited without vacuoles (Marinova et al., 2007). New technolo­
gists  have  developed  to  express  economically  important  proteins  in  plants  which 
 accumulate in vacuoles and can further be used for cultivation of plants so large num­
ber of proteins can be produced at low costs.

1.2.5  Golgi Apparatus
It is involved in the modification of carbohydrates and proteins, and also transports 
them within the cell wherever they are needed in the form of vesicles. Golgi apparatus 
also modifies many proteins which are involved in pollination and fertilization pro­
cesses within different floral cells. Within a plant cell, it constitutes a system of stacks of 
thin vesicles that are held together either in a flat or in a curved array. Individual stacks 
of cisternae that are filled with fluid with modification are present almost all over the 
cytosol within plant cell.

Golgi complex coordinates with endoplasmic reticulum, and form vesicles, that fuse 
and form a wider thin vesicle cisternae. Vesicles formed by smooth ER form cisterna on 
cis face of Golgi apparatus, however, at the trans face, vesicles are released or carried to 
their destination. These vesicles may move to plasma membrane and discharge their 
contents. Golgi bodies are also involved in forming cell wall machinery through the 
same process.

1.2.6  Nucleus Encodes Genes Required for Enzymes Forming Products 
of Commercial Applications
Nucleus is an important organelle due to the presence of nucleic acids DNA (deoxyribo­
nucleic  acid)  and  RNA  (ribonucleic  acid).  DNA  is  main  heredity  material  which  is 
 present  on  genes  present  on  chromosomes  which  are  thread‐like  structures.  RNA 
 synthesizes proteins for plants growth and metabolism through a process which we call 
gene expression.

All cells of plants possess their own nuclei. However, sieve cells of phloem loss their 
nuclei upon maturity and they are assisted by companion cells. Nucleus communicates 
with other organelles and cytosol by means of pores within nuclear membrane. Nuclear 
envelope is similar to plasma membrane and comprise of phospholipids as dominating 
lipids. Proteins which are part of nuclear membrane, facilitate transport of molecules 
and allow mRNA to leave the nucleus through nuclear pore. They also provide passage 

16

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

for transport of molecules like ATP from mitochondria within the nucleus to energize 
energy‐dependent reactions like DNA and RNA synthesis. Nucleotides which are build­
ing blocks of DNA and made up of repeating units of sugar, phosphoric acid and nitrog­
enous bases that are synthesized within the cytosol of the cell. Four nitrogenous bases, 
adenine (A), guanine (G), cytosine (C) and thymine (T) exist in a pair attached by means 
of hydrogen bonds. Adenine and guanine form double hydrogen bonds within the cen­
tre of double helical structure. However, guanine and thymine are attached by means of 
three hydrogen bonds. In RNA, instead of thymine, uracil is present. Nucleus encodes 
genes for formation of enzymes which are involved in pathways which leads to the for­
mation of products of industrial importance.

1.2.7  Plastids are Sites of Sugar and Fragrance Formation
Plastids are double membrane organelles derived from proplastids, which are undif­
ferentiated plastids in meristematic cells of root and stem. Detailed sequence analysis of 
genes  have  revealed  that  all  plastids  are  evolved  from  a  single  ancestral  source  and 
thought  to  be  originated  by  the  engulfing  of  a  photosynthetic  organism  by  a  non‐ 
photosynthetic organism. Like mitochondria, they multiply by division and have mater­
nal inheritance. Plastids possess their own circular genome known as ctDNA (circular 
DNA) or ptDNA (plastid DNA) which is 120‐160kbp in size and makes up to 0.1% of the 
size of a nuclear genome. Many enzymes like DNA polymerase, helicase and primase 
have been purified from them. Angiosperms plastids possess both plastid‐encoded and 
nuclear‐encoded RNA polymerases (Sato et al., 2003). During cell differentiation, they 
either  differentiate  into  chloroplasts,  chromoplasts  or  leucoplasts.  Leucoplasts  are 
colorless organelles which synthesize lipids and store starch in roots, tubers or seeds.
Chloroplasts arise from differentiation of proplastids. They possess their own circu­
lar chromosome and enzymes for gene duplication, gene expression and protein syn­
thesis, however, majority of proteins are encoded in nucleus and later transported to 
chloroplasts. Chloroplasts are known to be evolved from cyanobacteria because their 
genome is similar to prokaryotic genome.

Chloroplasts are one of the most abundant plastids which are present in leaves of 
green plants. Their presence in any organ of plant is indicative of their role in formation 
of sugar through photosynthesis. They contain a lipid bilayer similar to other mem­
branes, however, glycolipids are more common in a chloroplast membrane. Chloroplast 
lipids like monogalactosyl diacylgylcerols (MGDG) are in fact one of the most abundant 
lipids on our planet. The membrane of chloroplast is composed of pores which facilitate 
exchange of molecules and allow them to communicate with the cytosol of cell. Porins 
in outer membrane of chloroplasts are non‐specific and allow transfer of molecule upto 
3 nm in size. However, the inner membrane is composed of specific protein transloca­
tors which allow transfer of molecules between the cytosol and stroma.

Pigments  which  are  involved  in  photosynthesis,  that  is,  antenna  pigments  which 
are embedded in the lipid membranes of thylakoids which are disc shaped structures. 
A  pile  of  thylakoids  make  grana  which  are  interconnected  through  lamellae  within 
chloroplasts.  All  angiosperms  possess  chlorophyll  a  as  necessary  pigments  which 
are  crucial  for  light  reactions,  however,  other  pigments,  that  is,  chlorophyll  ‘b’, 
 carotenes and luteins, are also present on thylakoid membranes and transfer energy of 

An Introduction to Flowering Plants: Monocots and Eudicots

17

sunlight  to  chlorophyll  a.  Fluid  of  chloroplast  is  known  as  stroma  which  contains 
starch grains, free ribosomes and enzymes for formation of carbohydrates during the 
Calvin cycle. Energy molecules like ATP and NADPH are synthesized through a series 
of  photochemical reactions on thylakoids which diffuse in the stroma to provide energy 
for sugar synthesis. ATP and ADP translocators are present in the inner membrane 
of the chloroplast envelope. Plastoglobuli are oil containing bodies which are found 
within plastids of senescing leaves.

Chromoplasts  are  usually  present  in  the  petals  of  flowers  giving  red,  organ  and 
 yellow shades. They have an undulated system of membranes without grana. They 
contain pigments either on the membrane or in the form of plastoglobuli as droplets. 
During fruit ripening, many chloroplasts are converted into chromoplasts due to the 
formation of lipid pigments which is evident through a change of color in many fruits 
like tomato, organ, mango, and so on. They are green when unripened, and turn into 
chromoplasts when mature. Plastids without pigments and lipids are leucoplasts, they 
are colorless plastids like amyloplasts. The white color of petals of many flowers is due 
to leucoplasts. Carotenoids are lipid‐soluble pigments having 40 carbon atoms which 
accumulate in chromoplasts and give them that orange, yellow and red color to attract 
pollinators. However, the presence of carotenes in the chloroplast protects antenna 
pigments against high intensities of light and helps in the absorption of energy for 
photosynthesis.

1.2.8  Tannosomes are Chloroplast‐Derived Organelles Which Contain 
Polymers of Tannins
Plants  synthesize  many  molecules  in  response  to  the  defense  against  pathogens 
and   herbivores.  Proanthocyanidins  are  type  of  flavonoids  which  are  also  known  as 
 condensed  tannins.  They  play  a  defensive  role  against  pathogens  and  UV  radiation. 
Although tannins inclusions are previously reported to be synthesized by endoplasmic 
reticulum, recent ultrastructure studies revealed that they are derived from chloroplasts 
(Brillouet et al., 2013). Figure 1.9 shows developmental stages in the differentiation of 
chloroplast into tannosomes (tannin‐containing organelles) which involves unstacking 
and inflation of thylakoids grana forming tannosomes, which are later encapsulated and 
transferred as shuttle from cytosol to vacuoles where they are stored in order to protect 
the rest of the cell from toxic effects of tannins.

1.2.9  Ribosomes
are the site for protein synthesis. They are membrane‐bounded structures and consist 
of one large and one smaller subunit. However, the number of ribosomes depends upon 
the function of cell where they are present. Plant cells contain fewer ribosomes than 
animal cells. However, the cells of seeds in legumes contain large numbers of ribosomes.

1.2.10  Endoplasmic Reticulum
(ER)  forms  part  of  the  endomembrane  system  and  communicates  with  the  nuclear 
envelope. It is a system of flattened membrane, sacks and tubules. ER without ribo­
somes is smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER), whereas ER with ribosomes is rough 

18

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Intrathylakoidal

Grana

lumen

Stromal
lamella

In(cid:31)ating
thylakoids

Pearling
thylakoid

Tannins

Stroma

Outer

membrane

Inner

membrane

Tannosome

Shuttle

Stroma

CYTOSOL

Shuttle

membrane

Tonoplast

Tonoplast

Stroma

Cytosol

Vacuole

Figure 1.9  Stages in formation of tannosomes from chloroplast. During formation of tannosomes, 
chloroplasts membranes are unstacked and inflated forming tannosomes which are encapsulated and 
transferred as a shuttle through cytosol to vacuoles where they are stored (Brillouet et al., 2013). 
Not to scale; (used with permission from Oxford University press).

endoplasmic reticulum (RER) which is involved in protein formation with the help of 
ribosomes; all the while, SER synthesizes lipids for cells. SER in plant cells also forms a 
system of transport of molecules in the form of plasmodesmata. It forms phospholipids 
and  proteins  for  the  plasma  membrane.  RER  forms  vesicles  which  transport  large 
 molecules in coordination with Golgi bodies.

1.2.11  Peroxisomes
are  single  membrane  bounded  organelles  responsible  for  oxidative  reactions  due  to 
catalases and for oxidation of fatty acids. They are involved in detoxification of many 
waste products. Glyoxysomes convert stored fats into sugars and important in germina­
tion of fat rich oily seeds. They contain enzymes for breakdown of fatty acids through 
beta‐oxidation.  Peroxisomes  are  thought  to  be  originated  either  through  de  novo 
 synthesis from invagination of endoplasmic reticulum membrane or through division 
of preexisting peroxisomes.

An Introduction to Flowering Plants: Monocots and Eudicots

19

1.2.12  Oleosomes
or  oil  bodies  are  spherical  organelles  which  contain  triacylgylcerols  surrounded  by 
 protein oleosins in their monolayer phospholipid membrane. They are found in seeds 
and pollens of many angiosperms. They act as storage sites of many triacylgylcerols. 
They are detected in tapetum of developing anthers of olive and Arabidopsis. Oleosins 
are low molecular weight proteins (<30 kDa) which give enough stability to oleosomes 
and  also  help  in  degradation  of  oils  during  germination.  However,  in  addition  to 
 oleosins,  oleosomes  may  also  be  composed  of  other  proteins,  that  is,  caleosins  and 
 steroleosin (Purkrtova et al., 2008). Caleosins bind to Ca2++ and increase stability of oil 
bodies while steroleosins are reported to bind with sterols. Oleosomes based emulsions 
are  commonly used in many food industries for dressings and as sauces and they have 
applications in cosmetic and food industries. In order to understand their future role in 
industries, artificial oil bodies are also being produced.

Intracellular and Extracellular Communications are 

1.3 
Crucial for Cells’ Metabolic Demands

Molecules like water, sucrose, signaling molecules, many defensive compounds, and 
phytohormones, and so on are transported in plants from one organ to another through 
vascular tissues. These molecules are required for many metabolic activities, that is, 
growth, development, reproduction, protection against herbivores, insects and micro­
bial pathogens. Although xylem and phloem serve as main tissues for transport of many 
such molecules in plants from one organ to next, however, cell‐to‐cell transport takes 
place through passages in the cell wall of plants, that is, plasmodesmata (Figure 1.10). 
They are channels in symplast which mediate trafficking of molecules from cell to cell. 
Such transport is vital because all cells are in need of water, nutrients and sucroses 
which can only enter in cells through PD. However, once molecules cross PD, they will 
have to cross next barrier, that is, cell membrane. Small RNA molecules (sRNA) are also 
known to move symplastically through PD. Primary PD develop during cytokinesis, 
whereas secondary PD develop de novo in existing cell walls during cell expansion.

For  intracellular  communication  plants  have  evolved  a  system  of  proteins,  porins 
which are localized on all membranes within cells. Molecules within a cell are trans­
ported  through  these  pores  from  one  organelles  to  another.  Water  molecules  cross 
plasma membrane through specific protein channels, that is, aquaporins which belong 
to intrinsic protein superfamily and exist in wide range of organisms including bacteria 
and eukaryotes. Almost 35 different aquaporins have been identified in Arabidopsis and 
maize. Aquaporins are found on plasma membrane as well as tonoplast as tonoplast 
intrinsic proteins (TIPs). Phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of aquaporins regu­
late activity of water transport in some cells.

Transport across plasma membrane membrane takes place through channels, gates 
and pumps. Gas molecules like CO2, O2 and N2, ethanol can simply diffuse against 
the  membrane.  However,  many  molecules  of  relatively  large  size  or  molecules  with 
 electrical charges, that is, cations or anions cannot simply enter through diffusion; they 
depend upon channels and gates for entry or enter the cell through membrane proteins, 
that  is,  transporters.  These  transporters  are  transmembrane  proteins  which  form  a 

20

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

H2O

H2O

H2O

H2O

H2O

Nutrients

Figure 1.10  (a‐d) Intercellular and intracellular communications in plants; (a & b) Organ to organ 
transport within plants takes place through vascular tissues, that is, xylem and phloem, 
(c) Plasmodesmata allow cell to cell communication within plants, (d) Intracellular communication 
(within cell) takes place through porins which are part of plasma membrane as well as other 
organelles.

channel  comprising  a  passage  or  pore  through  which  molecules  pass  through  and 
 provide hydrophilic environment for molecules to enter (Figure 1.11).

Carriers are membrane proteins with high transport substrate specificity, whereas 
channels have low substrate specificity. Channels are passive transporters and direction 
of  transfer  of  molecules  is  determined  by  solute  concentration  and  electrochemical 
potential. Channels which allow molecules to pass most of the time are ungated, how­
ever, gated channels open only in response to a chemical or electric signal. Channels for 
transport of K+ and Cl− channels are ungated, however, Ca++ and Na+ channels are 
gated. In addition to this, cell membrane possesses many anion channels which may be 
dependent  upon  voltage,  light  activated  channels  and  mechanical  stress  activated 
channels.

Voltage activated channels may be depolarized‐activated channels which are either 
slow‐activating  (S‐type)  or  rapid‐activating  (R‐type)  anion  channels  and  are  found 
mostly in plasma membranes of epidermal cells of root, guard cells and hypocotyls.  
R‐Type channels allow transport of chloride, nitrate, malate, sulfate, and citrate, how­
ever, S‐Type facilitate rapid transfer of chloride, citrate and phosphate. Mechanoactive 
channels are also present in stomatal cells and involved in osmoregulation. In addition 
to this, aluminum‐activated malate channels (ALMT) also exist in stomatal cells and in 
Arabidopsis, ALMTs are localized in membrane compartments and comprise a gene 

An Introduction to Flowering Plants: Monocots and Eudicots

21

Antiporters 

+
H 
AA 
+
H 

–

+
H 

Suc 
+
H 

+
H 

+
H 
AA 

+
H 

–

+
H 

+
H 

+
K 
Suc 
+
H 

pumps

+
H 
pumps

s
y
m
p
o
r
t
e
r
s

p
u
m
p
s

 

P
l
a
s
m
a
m
e
m
b
r
a
n
e

 

 

P
l
a
s
m
a
m
e
m
b
r
a
n
e

 

Plasma membrane

channels

Cd 

Anthocyanin
GSX pump

Transporters 

Anions

C
h
a
n
n
e
l
s
 

Anions
Cations

+
H 

pumps

Antiporters 

Glu 
Fru 

Suc 

Cd 

Mg 

+
H 

+
H 

+
H 

+
H 

Mg 

+
H 

Sucrose 

ef(cid:31)ux carrier

Figure 1.11  An overview of intracellular communication within a plant cell which is achieved through 
porins present on plasma membrane as well as on other organelles. Many channels, gates and pumps 
present within membranes of a plant cell allow transport of molecules from one organelles to other. 
Note some transporters within membranes allow only one molecule to pass through them, they are 
uniporters, whereas some allow two molecules to pass through them within same direction, they 
are symporters. However, some are antiporters which allow counter‐exchange of molecules. NO3/H+, 
PO4
Suc/H+, Ca2+/H+, Cd/H+, Na+/H+ and Mg+/H+ are antiporters in vacuoles. Pumps like H+, K+, Ca2+ and 
Cl− are present on plasma membrane. (See insert for color representation of the figure.)

3−/H+, Suc/H+ are symporters on plasma membrane, whereas Na+/H+ is an antiporter. Glu/H+,  

family of 14 members (Kovermann et al., 2007). Temperature responsive channels open 
and  close  in  response  to  low  and  high  temperature,  for  example,  capsaicin  opens 
the channel in response to heat while menthol opens the channel regulated by low tem­
perature. However, coupled transport also takes place which involves binding of two 
molecules to a carrier proteins. If transport is in same direction it is known as  cotransport, 
however, if it takes place in opposite direction, it is known as counter transport. In 
 addition,  plasma  membrane  comprises  channels  for  K+  transport,  high  affinity  K+ 
 transporters,  KUP  permeases,  Ca2+channels,  cyclic  nucleotide‐gated  channels,  GluR, 
annexins and mechanosensitive Ca2+channels.

22

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Active transport involves transfer of molecules in one direction at the expense of 
energy  and  is  therefore  dependent  upon  ATP  hydrolysis.  Many  pumps  like  Na+/K+ 
pumps, H+/K+‐ATPases, ABC transporters are energy dependent.
Three types of pumps are present mainly within plant cells, for example, ABC trans-
porters, vacuolar (V‐type) H+ pumps and P‐type pumps which depend upon ATP as a 
fuel for energizing them. ABC transporters are generally found in the cell membrane as 
well  as  other  endomembrane  including  vacuoles  and  allow  efflux  of  molecules  like 
organic acids, hormones, alkaloids, toxic products and xenobiotics (Verrier et al., 2008). 
P‐type pumps are cationic pumps which become phosphorylated during catalytic reac­
tion which are present in plasma membrane, vacuole and chloroplast membranes, ER 
and Golgi. Binding of molecule causes a conformational change in these pumps in order 
to facilitate transfer of substrate across the membrane.
Other pumps which are present in plasma membrane may include P‐type pumps, 
ATPases,  P3A‐type  H+‐ATPase,  P2B‐(Ca2+)  ATPase,  P1B‐Zn2+‐ATPase,  H+‐Pyroph­
osphorylase,  pin‐formed  (PIN)  transporter  family,  amino  acid/auxin  permease 
 transporters, amino acid‐ polyamine‐choline transporters, amino acid transporter fam­
ily,  amino  acid  permeases,  AAAP  transporters  for  auxin  transport,  lysine/histidine 
transporters,  proline  transporters,  GABA  transporters,  aromatic  and  neutral  amino 
acid transporters, peptide transporters, PTR/NRT1pepetide, sugar transport proteins, 
inositol, polyol, sucrose, purine, aquaporins, nitrate, ZIP, copper, SLC40, chelation‐based 
strategy of iron uptake in grasses like maize and rice, yellow stripe‐like transporters and 
phosphate transporters.

1.4  Future Perspectives

Angiosperms phylogenetic system (APG IV) is still characterizing and classifying plants 
in order to develop evidence‐based molecular systematics. Molecular cues are being 
explored  that  can  form  foundation  of  modern  classification  will  be  more  reliable. 
Therefore,  advancement  in  molecular  phylogenetics  can  provide  more  accurate 
 information for classification of plants.

Molecular phylogenetics can also serve as a useful tool to provide adequate knowl­
edge  about  evolutionary  relationships  of  angiosperms  which  will  not  only  help  in 
 characterizing many products but can help implement data provided by phylogenetics 
that can be used for metabolomics to increase further applications.

Tannosomes are relatively new structures reported in the plant cell. Many analytical 
and spectrometric techniques can further aid our knowledge of the plant cell and their 
metabolites (both primary and secondary) which will increase their use in industries. 
Tools in molecular biology, proteomics and metabolomics and further development of 
nano‐techniques can reveal different aspects of plant cells biology. Many cell membrane 
carrier proteins in flowers are still being explored.

Reduction of O‐acetylation units in the cell wall will be helpful in biofuel technology. 
Determination of orientation of cellulose fiber in the cell wall through Raman micro­
spectroscopic  methods  and  other  spectroscopic  methods  in  herbaceous  plants  can 
open directions for cell wall research in the future. In order to increase use of oleosomes 
in industries, artificial oil bodies are also being produced.

References

An Introduction to Flowering Plants: Monocots and Eudicots

23

Bremer, B., Bremer, K., Chase, M.W., Fay, M.F, Reveal, J.L, Soltis, D.E, Soltis, P.S., & 

Stevens, P.F. (2009). ‘THE ANGIOSPERM PHYLOGENY GROUP: An update of the 
Angiosperm Phylogeny Group classification for the orders and families of flowering 
plants: APG III’, Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society, 161, pp. 105–121. 
doi:10.1111/j.1095‐8339.2009.00996.x.

Brillouet, J.M., Romieu, C., Schoefs, B., Solymosi, K., Cheynier, V., Fulcrand, H., Verdeil, J., & 

Cone ́je ́ro, G. (2013). ‘The tannosome is an organelle forming condensed tannins in the 
chlorophyllous organs of Tracheophyta’, Annals of Botany, 112, pp. 1003–1014. 
doi:10.1093/aob/mct168.

Chase, M. (2003). ‘The Linnean Society of London’, Botanical Journal of the Linnean 

Gille, S. & Pauly, M. (2012). ‘O‐acteylation of plant cell wall polysaccharides’, Frontiers in 

Society, 141, pp. 399–436.

Plant Science, 3, pp. 1–7.

Kovermann, P., Meyer, S., Hortensteiner, S., Picc,o C., Scholz‐Starke, J., Ravea, S., Lee, Y., & 

Martinoia, E. (2007). ‘The Arabidopsis vacuolar malate channel is a member of the 
ALMT family’, Plant Journal, 52, pp. 1169–1180.

Marinova, K., Kleinschmidt, K., Weissenbck, G., & Klein, M. (2007). ‘Flavonoid 

biosynthesis in barley primary leaves requires the presence of the vacuole and controls 
the activity of vacuolar flavonoid transport’. Plant Physiology, 144. pp. 432–444.

Molinari, H.B., Pellney, T.K., Freeman, J., Shewry, P.R, & Mitchell, R.A. (2013). ‘Grass cell wall 

feruloylation: distribution of bound ferulate and candidate gene expression in 
Brachypodium distachyon’, Frontiers in Plant Science, 4, p. 50. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2013.00050.

Purkrtova, Z., Le Bon, C., Kralova, B., Ropers, M.H., Anton, M., & Chardot, T. (2008). 

‘Caleosin of Arabidopsis thaliana: Effect of calcium on functional and structural 
properties’, Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 56, pp. 11217–11224.

Sato, N., Teraswa, K., Miyajima, K., & Kabeya, Y. (2003). ‘Organization, developmental dynamics 

and evolution of plastids nucleotides’, International review of Cytology, 232, pp. 217–262.

Sun, L., Singh, S., Joo, M., Vega‐Sanchez, M., Ronald, P., Simmons, B.A., Adams, P., & Auer, 

M. (2016). ‘Non‐invasive imaging of cellulose microfibril orientation within plant cell walls 
by polarized Raman microspectroscopy’, Biotechnology & Bioengineering, 113, pp. 82–90.
Verrier, P., Bird, D., Burla, B., Dassa, E., Forestier, C., Geisler, M., Klein, M., Kolukisaoglu, 

U., Lee, Y., Martinoia, E., Murphy, A., Rea, P., Samuels, L., Schulz, B., Spalding, E., 
Yazaki, K., & Theodoulou, F.L. (2008). ‘Plant ABC proteins – a unified nomenclature and 
updated inventory’, Trends in Plant Science, 13, pp. 151–159.

Yamaguchi, T., Fakuda‐Tanaka, S., Inagaki, Y., Saito, N., Yonekura‐Sakakibara, K., Tanaka, 

Y., & Iida, S. (2001). ‘Genes encoding the Vacuolar Na+/H+ Exchanger and Flower 
Coloration’, Plant Cell Physiology, 42, pp. 451–461.

Further Reading

Bar‐Peled, M., Urbanowicz, B.R., & O’ Neill, M.A. (2012). ‘The synthesis and origin of 

pectic polysaccharide rhamnogalacturonan II‐insights from nucleotide sugar formation 
and diversity’, Frontier in Plant Science, 92, pp. 1–12.

24

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Blom, T.J.M., Sierra, M., van Vliet, T.B., Franke‐van Dijk, M.E.I., de Koning, P., van Iren, F., 

Verpoorte, R., & Libbenga, K.R. (1991). ‘Uptake and accumulation of ajmalicine into 
isolated vacuoles of cultured cells of Catharanthus roseus (L.) G. Don and its conversion 
into serpentine’, Planta, 183, pp. 170–177.

Carpita, N.C., Defernez, M., Findlay, K., Wells, B., Shoue, D.A., Catchpole, G., Wilson, 

R.H., & McCann, M.C. (2001). ‘Cell wall architecture of the elongating maize coleoptile’, 
Plant Physiology, 127, pp. 551–565.

Cosgrove, D.J. (2000). ‘Loosening of plant cell walls by expansins’, Nature, 407, pp. 

321–326.

De Oliviera, D.E., Franco, L.O., Simoens, C., Seirinck, J., Coppieters, J., Botterman, J., & 

Van Montagu, M. (1993). ‘Inflorescence‐specific genes from Arabidopsis thaliana 
encoding glycine‐rich proteins’, Plant Cell, 2, pp. 427–436.

Gilley, S., de Souza, A., Xiong, G., Benz, M., Cheng, K., Schultink, A., Reca, I.B., & Pauly, 

M. (2011). ‘O‐acetylation of Arabidopsis hemicellulose xyloglucan requires AXY4 or 
AXY4L, protein with a TBL, and DUF231 domain’, Plant Cell, 23, pp. 4041–4053.
Gaxiola, R.A., Fink, G.R., & Hirschi, K.D. (2002). ‘Genetic Manipulation of Vacuolar 

Proton Pumps and Transporters’, Plant Physiology,129, pp. 967–973.

Haigler, C.H., Betancur, L., Stiff, M.R., & Tuttle, J.R. (2012). ‘Cotton fiber: a powerful 

single‐cell model for cell wall and cellulose research’, Frontier in Plant Science, 3, p. 104.

Huang, L., Takahashi, R., Kobayashi, S., Kawase, T., & Nishinari, K. (2002). ‘Gelatin 

behavior of native and acetylated konjac glucomannan’, Biomacromolecules, 3, 
pp. 1296–1303.

Jia, Z., Cash, M., Darvill, A., & York, W. (2005). ‘NMR characterization of endogenously 

O‐acetylated oligosaccharides isolated from tomatoes (Lycopersicon esculentum) 
xyloglucan’, Carbohydrates Research, 340, pp. 1818–1825.

Lucas, W.J., Yoo, B.C., & Kragler, F. (2001). ‘RNA as a long‐distance information 

macromolecule in plants’, Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, 2, pp. 849–857.

Martinoia, E., Klein, M., Gessler, M., Sanchez‐Fernandez, R., & Rea, P.A. (2001). ‘Vacuolar 

transport of secondary metabolites and xenobiotics. In: Robinson, D., Rogers, J, (eds). 
Vacuolar Compartments. CRC Series. Sheffield Academic Press, Sheffield, UK, pp. 221–253.

Maurel, C., Reizer, J., Schroeder, J.I., & Chrispeels, M.J. (1993). ‘The vacuolar membrane 
protein y‐TIP creates water specific channels in Xenopus oocytes’, Journal of European 
Molecular Biology Organization, 12, pp. 2241–2247.

Otani, M., Shitan, N., Sakai, K., Martinoia, E., Sato, F., & Yazaki, K. (2005). 

‘Characterization of vacuolar transport of the endogenous alkaloid berberine in Coptis 
japonica’, Plant Physiology, 138, pp. 1939–1946.

Otegui, M.S., Capp, R., & Staehelin, L.A. (2002). ‘Developing seeds of Arabidopsis store 

different minerals in two types of vacuoles and in the endoplasmic reticulum’, Plant Cell, 
14, pp. 1311–1327.

Ross, J.H.E. & Murphy, D.H. (1996). ‘Characterization of anthers‐expressed genes encoding 

a major class of extracellular oleosin‐like proteins in pollen coat of Brassicaceae’, Plant 
Journal, 9, pp. 625–637.

Simpson, M.G. (2010). Plant Systematics, 2nd ed. Elsevier Academic Press.
Shimaoka, T., Ohnishi, M., Sazuka, T., Mitsuhashi, N., Hara‐Nishimura, I., Shimazaki, K., 

Maeshima, M., Yokota, A., Tomizawa, K., & Mimura, T. (2004). ‘Isolation of intact 
vacuoles and proteomic analysis of tonoplast from susprension‐cultured cells of 
Arabidopsis thaliana’, Plant Cell Physiology, 45, pp. 672–683.

An Introduction to Flowering Plants: Monocots and Eudicots

25

Tanaka, Y., Tsuda, S., & Kusumi, T. (1998). ‘Metabolic engineering to modify flower color’, 

Plant Cell Physiology, 39, pp. 1119–1126.

Vanholme, R., Demedts, B., Morreel, K., Ralph, J., & Boerjan, W. (2010). ‘Lignin 

Biosynthesis and Structure’, Plant Physiology, 153. pp. 895–905.

Van Norman, J.M., Breakfield, N.W., & Benfey, P.N. (2011). ‘Intercellular communication 

during plant development’, Plant Cell, 23, pp. 855–864.

Vitale, A., & Hinz, G. (2005). ‘Sorting of proteins to storage vacuoles: how many 

mechanisms?’ Trends in Plant Science, 10, pp. 316–323.

Vogel, J. (2008). ‘Unique aspects of the grass cell wall’, Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 

11, pp. 301–307.

Werner, D., Gerlitz, N., & Satdler, R. (2011). ‘A dual switch in phloem unloading during 

ovule development in Arabidopsis’, Protoplasma, 248, pp. 225–235.

Wu, X., Weigel, D., & Wigge, P.A. (2002). ‘Signaling in plants by intercellular RNA and 

protein movement’ Genes and Development, 16, pp. 151–158.

Yoshida, K., Kawachi, M., Mori, M., Maeshima, M., Kondo, M., Nishimura, M., & 

Kondo, T. (2005). ‘The Involvement of Tonoplast Proton Pumps and Na (K+)/H+ 
Exchangers in the Change of Petal Color During Flower Opening of Morning Glory, 
Ipomoea tricolor cv. Heavenly Blue’, Plant Cell Physiology, 46, pp. 407–415.

Zhen, R.G., Kim, E.J., & Rea, P.A. (1997). ‘The molecular and biochemical basis of 

pyrophosphate‐energized proton translocation at the vacuolar membrane’, Advances in 
Botanical Research, 25, pp. 297–337.

26

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Problems Chapter 1

1  Select the best answer from options given below.

i.   One of the following is an important distinguishing criteria in classification of 

asterids and rosids.
A  Presence of tepals
B  Arrangements of petals
C  Presence of endosperm
D  Presence of tricolpate pollens

ii.  Inflorescence of monocots like grasses is different from eudicots and known as

A  catkin
B  umbel
C  spikelet
D  cyathium

iii.  Parallel venation is a characteristic of:

A  Zea mays
B  Coriandrum sativum
C  Mentha piperita
D  Rosa indica

iv.  Cell wall is outermost boundary of plant cells which gives a definite shape to 
plant cell and is made up of carbohydrates, proteins and acids. However, one of 
the following carbohydrate is not constituent of cell walls.
A  Sucrose
B  Cellulose
C  Hemicellulose
D  Arabinose

v.   Plasma membranes are lipid bilayer which serves as a barrier to many molecules 
and allow them to enter only through their specific channels which are made 
up of ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐.
A  lipids
B  proteins
C  carbohydrates
D  nucleic acids

vi.  In  symplast  pathway  for  water  transport,  water  and  dissolved  solutes  will 
enter from one cell to another through plasmodesmatal connections which are 
 extensions of ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐.
A  smooth endoplasmic reticulum
B  mitochondrial cristae
C  thylakoids of chloroplast
D  vacuoles

An Introduction to Flowering Plants: Monocots and Eudicots

27

vii.  If you find a flower which is small, inconspicuous, and not scented, its most 

likely pollinator would be:
A  bees
B  birds
C  humans
D  wind

2 

If anaerobes represent the common ancestors of modern living plants, eudicots and 
monocots have common origin, but they are evolved at different rate, eudicots faster 
than monocots, and monocots represent the highly evolved plants. How will you 
construct a Tree of Life based on the information given above?

3  Evolution is never‐ending process, responsible for modern plant architecture. Based 

upon this fact, predict ONE change in plant architecture after a million years.

4  Herb is a general term which is used to describe soft and herbaceous plant which 
never becomes woody throughout its life cycle and may be a monocot or a eud­
icot.  However,  many  morphological  and  anatomical  differences  exist  among 
monocot and eudicot herbs. Taking grasses like rice as an example of monocot 
herb and mint as a eudicot herb, fill the information in the table below showing 
main  differences  in  the  roots,  stem,  leaves  and  flowers  of  these  economically 
important herbs.

Characteristic

Rice

Mint

Stem
Leaves
Flower
Fruit
Seed

5  Compare and contrast major anatomical traits of monocots and eudicots with the 
help of cladogram. How vascular tissues of monocots differ from eudicots? Explain 
with the help of diagram.

6  Suppose you find plant A which is non woody, have parallel venation and small 
inconspicuous flower. However plant B is woody, with reticulate venation and with 
large showy flower. How can you compare internal organization of plant A with 
plant  B  in  concluding  that  plant  A  is  possibly  a  monocot  while  plant  B  is  an 
eudicot?

28

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

  7  Classify the following plants as asterids and rosids.

(a)

(b)

(c)

  8  What evidences will you give to support that plant in picture (a) is a monocot and 

(b) is an eudicot?

(a)

(b)

  9  A team of Russian scientists reported (published in the New York Times February 
2012) that a narrow‐leafed campion, living plant, which died 32,000 years ago, 
have been generated from the fruit of a little arctic flower. The fruit was stored by 
an arctic ground squirrel in its burrow on the tundra of northeastern Siberia and 
lay permanently frozen until excavated by scientists a few years ago. If the ancient 
campions are the ancestors of the living plants, this family relationship should be 
evident in their DNA. Based upon above information, briefly explain the advan­
tages of molecular phylogeny and which techniques helped scientists for drawing 
their conclusions?

10  Do you think that grasses are considered to be one of the highly evolved clade of 

flowering plants? If yes, give reasons to support your answer.

11  Give two main differences in cell walls of monocots and eudicots.

An Introduction to Flowering Plants: Monocots and Eudicots

29

12  Lipids  and  proteins  make  important  part  of  plasma  membranes.  Hydrophobic 
nature  of  lipids  acts  a  barrier  for  the  transport  of  molecules  and  directs  them 
toward  their  protein  gates,  many  of  which  are  molecule  specific.  Lipid‐protein 
organization is almost the same for the membrane of organelles as well. Keeping 
this  mind,  explain  with  the  help  of  diagram  that  how  organelles  communicate 
within a cell for transport of molecules?

13  Vacuoles are organelles which perform multiple functions in plants. They are the 
site of storage of water molecules and minerals; they degrade harmful products 
and  also  digest  old  organelles.  They  also  accumulate  water‐soluble  pigments 
within cells of flowers especially in cells of petals which are attractive for many 
pollinators. It indicates that vacuoles which are present in floral cells are different 
from vacuoles in cells of vegetative organs. Using this information, make two sepa­
rate diagrams of plant cells (i) a stem cell (ii) a petal cell (preferably eudicot as they 
form conspicuous petals) to show how vacuoles of different plant organs may 
 differ in their functions.

14  Define oleosomes. Why many plants prefer to store triacylgylcerols within their 

seeds?

15  With the help of diagram, differentiate between (i) carriers (ii) channels (iii) pumps 
(iv)  antiports  (v)  symporters  and  (vi)  uniporters  (vii)  primary  and  secondary 
plasmodesmata

31

2

An Introduction to Angiosperm Natural Products

2.1 

Introduction

Growth and developments in plants is dependent upon their metabolic activities which 
result in formation of energy and important molecules which are essential for their 
growth. Flowering plants synthesize such molecules during metabolic pathways which 
also result in formation of many products which provide defense against their predators 
and are known as plant functional products, secondary metabolites or natural products. 
Although they do not play a direct role in growth and development, they are crucial for 
survival of plants in many ways. Angiosperms (both monocots and eudicots) produce a 
variety of such products of commercial importance in their different tissues, however, 
they are synthesized only in organs or tissues where they are required mostly for defen-
sive purposes. Leaves of many plants synthesize compounds which give them bitterness 
and make them difficult to digest for herbivores. Similarly, leaves and flowers of many 
plants may secrete essential oils _ which act as aromatic signals for their pollinators. 
They also release some aromatic molecules which act as repellents for many pathogens. 
Flowers  of  angiosperms  may  form  pigments  as  a  visual  signal  to  attract  insects  for 
 pollination. Roots of many plants form compounds which acts as toxins and inhibit 
growth of other plants. Prickles and thorns of angiosperms also provide defense against 
many herbivores.

Plant  cell  synthesizes  these  secondary  metabolites  within  different  organelles  or 
within  cytosol.  Figure  2.1  shows  that  some  secondary  metabolites  are  synthesized 
within the cytosol of cell, however, depending upon their nature if they are toxic, they 
are  stored  in  storage  vacuoles.  Aromatic  molecules  are  synthesized  within  plastids. 
Pigments are stored in vacuoles. However, energy required for the synthesis of these 
molecules is provided by mitochondria. Tannosomes synthesize tannins which are also 
important defensive compounds against herbivores. Although nucleus does not directly 
houses the pathway for the formation of these metabolites, gene encoding enzymes 
for  metabolic  pathways  involved  in  biosynthesis  of  these  commercial  products  are 
encoded by nuclei.

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products, First Edition. Aisha Saleem Khan. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.32

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Mitochondria

M i

. e .

i

 

,

 

  e n e r g y  
i a   p r o v i d e s
i o n  
t o c h o n d r
f o r m a t
 
t e s
t h e  
i
s e c o n d a r y   m e t a b o l
t e r p e n o i d s
 
f o r
  (cid:31) a v o n o i d s
 
  w h i c h   a r e   n o t
 
o f
,
  a l k a l o i d s
i d e s
a n d   g l y c o s
i v e  
s o   w i d e l y   u s e d  
o n l y   d e f e n s
 
s
i n   m a k i n g   p r o d u c t
  b u t
s
p l a n t
i e s
i n d u s
i n   m a n y  

f o r

  a l

r

 

t

Plastid

Nucleus

Anthocyanin, alkaloids and saponin are

stored in vacoule as they are

toxic for the cell 

Vacuole 

T

E

R

P

E

N

O

I

D

S

 

B

I

O

C

P

i
n

e

r

f

d

u

u

m

s
t
r

e
 

y
 

S

Y

N

T

s
t
r

e
t
i
c
 

y
 

i
n

o

s

m

d

u

P

h

a

r

H

E

S

I

S

m

i
n

a

d

c

u

e

s
t
r

u
t
i
c

y
 

a

l 

Nucleus encodes genes for the sysnthesis
 of enzymes
involved in products of 
 industrial importance

Oleosome store oil as energy reservoir

for plants. 

(Cooking oil is also extracted from oleosome) 

Synthesis of rubber & resins

takes place in cytosol

Oleosome

Figure 2.1  A plant cell from an industrial perspective showing different sites for the synthesis of 
products of industrial importance which include secondary metabolites like alkaloids, terpenoids 
and flavonoids.

2.2  Glucose Serves as a Precursor for Formation of Primary 
and Secondary Metabolites in Plants

Glucose is the universal source of energy for all living organisms whether bacteria, 
fungi, protists, plants and animals; they all share same energy requirements, and due 
to this reason, our food is contaminated with bacterial and fungal spores as they are 
also in need of glucose. The ability of all organisms to breakdown glucose indicates 
that glycolysis, a process during which glucose is catabolized, takes place in all living 
organisms.

Plants  are  the  ultimate  source  of  glucose  which  has  potential  to  convert  photons 
(energy packets) in ATP and NADPH through a series of photochemical reactions. ATP 
and NADPH diffuse in stroma to provide energy for the formation of carbohydrates. 
Once carbohydrates like glucose are synthesized, plants can either use them for the 
synthesis of the cell wall to form cellulose or they can store glucose in the form of starch 
or glucose which can be converted to sucrose for translocation through phloem to other 
organs. When sucrose enters the cell, it is acted upon by enzyme invertase which can 

An Introduction to Angiosperm Natural Products

33

again convert it in glucose. Glucose transporters on plasma membrane allow glucose 
molecule to enter the cytosol. Once in cytosol, glucose is catabolized initially in cytosol. 
Glucose  catabolism  provides  cell  with  important  intermediates  like  acetly‐CoA  and 
erythrose‐4‐phosphate which serve as a branching point for the formation of secondary 
metabolites including terpenoids, flavonoids, phenolic compounds, alkaloids and lignin 
which are synthesized through amino acids (Figure 2.2).

2.3  Classification of Natural Products of Angiosperms

Angiosperms,  over  periods  of  time,  have  evolved  many  mechanisms  which  have 
increased their chances of their survival and reproduction. These mechanisms involve 
the biosynthesis of plants’ secondary metabolites which are not only required for defen-
sive purposes but they are also important for completion of their life cycles, as they 
attract pollinators by either forming different pigments or through release of aromatic 
compounds. More than 100,000 of these low molecular weight compounds are reported 
from different plants so far, however, through advancement in analytics techniques, our 
knowledge about identification, characterization and isolation of secondary metabolites 
is increasing. Many of them are widely distributed among angiosperm families, however, 
relatively complex compounds are only restricted to certain genera. Some evidence sug-
gests that plants produce these natural products in response to many  selection pressures 
which may have arisen in order to protect them from herbivores, competition with other 
species, or for the sake of reproductive fitness. Some evidence suggests that genes for 
secondary metabolites are introduced in the genome of angiosperms through symbiotic 
mutualistic relationship with mycorrhizal fungi or cyanobacteria.

A brief introduction and major role of important metabolites are being discussed here. 

Their biosynthesis, and commercial applications, will be described in later chapters.

2.3.1  Alkaloids Provide Defense Against Herbivory Due to Their Bitter Taste 
in Plant Organs
Alkaloids  are  one  of  the  best‐known  low  molecular  weight  defensive  alkaline  com-
pounds  in  plants  which  are  characterized  due  to  the  presence  of  nitrogen  in  their 
 heterocyclic ring structures. More than 12,000 alkaloids are reported so far, however, 
their number is likely to increase in future. Alkaloid synthesis takes place within cytosol 
of leaf mesophyll, fruits, seeds, roots and bark and sieve tubes in plants. In Opium latex, 
they are produced in specialized vesicles.

A common property of alkaloids is their bitter taste, like atropine, pure caffeine, cathi-
none, nicotine, cocaine, morphine, quinine, scopolamine and solanine. Many of them are 
psychoactive and act as neurotransmitters. They are known to influence chromosome 
stability and inhibition of DNA duplication which can also be toxic for other plants.

Family Fabaceae and Solanaceae are well known sources of alkaloids. Some of them are 
poisonous  like  deadly  nightshade  (Atropa  belladona)  and  poison  hemlock  (Conium 
maculatum). Many researchers have used root hair culture of plants from solanaceae to 
produce commercially important tropanes, as root hairs are reported to be potential 
sites  of  tropane  synthesis.  Alkaloids  are  basically  classified  into  tropane  alkaloids 
( tyrosine derivatives) or monoterpenoids indole alkaloids MIA (tryptophan derivatives).

Sun

CO  + H O

Photons

ATP

NADPH

C

alvin 

cycle

Triose

Phosphate

Glucose

Structure
(cellulose)

Sucrose

Storage
(starch)
Glyceraldehyde

(Transportation) 

Ribulose

-5-

Phosphate

Ribose

-5-

Phosphate

Nucleic acids
Deoxyibose

DNA

Ribose

RNA

-3-

phosphate

Tyrosine

Tryptophon
P-amino
 benzene
P-hydroxy
 benzoate

Respiratory 

quinone

Sedoheptulose

-7-

phosphate

Aliphatic
Amino acid

Alkaloids

Folic
acid

Erythrose

-4-

phosphate

Shikimic

acid

Lignin

biosynthesis

Calvin
cycle

Glycerol

Storage lipids

Membrane lipids

2 (x Triose Phosphate)

Phospho glycerate

Glucose

Serine Glycine

Purine

Glucose-6-phosphate

Methionine

Phosphoenol pyruvate

Pyruvate

Acetyl-CoA

Alanine

Valine

 Leucine

Fatty acid
biosynthesis

-oxidation

Mevalonic acid 
pathway (MVA)

Malonic acid 

pathway

Tropane
alkaloids

Monoindole

alkaloids
(MIA)

Monoterpenoids

Diterpenoids

Triterpenoids Tetraterpenoids Polyterpenoids

Phenolic
compounds

Aspartate
Threonine
Isoleucine
Methionine

Tannins

Flavonoids like
anthocyanins

Acetyl-CoA

Citrate

Oxalo
acetate

Isocitrate

 - Keto
glutarate

CITRIC ACID CYCLE

Succinate

Porphyrin

Chlorophyll

CH

H

C

H

CH

H C

H
H C

H

A

D

N

N

Mg

B

N

N
C

C H

H

CH

CH

N

E

O
COOCH

Phytol tail

Figure 2.2  Many secondary metabolites are synthesized during the primary metabolism of plants. Glucose is the main molecule as 
breakdown of glucose provides cells with energy and many other molecules which are required not only for primary metabolic 
activities like proteins, carbohydrates and nucleic acids synthesis, but also for the formation of secondary metabolites. Acetyl‐CoA is 
an important intermediate for formation of many secondary metabolites.

An Introduction to Angiosperm Natural Products

35

Figure 2.3  Alkaloids give 
bitter taste to plant organs 
where they are synthesized. 
Catharanthus roseus 
(periwinkle) is a dicot herb 
with anti‐carcinogenic and 
anti‐diabetic potential due to 
alkaloids like catharanthin, 
vinblastine and vincristine.

More than 200 tropane alkaloids (TA) are reported in many plants and many genera 
from families Brassicaceae, Convolvulaceae, Erythroxylaceae, Solanaceae, Proteaceae 
and Rhizophoraceae produce TA, however, family Proteaceae is the oldest known fam-
ily  among  angiosperms  for  producing  TAs.  Formation  of  more  than  2500  MIA  is 
reported to synthesize in angiosperms. Among these, vinblastine and vincristine, along 
with  almost  150  MIAs  are  specifically  expressed  in  Catharanthus  roseus,  and  are 
 currently being used in cancer therapy (Figure 2.3). Ajmaline is produced by Rauvolfia 
serpentina,  and  the  anticancer  compound  camptothecin  is  mostly  produced  in 
Campotheca acuminata. Cathranthine is found to have anti‐fungal activity on leaf sur-
face. Many other MIA‐like secoiridoids are reported to be potent herbivores deter-
rents  in  families  like  Apocynaceae,  Gentianaceae  and  Rubiaceae.  Alkaloids,  like 
caffeine  and  nicotine,  have  natural  pesticidal  properties,  and  transgenic  plants  are 
being synthesized using tobacco in order to increase plant’s resistance against patho-
gen infections (Kim & Sano, 2008). Calotropis procera is known to possess many alka-
loids  like  calotropin,  calotaxein  and  uskerin  that  have  potential  to  stimulate 
cardiovascular system.

2.3.2  Flavonoids are Important Pollination Pigments and Increase Plants’ 
Demands in Floriculture
Flavonoids are important phenolic compounds which form plant pigments required for 
pollination  and  pollen  fertility,  important  in  auxin  transport,  defensive  compounds 
against  UV‐B  radiations,  prevent  photooxidative  damage,  pathogen  infection,  stress 
conditions and act as strong antioxidants and signals during nodulation. Many phenolic 
compounds act as allelochemicals against many herbivores and pathogens. They also 
help in nutrient retrieval during senescence.

More than 6000 flavonoids are identified in plants, and that number is expected to 
increase in the future (Ferrer et al., 2008). They give different colors to flowers, fruits 
and  seeds.  They  are  classified  in  six  major  groups:  chalcones,  flavones,  flavonols, 
 flavandiols,  anthocyanins,  proanthocyanidins  (condensed  tannins)  and  aurones 
(Figure 2.4). Legumes and some non‐legume plants synthesize a specialized flavonoid, 
that is, isoflavonoid (Wang, 2011). Grapes and peanuts synthesize stilbene, which is 
closely  related  to   chalcone.  Flavonols  are  important  flavonoids  in  stress  response. 
Isoflavones are insecticidal and anti‐fungal compounds.

COMPARISON OF PLANT PIGMENTS

FAT SOLUBLE 

(stored in chromoplast,
chloroplast & leucoplast)

CHLOROPHYLL 

CAROTENOIDS 

B

o

C

A

FLAVONOIDS

WATER SOLUBLE 

(stored in vacuoles mostly)

ANTHOCYANINS 

PROANTHOCYANIDINS 

(TANNINS) 

FLAVONES 

FLAVANOLS 

CHALCONES 

AURONES 

BETALAINS 

CAROTENES 

XANTHOPHYLLS 

ALKALOIDS 

CH

H

C

H

CH

A

N

N

D

Mg

H C
H
H C

H

CH

N

C H

H

CH

B

N

N
C

E

O
COOCH

Phytol tail

CH
CH

CH

C

CH

CH

CH

HC

H C

H C

HYDROLYZED

TANNINS

CONDENSED

TANNINS

CHLOROPHYLL (a) 

CAROTENE 

Figure 2.4  A comparison of fat‐soluble and water‐soluble pigments within plants and their accumulation within different organelles. 

An Introduction to Angiosperm Natural Products

37

Many  flavonoids  form  white  and  light  yellow  color  in  flowers  and  leaves.  Leaves 
 contain  flavones  and  xanthophylls  but  their  effect  is  masked  by  green  chlorophyll. 
They absorb light in UV region and provide protection against harmful radiations. Due 
to the presence of OH group, flavonoids are partially soluble in water, however, when 
they  form  a  bond  with  glucose  they  are  known  as  glycosides  which  increase  their 
 solubility and they are stored in vacuoles. They are responsible for colors of flowers of 
white daisies, narcissus, off‐white and yellow chrysanthemum cape sorrels. Quercetin 
is common in many fruits and vegetables.

Anthocyanins are sugar‐containing flavonoids stored in plant vacuoles having many 
OH groups. Their polar nature increases their solubility in water. They form blue, pink, 
purple and red shades in the organs where they are synthesized (Figure 2.5). However, 
depending  upon  their  location  in  plants  and  time  at  which  genes  for  anthocyanins 
 formation  are  expressed  determines  their  role  in  plants.  In  Hydrangea  and  Petunia 
flowers, shades of anthocyanins are determined by soil pH.

Flavanoids find numerous applications in many industries like food, pharmaceutical, 
cosmetic, nutraceutical industries as well as in floriculture. Flavonoids and polyphenols 
consumption prevents oxidative stress that may cause change in lipid peroxidation in 
arterial macrophages and in lipoproteins and therefore, beneficial for reducing cardio-
vascular and inflammatory diseases as well as others.

Flavonoids biosynthetic pathways are genetically engineered to produce novel flower 
colors in spp. of petunia, gerbera, rose, carnation, lisianthus and torenia either through 
transcriptional down‐regulation, or by inactivating enzymes of anthocyanin pathways, 
or  through  heterogenous  expression  of  key  enzymes.  Other  objectives  of  metabolic 
engineering of flavanoids pathways are to produce disease‐resistant crops. Genes for 
enzymes like stilbene synthase from grapes are inserted in wheat and barley to produce 
transgenic plants resistant to fungal attack. Anthocyanins and betalains can also be 
used to make dye‐sensitized solar cells due to their ability to convert solar energy in 
chemical energy (Calogero et al., 2012). Betalains are used as food and drink additives 
in meat, and in drinks.

2.3.3  Glycosides are Sugar‐Containing Natural Products
Glycosides are sugar‐containing secondary metabolites attached with a non‐sugar mol-
ecule and provide defense to organs where they are synthesized. Glycosides may be 
cardioactive which are effective on heart muscles, cyanogenic glycosides or cardenolides 
which release hydrogen cyanide (HCN) due to breakdown of cell walls, or steroid glyco-
sides or saponins which form a soapy mixture when mixed with water. Cardioactive 
glycosides  are  found  in  plants  like  purple  foxglove,  Nerium  oleander  and  milkweed 
plants and are defensive against animals (Figures 2.6 & 2.7).

Cyanogenic glycosides are abundant in leaves, stem bark and seeds of plants of fam-
ily Rosaceae. Plants like peach, almond, cherries, cassava and passion fruits contain 
cyanogenic glycosides. There are more than 2600 cyanogenic glycosides reported in 
110 families of different plants. Many of these are found in cereals like wheat, rye,  barley, 
maize, oats, sugar cane, millets and sorghum. Amygdalin from bitter almonds, prunasin 
from wild cherry bark, linamarin from linseed, manihotoxin from Manihot utilissima 
and samburigrin from Sambucus nigra are common cyanogenic glycosides. However, 
formation of cyanogenic glycosides is energetically expensive for plants as they need to 

38

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(a)

(b)

(d)

(c)

(e)

Figure 2.5  (a‐e) Flavonoids accumulation in flowers of eudicots serves to attract many pollinators which 
are not color‐blind: (a & b) Daisies and Petunia spp. accumulate different flavonoids in their petals, 
(c) Viola tricolor shows great variety of pigments due to hydroxyl, metoxyl, and glycosyl substituents and 
yellow color is due to violaxanthin, (d) Linaria maroccana, (e) Daisy flower showing different shades 
which are anthocyanins which give pink color (due to cyanidin‐3‐ glucoside) in ray florets and blue color 
(delphinidin‐3‐glucoside) in disc florets. (See insert for color representation of the figure.)

be produced in sufficient amount in order to provide protection and plants also have 
to compromise on their nitrogen reservoir which could otherwise be used for their 
 primary metabolism. Plants are also capable of recovering carbon nitrogen and energy 
investments which they made during the synthesis of cyanogenic glycosides; this is an 
example of metabolic plasticity and is being investigated to observe if turn‐over  products 
can provide novel advantageous new functions.

An Introduction to Angiosperm Natural Products

39

(b)

(a)

(c)

Figure 2.6  (a‐c) shows economically important eudicots which synthesize glycosides with 
cardioactive activities (a) Nerium oleander synthesizes cardioactive glycosides like neriin and an 
alkaloid, oleandrin, and along with many cardenolides. Oleandrin and its aglycone oleandrigenin are 
synthesized by plant possessing anticancerous properties, (b) Digitalis purpurea ’Primrose Carousel’ 
(foxglove plants) synthesizes digitoxin and digoxin which possess cardioactive properties, 
(c) Helianthus annuus synthesizes many allelochemicals in leaves and a flavonoid nevadensin is 
isolated from plants which have inhibitory effects against inflammation and cancer. Glycosides like 
helikauranosides are also extracted from aerial parts of plant with defensive role.

Saponins are gylcosidic triterpenoids, steroids and characteristics of mostly eud-
icots.  They  have  antimicrobial,  insectidical  and  allelopathic  activities.  Metabolic 
pathways of saponin biosynthesis in rice are being engineered through genome min-
ing to increase resistance in other cereals. LC‐MS/MS is proved to be beneficial in 
quantification of saponins (Munafo et al., 2011). Tannins provide defense to plants 
against  herbivores.  Red  oaks  synthesize  tannins  as  defensive  compounds  against 
gypsy moths.

2.3.4  Terpenoids Make Fragrances and are Used in Perfume 
and Cosmetic Products
Terpenoids represent one of the largest class of secondary metabolites. They are 
 composed  of  five  carbon  isoprene  units  (C5H8)  which  are  biosynthesized  in 
cytosol and plastids through different metabolic pathways. When terpenoids are 

40

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(a)

(b)

Figure 2.7  (a‐b) (a) Many Salix 
spp. synthesize salicin which is 
a part of defensive mechanism 
and possess antipyretic and 
analgesic properties, (b) 
Cannabinoids are synthesized 
from Cannabis sativus which 
have sedative effect.

synthesized  in  cytosol,  they  form  resins,  rubber,  carotenes,  phytohormones  and 
waxes  and  also  serve  as  precursor  of  chlorophyll  and  hormonal  biosynthesis. 
However,  terpenoid  biosynthesis  in  plastids  results  in  the  formation  of  aromatic 
monoterpenoids. More than 40,000 terpenoids are known to be synthesized within 
different tissues of economically important plants (Morrone et al., 2011). Rubber is 
one of the largest known terpenoids which contains almost 400 to 100,000 isoprene 
units. About 1800 species of plants are known to synthesize rubber among which 
Hevea brasiliensis is most common, which synthesizes rubber in the form of milky 
latex in laticiferous cells.

Aromatic  monoterpenoids  are  mostly  essential  oils  which  are  volatile  organic 
 compounds biosynthesized within plastids of parenchymatous cells of many flowers 
and leaves. They are secreted by glandular trichomes to attract pollinators, as many 
insects are color blind and are only attracted towards the plants due to their fragrance; 
many flowers stop emitting fragrance once pollination is done (Figure 2.8). Monocots, 
like wheat, oat and barley, release aromatic oils in response to pathogen attacks by fungi, 
and therefore, their concentration is high in infected tissues.

Another important role of many essential oils involves the removal of toxic waste 
products during translocation within the plant body, thus acting as natural cleansers. 

(a)

(c)

An Introduction to Angiosperm Natural Products

41

(b)

Figure 2.8  (a‐c) Angiosperms release aromatic signals which are generally monoterpenoids. They are 
synthesized in different parts of flowers and released through glandular structures from plants in air 
either to attract their pollinators or to keep microbial pathogens and herbivores away: (a) Citrus sp. is 
an important source of linalool used in many industrial products. Essential oil of C. sinensis is known to 
be comprised of D‐limonene (73.24%), α‐pinene (5.86%) and myrcene (4.45%) as shown by 
chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC‐MS). However, D‐limonene (92.57%) is major component 
of essential oil as revealed through solid‐phase micro extraction‐GC/MS. It possess significant 
activities against larvae of housefly and suggested to be eco‐friendly housefly control measure 
(Kumar et al., 2012), (b) Heliotropium arborescens is highly fragrant and smells like vanilla, (c) Sweet 
peas Lathyrus odoratus release aromatic fragrances and used in making of many perfumes.

However, some terpenoids are produced only in response to bacterial or fungal infec-
tion, and also act as allelochemicals. Presence of isoprene chains of glycerol ethers in the 
cell membrane of archaebacteria suggests their role in early forms of life.

Many  industries,  like  food,  pharmaceutical,  perfumery  and  cosmetics,  depend  on 
aromatic and antibacterial properties of aromatic terpenoids. They are used in bever-
ages, vitamins (A,D and E), rubber and gutta‐percha. They also have a role in horticul-
ture  and  floriculture  where  they  make  pigments  of  yellow‐orange  shades,  that  is, 
carotenoids. Terpenoid biosynthetic pathways are being metabolically engineered and 
enzymes involved in terpenoid biosynthesis are being cloned and then overexpressed in 
order to increase plant resistance to pathogens. An example of this is overexpression of 
geranic acid with genes cloned from Lippia dulcis in order to increase resistance of 
maize against fungal pathogens (Yang et al., 2011).

Monocots  like  other  angiosperms  have  evolved  many  mechanisms  which  help  to 
 survive against many pathogen attacks, and increase their chances of survival. Many 

42

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

members of the family Poaceae are known to synthesize alkaloids, flavonoids, glyco-
sides, phenolic compounds, tannins, steroids and triterpenoids. Phenolic compounds 
are abundant among other secondary metabolites in Poaceae (Ankanna et al., 2012). 
In  addition  to  this,  families  like  Aliaceae,  Agavaceae,  Arecaceae,  Commelinaceae, 
Liliaceae, Musaceae and Zingiberaceae also comprise many of these metabolites.

Benzoxazinoids are tryptophan‐based defensive compounds synthesized mostly in 
young leaves of cereals like wheat, maize, rice, barley and oat. Due to their toxic affects, 
plants stores them in vacuoles or in plastids in inactive glucoside form. They are also 
involved in providing protection against fungal infections. However, monocots do not 
produce  saponins  with  the  exception  of  oats  which  form  two  types  of  saponins: 
 avenacins and avenacosides. Volatile oils from lemon grasses and vanilla species make 
important contribution in food and pharmaceutical industries.

D
L
E
I
F

Y
R
O
T
A
R
O
B
A
L

Y
R
T
S
U
D
N

I

Genetic analysis
Phytochemical
analysis
Variety selection
Species choice

Culture initiation

Light

Growth regulators

Medium

Explant type selection
Explant age selection
Sterilization conditions
Adaptation to in vitro
conditions

Elucidation of metabolic pathways

Characterization of genes involved in product biosynthetic pathway

Understanding of they regulatory mechanisms and functions

Genetic enginerring of biosynthetic pathway by introducing genes encoding key enzymes

Knockout of genes encoding enzymes of competing or degradation pathways

Gene activation and Gene Silencing

Growth regulators
Medium optimization
Inoculum optimization

Light

Multy-metabolite analisis
pH

Growth dynamics

dO2
pH

Medium in

Phytochemical analysis

Clonal selection

Genetic stability

Precursurs

Elicitors

Product dynamics

Temperature

Cell permeabilization

Light

Agitation

Air out
Medium out

Air
O2
CO2N2

Optimization of oxigen mass transfer
Minimize shear stress
Batch, feed-batch or continios process
Two-phase cultivation systems

Temperature

Temperature

Laboratory scale

Temperature

Scale-up

 Sterility
Quality control
Automation of entire process
Product isolation and puri(cid:31)cation
Recycling of nutrients and solvents
Waste products management
Product packaging and storage
Product marketing
Research and development

Optimization of mass transfer
Optimization of mixing
Optimization of yields
Test of commercial substrstes
Temperature control
Medium sterilization
Product recovery
Economic feasibility

Commercial scale

Pilot plant

Figure 2.9  Steps for the development of the biotechnological system for anthocyanins production 
based on grape cell suspension culture from field to industry involving elucidation of metabolic 
pathways, characterization of genes, understanding of regulatory mechanisms, genetic engineering 
of pathway leading to gene activation or silencing, laboratory analysis and optimization at 
commercial scale (Ananga et al., 2013).

Mass spectrometer 

detector

Injector for
plant sample

Smaller

 molecules 

diffuses
earlier

Column

Mass Spectrum

Data System

Gas

molecules

Carrier gas

(He)

Gas chromarography oven

Figure 2.10  Gas chromatography in combination with mass spectrometry is a common technique used in food and perfume 
industries for isolation and identification of volatile molecules.

44

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

2.4  Techniques for Isolation of Secondary Metabolites 
With Future Perspectives

Many analytical techniques have added our knowledge about structure, characteriza-
tion and isolation of secondary metabolites, however, main challenges in the isolation 
of secondary metabolites is their complex nature and incomplete information about 
phytochemistry. Therefore, due to the differences in chemical nature of many metabo-
lites and their combination with other molecules, the same technique cannot be applied 
for each metabolite.

Recently, metabolomics, an emerging field which is based on characterization of small 
molecules within a complex mixture, can provide further information about quantita-
tive and qualitative isolation of secondary metabolites which will result in an increase in 
their future applications in pharmaceutical and food products. Although Plant Cell and 
Tissue Culture (PTCT) methods can be used to control variation in amount of specific 
metabolites in wild plants, for multiplication and extraction of secondary metabolites 
and many tissue cultured ornamental flowers are licensed. In vitro production of sec-
ondary products in plant suspension culture is in progress for many medicinal plants 
(Figure 2.9) but there is a need to develop more efficient methods which can result in 
the formation of product in desired quantity.

Water

Water

Re(cid:25)ux Condenser

Polytetra (cid:25)uoroethylene film

Oven

Round bottom (cid:25)ask
Ionic liquid solution

and plant powder

Ceramic pad

Figure 2.11  Schematic representation of the diagram of ionic liquids‐based microwave‐assisted 
simultaneous extraction and hydrolysis apparatus (Yao et al., 2012).

An Introduction to Angiosperm Natural Products

45

Gas‐chromatography (GS) and mass spectrometry (MS) are used as modern tools for 
separation and isolation of fragrant molecules. Through GS, it is possible to separate 
even small amount of volatile molecules. GS is composed of a temperature‐controlled 
oven with a suspended capillary tube that is coated with absorbent. Samples to be evalu-
ated are injected onto the column and a stream of gas carries mixture to the capillary 
tube. This stream separates the molecules on the basis of their size, polarities and their 
interaction with absorbent as smaller molecules travel faster and exit earlier, which are 
recorded  by  detector.  Gas  chromatograms  can  be  accompanied  with  sniffing‐port 
through which molecules emitted can also be sniffed. Each peak on a gas chromato-
gram indicates a different compound. However, mass spectrometer evaluates molecules 
on the basis of their mass and helpful in determining the structure of compounds as 
well (Figure 2.10).

Liquid Chromatography‐Mass Spectrometry is used for analysis of polar and semi‐
polar  compounds,  whereas  while  Nuclear  magnetic  resonance  (NMR)  spectroscopy 
and Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) have applications in structural 
characterization of small molecules. Benzoxinoids are identified using techniques like 
Ultra Performance LC‐MS. Solid‐phase microextension (SPME) is used to analyze vola-
tile  organic  compounds  (Beleggia  et  al.,  2009).  Super‐critical  extraction  techniques, 
microwave‐assisted  extraction  (Figure  2.11),  hydrodistillation,  steam  distillation 
(Figure 2.12) are used for extraction of volatile compounds. They are widely used in 

Peppermint 

Lemongrass 

Lavender 

Eucalyptus leaves

Condenser temperature

display 

Cooling water pipe

Condenser

Cooling water (cid:31)ow rate

valve

Water level
(cid:31)oat needle

Pressure
guage

Electrical steam

generator consumes 220V 

to generate

steam

Distillation Pot

Sieve

Steam inlet

Cooling barrel

outlet

Oil & water
separator

Cooling 
water inlet

Barrel to hold 

oil

Figure 2.12  The steam distillation process is used for extraction of essential oils from peppermint, 
lemongrass, lavender and eucalyptus.

46

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

nutraceutical and cosmetic industries. NIR‐FT Raman micro spectroscopic techniques 
are also used for identification and localization of secondary metabolites in medicinal 
plants.

With the advancement in many analytical techniques, natural products of plants are 
being  characterized  and  isolated,  and  their  use  is  increasing  in  many  industries. 
However, this knowledge is not sufficient and there is a need to develop protocol for 
extraction  and  multiplication  of  many  products  of  commercial  applications  from 
plants which might be achieved through progress in techniques like tissue culture 
techniques  molecular  techniques,  nanotechnology,  microscopic  and  spectroscopic 
techniques.

References

Ananga, A., Georgiev, V., Ochieng, J., Phills, B., & Tsolova, V. (2013). Production of 

Anthocyanins in Grape Cell Cultures: A Potential Source of Raw Material for 
Pharmaceutical, Food, and Cosmetic Industries. The Mediterranean Genetic Code 
Grapevine and Olive. Intech.

Ankanna, S., Suhrulatha, D., & Savithramma, N. (2012). ‘Chemotaxonomical Studies of   

Some Important Monocotyledons’ Botany Research International, 5, pp. 90–96.

Beleggia, R., Platani, C., Spano, G., Monteleone, M., & Cattivelli, L. (2009). ‘Metabolic 
profiling and analysis of volatile composition of durum wheat semolina and pasta’, 
Journal of Cereal Science, 49, pp. 301–309.

Ferrer, J., Austin, M., Stewart, C.J., & Noel, J. (2008). ‘Structure and function of enzymes 
involved in the biosynthesis of phenylpropanoids,’ Plant Physiology & Biochemistry, 46, 
pp. 356–370.

Calogero, G., Yum, J.H., Sinopoli, A., Marco, G.D., Gratzel, M., & M.K. Nazeeruddin 

(2012). ‘Anthocyanins and betalains as light‐harvesting pigments for dye‐sensitized solar 
cells’, Solar energy, 86, 1563–1575.

Kim, Y.S. & Sano, H. (2008). ‘Pathogen resistance in transgenic tobacco plants producing 

caffeine’, Phytochemistry’, 69, pp. 882–888.

Kumar, P., Mishra, S., Malik, A., & Satya, S. (2012). ‘Insecticidal evaluation of essential oils 

of Citrus sinensis L. (Myrtales: Myrtaceae) against housefly, Musca domestica L. 
(Diptera: Muscidae)’, Parasitology Research, 110, pp. 1929–1936.

Morrone, D., Hillwig, M.L., Mead, M.E., Lowry, L., Fulton, D.B., & Peters, R.J. (2011). 
‘Evident and latent plasticity across the rice diterpene synthase family with potential 
implications for the evolution of diterpenoid metabolism in the cereals’, Biochemical 
Journal, 435, pp. 589–595.

Munafo, J.P. & Gianfagna, T.J. (2011). ‘Quantitative analysis of steroidal glycosides in 

different organs of Easter Lily (Lilium longiflorum Thunb.) by LC‐MS/MS’. Journal of 
Agricultural & Food Chemistry, 59, pp. 995–1004.

Yang, T., Stoopen, G., Yalpani, N., Vervoort, J., de Vos, R., Voster, A., Verstappen, F.W.A., 
Bouwmeester, H.J. & Jongsma, M.A. (2011). ‘Metabolic engineering of geranic acid in 
maize to achieve fungal resistance is compromised by novel glycosylation patterns,’ 
Metabolic Engineering, 13, pp. 414–425.

Wang, X. (2011). ‘Structure, function, and engineering of enzymes in isoflavonoid 

biosynthesis’, Functional & Integrative Genomics, 11, pp. 13–22.

An Introduction to Angiosperm Natural Products

47

Yao, H., Du, X., Yang, L., Wang, W., Yang, F., Zhao, C., Meng, X., Zhang, L., & Zu, Y. (2012). 

‘Microwave‐Assisted Method for Simultaneous Extraction and Hydrolysis for 
Determination of Flavonol Glycosides in Ginkgo Foliage Using Brönsted Acidic Ionic‐
Liquid [HO3S(CH2)4mim]HSO4 Aqueous Solutions’, International Journal of Molecular 
Sciences, 13: pp. 8775–8788;. doi:10.3390/ijms13078775.

Further Reading

Chong, J., Poutaraud, A., & Hugueney, P. (2009). ‘Metabolism and roles of stilbenes in 

plants’, Plant Science, 117, pp. 143–155.

Du, H., Huang, Y., & Tang, Y. (2010). ‘Genetic and metabolic engineering of Isoflavonoid 

biosynthesis’, Applied Microbiology & Biotechnology, 86, pp. 1293–1312.

Feild, T.S., Lee, D.W. & Holbrook, N.M. (2001). ‘Why leaves turn red in autumn. The role 

of anthocyanins in senescing leaves of red‐osier dogwood’, Plant Physiology, 127, 
pp. 566–574.

Inagaki, Y.S., Etherington, G., Geisler, K., Field, B., Dokarry, M., Ikeda, K., Mutsukado, Y., 
Dicks, J., & Osbourn, A. (2011). ‘Investigation of the potential for triterpene synthesis in 
rice through genome mining and metabolic engineering’, New Phytologist, 191, 
pp. 432–448.

Jirschitzak, J., Dolke, F., & D’Auria, J.C. (2013). ‘Increasing the Pace of New Discoveries 

in Tropane Alkaloid Biosynthesis’. Advances in Botanical Research, 68, pp. 2–380.

Noda, Y., Kaneyuki, T., Mori, A., & Packer, L. (2002). ‘Antioxidant activities of pomegranate 

fruit extract and its anthocyanidins: delphinidin, cyanidin, and pelargonidin’. Journal of 
Agricultural & Food Chemistry, 50, pp. 166–171.

Miguel, G., Dandlen, S., Antunes, D., Neves, A., & Martins, D. (2004). ‘The effect of two 

methods of pomegranate (Punica granatum L) juice extraction on quality during storage 
at 4°C’. Journal of Biomedicine & Biotechnology, 5, pp. 332–337.

Piesik, D., Pan’ka, D., Delaney, K.J., Skoczek, A., Lamparski, R., & Weaver, D.K. (2011). 

‘Cereal crop volatile organic compound induction after mechanical injury, beetle 
herbivory (Oulema spp.), or fungal infection (Fusarium spp.)’, Journal of Plant 
Physiology, 168, pp. 878–886.

Vitale, A. & Hinz, G. (2005). ‘Storing to proteins to storage vacuoles: how many 

mechanisms?’, Trends in Plant Science’, 10, pp. 316–323.

Van der Heijden, R., Jabos, D., Snoeijer, W., Hallarad, D., & Verpoorte, R. (2004). 

‘The Catharanthus alkaloids’, Pharmacognosy and Biotechnology’, Current Medicinal 
Chemistry, 11, pp. 607–528.

Winkel‐Shirley, B. (2006). ‘The biosynthesis of flavonoids,” in The Science of Flavonoids, 

Grotewold, E. (ed). (New York, NY: Springer), pp. 71–95.

48

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Problems Chapter 2

1  Select the best answer from options given below

  i.  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐ is an end product of glycolysis which enters the mitochondrial 

matrix to initiate citric acid cycle.
A  Fructose
B  Glyceraldehyde‐3‐Phosphate
C  Pyruvate
D  NADPH

 ii.  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐ is an important molecule which produced during glucose catabolism 

and can initiate shikimate pathway forming lignin in xylem vessels and fibers.
A  Erythrose‐4‐Phosphate
B  Glucose‐6‐Phosphate
C  Triose phosphate
D  Phosphoenolpyruvate

 iii.  One of the following is a closely related precursor for the formation of Ribose‐5‐

Phosphate is ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐.
A  glucose‐6‐Phosphate
B  pyruvate
C  acetly‐CoA
D  erythrose‐4‐Phosphate

 iv.  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐ is generally used in the prevention of heart attacks, strokes, fever 

and pain.
A  Quinine
B  Morphine
C  Aspirin
D  VICKS

 

v.   Commercially important resins produced by many plants in their resin canals 

are chemically:
A  alkaloids
B  terpenoids
C  glycosides
D  phenols

 vi.  Plants  produce  different  pigments  which  are  generally  stored  in  vacuoles, 

 however, ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐ pigment is not stored in plant vacuoles.
A  anthocyanin
B  chromoplast
C  carotenoids
D  chlorophyll

An Introduction to Angiosperm Natural Products

49

 

 

 

vii.   Many polyterpenoids which are produced in plants are responsible for giving 

‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐ to plants.
A  pigments
B  odor
C  resin
D  caffeine

viii.   One of the secondary metabolites which is natural constituent of wood and 

produced through shikimic acid pathway is ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐.
A  terpenoids
B  phenols
C  saponins
D  alkaloids

ix.   Amygdalin, a cyanogenic glycoside is used in many drugs and exists naturally 

in the seeds, pits and bark of many plants of family ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐.
A  Fabaceae
B  Rosaceae
C  Solanaceae
D  Rubiaceae

2  With the help of the flow sheet, justify that glucose is a precursor for formation of:

i.  DNA
ii.  lignin
iii.  chlorophyll
iv.  flavonoids
v.  alkaloids

3  With the help of flow sheet, justify that:

isocitrate is a precursor of lipids

i. 
ii.  acetly‐CoA is a precursor of lignin

4 

Identify secondary metabolites in column A with respect to their site of synthesis in 
cells and write your answer in column B.

Column A

Column B

Alkaloids
Tannins
Flavonoids
Essential oils
Gibberellins
Saponins

Vacuole
Mitochondria
Cytosol
Plastids
Golgi complex
Cell wall

50

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

5 

In column A, role of secondary metabolites are given. Write down your answer in 
column B with respect to their role.

Column A

Column B

Defense through colors
Defense through aromatic signals
Structural defense
Defense through bitter taste
Defense through secretion of exudates

6  Match the plants in column A to their respective pigments in column B.

Column A

Green color of spinach leaves
Red color of apples
Yellow color of bananas or mangoes
Red color of tomatoes
Taproot of beetroot

Column B

Betalains
Carotene
Chlorophyll
Anthocyanins
Lycopene

7 

Identify the pigments and also write the possible site of their biosynthesis in differ-
ent parts of flower shown in the pictures below.

(a)

(b)

8  Write down the name of families of the following economically important genera 

i.  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
 
ii.  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
 
  iii.  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
  iv.  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
  v.  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
  vi.  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
 vii.  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
 viii.  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
  ix.  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

i.  Aloe vera
ii.  Cynadon dactylon

given below.
 
 
  iii.  Solanum tuberosum
  iv.  Rosa indica
  v.  Papaver somniferum
  vi.  Gossypium hirsutum
 vii.  Melia azardirachta
 viii.  Pisum sativum
  ix.  Coffea arabica

An Introduction to Angiosperm Natural Products

51

  9  Briefly explain morphological, anatomical and phytochemical criteria which are 

crucial in plant systematics.

10  How plants can be used for treatment of cancer? Give any two examples of plants 
with anticancer potential with the names of possible compounds which have anti‐
cancer activities.

11  What  is  metabolomics?  How  advancement  in  tissue  culture  techniques  can 

enhance use of secondary metabolites for pharmaceutical uses in future?

53

3

Plant Tissues Organization of Angiosperms

3.1 

Introduction to Plant Tissues

This  chapter  explains  different  tissue  types  in  angiosperms,  their  structure  and 
 organization,  how  they  perform  related  physiological  activities  and  how  secondary 
metabolites  formation  and  translocation  takes  place  through  vascular  tissues. 
As explained before, plants synthesize many products for their protection and then 
translocate  it  through  vascular  tissues  to  organs  where  there  is  a  need  of  defensive 
molecules.

Plant cells which share similar morphological, anatomical and physiological charac-
teristics and work in a close coordination to perform a related metabolic activity are 
known as plant tissues. Plants have three main kinds of tissues i) Ground tissue, that is, 
parenchyma is the main ground tissue of the plant which is composed of simple and 
thin‐walled cells. Collenchyma is a modified forms of parenchyma tissue which gives 
protection to the peripheral plant organs, ii) Mechanical tissue or sclerenchyma which 
exists either in the form of fibers or sclereids, iii) Vascular tissue is responsible for the 
transportation of water and food. It is composed of xylem and phloem. Xylem trans-
ports water to the cells of plant body, whereas phloem transports sugars from leaves to 
other parts of plant. In addition, phytohormones and many secondary metabolites like 
nicotine and menthol are also translocated through vascular tissues.

Before the discussion of plant tissues, first it is important to understand the diversity 

of a plant cell.

3.2  Diversity of Plant Cell

There is a great diversity in the shape of plant cells which is dependent upon their 
 location and function within the plant body. They may appear round, elongated, rectan-
gular,  polyhedral,  kidney‐shaped,  globular,  star‐shaped  or  drum‐shaped.  Figure  3.1 
compares diversity of plant cells, both in their cross and longitudinal sections. This 
diversity in cell shape is a genetically controlled feature of plants.

Plant have outgrowths on the epidermal cells of some leaves and flowers known as 
trichomes.  They  may  be  unicellular  or  multicellular,  branched  or  unbranched  with 
round,  globular,  star‐shaped,  dome‐like  or  spike‐like  in  shape.  Glandular  trichomes 
release  many  secretions  including  volatile  atoms  in  the  air  and  attract  insects  for 

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products, First Edition. Aisha Saleem Khan. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Cells in transverse section

 Cells in longitudinal section

 (T.S)

(L.S)

Tracheids

(primary wall in blue, ligni(cid:31)cation in red)

Epidermal parenchyma cell

Cortical parenchyma cell

Palisade mesophyll cell

Stomata

Collenchyma

Trichomes

Elaiophore

Glandular Unbranched Branched

Figure 3.1  A comparison of different types of cells in plants.

P
a
r
e
n
c
h
y
m
a
 
(

G
r
o
u
n
d
 
t
i
s
s
u
e
s
)

V
a
s
c
u
l
a
r
 
t
i
s
s
u
e
s
 
(

C
o
n
d
u
c
t
i
n
g
 
t
i
s
s
u
e
)

(
 

M

a
i
n
 
m
e
c
h
a
n
i
c
a
l
 
t
i
s
s
u
e
)

S
c
l
e
r
e
n
c
h
y
m
a
 

T.S of
xylem

Annular

Helical

Scalariform

Pitted

 Vessels 

(with simple perforation)

Simple 

perforation plate 

Scalariform

Reticulate 

Pitted 

Pitted 

Sieve

Lateral sieve areas

T.S of
phloem

Companion cell

Sieve tube in L.S

Nucleus

Sclerenchyma 

( T.S )

Osteosclereid

Fiber

Astrosclereid

Plant Tissues Organization of Angiosperms

55

pollination. Some of them release oil, that is, elaiophores. They are found as floral glands 
in many orchids and serve to attract pollinators. Trichomes are also important in main-
taining a microclimate at leaf surface. Elaiophores associated with trichomes secrete oil 
through specialized hairs.

Guard cells of stomata are kidney‐shaped. This shape allows them to open and close 
easily. Stomata open during the day time to absorb carbon dioxide from the air while 
releasing oxygen and partially closed at night. However, in some plants stomata are 
open during the night time to fix CO2 and store it in form of malate in vacuoles causing 
nocturnal acidification.

Cells of the cortical region, which is next to the epidermis in dicot roots and stems, 
and pith (central part of the stem or root) are round or polyhedral in shape. Their round 
shape  is  significant  as  it  allows  the  formation  of  intercellular  spaces  through  which 
gases can diffuse easily. Fibers and sclereids give mechanical strength to plant tissues 
where  they  are  located.  They  exhibit  a  lot  of  diversity  in  shape  and  may  be  round, 
 elongated, star‐shaped, bone‐shaped or thread‐like.

Tracheids and vessels are water‐conducting cells of xylem tissue. They appear round 
in  the  cross‐section  but  in  longitudinal  view,  they  are  elongated  with  tapering  ends 
while vessels appear drum‐shaped. Both tracheids and vessels have modified cell walls 
due to lignin which is deposited on the inner walls of xylem cells either in the form of 
spirals,  helices,  annular,  reticulate  (net‐like)  or  in  scalariform  manner  (Figure  3.1). 
Phloem cells are polyhedral in transverse sections and elongated in longitudinal view.

3.3  Parenchyma is the Main Ground Tissue of Plants

Parenchyma  consists  of  actively  dividing  living  cells  (meristems)  with  thin  walls. 
However, after maturity these cells do not divide further. A parenchyma cell generally 
represents a typical plant cell which has all the organelles that are required for growth 
and metabolism. Many parenchymatous cells are connected to each other by means of 
cytoplasmic connections plasmodesmata (as mentioned in Chapter 1). Epidermal cells, 
food‐conducting cells of phloem, palisade and spongy mesophyll of leaves, mesophyll 
cells of floral organs, guard cells of stomata, trichomes, and endosperms of seeds all are 
different forms of parenchyma. Parenchyma may be synthetic, structural, boundary, 
transport and storage parenchyma depending upon its location and role within plants. 
Structural parenchyma forms the epidermis, cortex, pericyle, and pith of many plant 
organs. Figure 3.2 shows the distribution of parenchyma cells within the eudicot stem.

3.4  Collenchyma: Introduction and Distribution

Collenchyma  is  a  parenchyma  with  axially  elongated  cells  and  uneven  thickenings  of 
 pectin and cellulose on their cell walls. They are living parenchymatous cells with high 
tensile strength that are compactly arranged to give support to the organ where they are 
located. Cell wall of collenchyma contains large amount of water which gives it a gleaming 
appearance.

Extra deposition of pectic compounds is significant for plant organs as it provides 
support to the peripheral organs of stems and leaves. Pectin deposition may take place 

Parenchyma (Ground tissue)

Epidermal

parenchyma cell

Cortical

parenchyma cell

Cambial cell

Epidermal

Cortical

cell

cell

Cambial cell

Pith
cell

Xylem vessel

Vascular tissue (Conducting tissue)

Xylem Tracheids

Scalariform

Tracheids

Sieve element

Xylem

Phloem

Xylem vessel

Pith

parenchyma cell

Transverse section

n
o
i
t
c
e
s
 
l
a
i
d
a
R
&

 

 
l
a
n
i
d
u
t
i
g
n
o
L
Epidermis

Pith

y l e m

X
Cambium

e m

h l o
Cortex

P

Figure 3.2  Stem anatomy of eudicot showing transverse, radial and longitudinal section. Note different arrangement of xylem 
vessels. (See insert for color representation of the figure.)

Plant Tissues Organization of Angiosperms

57

either on the angles of stems, in primary ground tissue or in the mid‐ribs of leaves. 
They differ from fiber cells because they retain their contents at maturity and they do 
not have lignified walls. However, lignified collenchyma may also exist in some mem-
bers of Asteraceae, Lamiaceae and Piperaceae.

Collenchymatous  cells  are  characteristics  of  many  members  of  the  family 
Cucurbitaceae, Begonia as well as stalk of celery. Within cucurbits, they are found in 
stem, petioles and leaves of many genera. Enzymes for the deposition of pectin com-
pounds are located on the plasma membrane. Roots and floral organs generally do not 
have collenchyma cells.

3.5  Sclerenchyma is the Mechanical Tissue of Plants

It  is  main  mechanical  tissues  of  plant  which  exists  either  in  the  form  of  fibers  or 
 sclereids. Sclerenchyma cells have both primary cellulosic and secondary lignified walls 
which give them extra support. However, lignified walls of sclerenchyma do not forms 
spirals, rings, or net‐like patterns which exist in the secondary walls of xylem. They are 
dead at maturity, with empty lumen, and therefore, not involved in many metabolic and 
physiological activities. In the stem of many plants, they give rigidity, tensile and shear 
strength. Floral organs rarely have sclerenchymtous cells, however, fruits of many plants 
contain thick‐walled sclereids. Sclerenchyma cells also form the hardening tissues in 
form spines, thorns and prickles which are defensive organs and protects plants from 
herbivores (Figure 3.3).

3.5.1  Fibers Types in Plants
Fibers are elongated unbranched cells, with tapering ends and resemble tracheids of 
xylem tissues. They are usually present close to vascular tissues of stems and in the 
leaves  and  fruits  of  many  plants.  Boehmaria  nivea  have  the  longest  fiber  cell  ever 
recorded, of up to 0.5 m. Extraxylary cortical fibers are know as bast fibers or phloem 
fibers. They are produced by many plant species like Cannabis sativa (hemp), Corchorus 
capsularis  (jute),  Boehmaria  nivea  (ramie),  Hibiscus  cannabinus  (kenaf)  and  Linum 
usitatissimum (flax).

Fibers associated with xylem, that is, xylarly fibers are found in wood and originate 
from vascular cambium. Libriform xylem fibers are longer than other xylarly fibers and 
resemble phloem fibers. They are present in the wood of Zygogynum spp. Boehmeria 
rugulosa have libriform fibers up to 1,400 μm in length. However, some fibers are not 
associated with vascular tissues and exist either in the form of cylinder next to  epidermis 
or in the form of sheath around vascular bundles, that is, leaf fibers of some monocots. 
Edible fruits are rich in fibers which facilitate the process of digestion.

3.5.2  Commercially Important Fibers
Angiosperms fibers are used commercially for making ropes, fabric making in textile 
industry, baskets, weaving, wood pulp and paper making. Flax, jute, hemp, kenaf and 
cotton plants produce fibers of economic value. Ripe seed capsules of cotton, known as 
cotton bolls are woven in textile and used to make cotton fabrics. Fibers from flax and 

58

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 3.3  (a‐c) Sclerenchyma is the main mechanical tissue of plants which provides physical 
defense to organs where it is present. Spines, thorns and prickles contain sclerefied cells to provide 
defense against herbivores: (a & b) Spines of Echinocactus grusonii, (c) Ceiba speciosa trunk is covered 
with cone‐like prickles which are sclerefied enough to provide defense against herbivory invasion.

ramie are used to make textile‐like linen. Jute and sisal fibers are used for making ropes 
and mats, whereas kopak fibers are used in stuffing of pillows. Fibers of cottons are also 
modified to form semisynthetic fibers, like rayon or acetate (Letcher & Lutseke 1990). 
Vegetable fibers of jute are well‐known fibers which are grown in many Asian countries 
as reported by International Jute Study Group in 2005 and contribute 95% of global 
demands  of  jute  fibers.  Stem  of  jute  is  also  a  source  of  commercial  fibers  which  is 
obtained by retting in water, beating, stripping the fibres from core and then drying of 
the fibers. Flax fibers are used in paper, textile and in pharmaceutical industries. Fibers 
from transgenic flax plants are being used for industry and medicine and also for the 
preparation of bioplastic as they are ecologically safe (Wrobel‐Kwiakowska et al., 2009). 
It  has  good  heat‐conducting  properties  and  durable.  Fibers  from  ramie  are  used  in 
clothing fabrics, industrial packaging, canvas, cordage and also used for fiber‐reinforced 
composites.

Plant Tissues Organization of Angiosperms

59

Hemp fibers are obtained from stem and are as long as the length of stem. They can 
be easily peeled off the xylem surface manually or with a machine. Anatomically, hemp 
stem is composed of hollow cylinder of 1–5 mm thick xylem region, surrounded by cam-
bium, cortex, epidermis and cuticle. Hemp yarn made from hemp fibers is very strong 
and resistant. Fibers from hemp are used in making ropes and clothing. Sisal fiber is 
extracted from leaves and hard fiber used in making ropes, mats, carpets and as cement 
reinforcement.  Henequen  fibers  are  used  in  cordage  and  carpets.  Coire  fibers  are 
obtained from coconuts husk and used in making floor mats, door mates, brushes and 
mattresses. White fibers from green coconut husks are used in making yarns in textiles.

3.5.3  Making of Fabrics From Corn Fibers
Fibers of monocots like corns and many other plants are being used in making fabrics 
by many textile industries. Polylactic acid fibres (PLA) are extracted from corn kernels. 
The advantage of using PLA fibers are that they are eco‐friendly, environmentally safe, 
highly sustainable and biodegradable. They can also be composted to grow more corn; 
beets and PLA can also be recycled.

Corn  are  harvested  for  obtaining  sugar  (glucose)  from  corn  kernels.  The  next 
step involves fermentation in which kernel glucose is introduced into a large multi‐ 
chambered vat containing genetically engineered microorganisms, water, and minerals. 
Then  monomers  are  transferred  for  polymerization  to  polymers  for  mixing  with 
 petroleum‐based  monomers.  Resulting  long‐strand  polymer  is  chopped  into  small 
 pellets. Pellets are extruded and spun to create a fiber to maintain long‐lasting shape of 
fiber (Figure 3.4). Corn fibers are used in manufacturing of yarn which can be blended 
with wool, silk and cotton to make Ingeo fabric. Corn straws and stalks are also being 
used for formation of fibers. A recent use of corn fibers is to use them for creating 
human organs by blending them with tissues. Smart carpets or Dupont Sorona also 
make use of corn yarns as they use less energy and reduce greenhouse gases by 63%.

Cargow‐Dill is one of the pioneer PLA‐based industrial plant in Nebraska which pro-
duces 300 million tons of fibers annually. PLA fibers are being used in home furnishing 
products, for filling pillows, bed comforters, in synthesizing leather, for clothing and 
knit fabrics, recycling of carpets and for disposable products. PLA fibers are processed 
by extrusion, injecting moulds, film and sheet casting and spinning for their use in dif-
ferent materials.

3.5.4  Diversity in Sclereids
Sclereids are also sclerenchymatous cells which develop from parenchyma. There is 
great diversity in shape of sclereids. Astrosclereids are star‐shaped, highly branched and 
produce projections which grow intrusively into intercellular spaces or in the middle 
lamella during the growth of the organ. Stone cells or brachysclereids occur in many 
fruits and their presence in Pyrus communis fruits gives them gritty texture. Stone cells 
of cherries are sclerefied. They make shells of nuts and pits of peach fruits. Rod‐shaped 
sclereids are columnar which are found in the outer layer of seeds of family Fabaceae. 
Filiform sclereids are thread‐like and branched. They occur in the mesophyll cell of Olea 
europaea  leaves.  Macrosclerids  have  an  uneven  deposition  of  secondary  walls. 
Osteosclereids are bone‐shaped and enlarged at their ends. Astrosclereids are generally 
found in the intercellular spaces of aquatic plants like Nymphaea spp (Figure 3.5).

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Kernel

Glucose

PLA monomer

Making of yarn 

from (cid:5)ber

Pellets

Harvesting 

Getting sugar from

The fermenter: Turning sugar

Turning monomer

the corn

 the corn

into monomer

into polymer

Yarns and fabric from corn

Figure 3.4  Steps in making of fabric from corn fibers.

Plant Tissues Organization of Angiosperms

61

(b)

(a)

Figure 3.5  (a‐b) (a) Astrosclereids on leaf epidermis of Beta vulgaris (4X), (b) astrosclereids on 
lotus stem.

3.6  Vascular Tissues: Xylem and Phloem

Xylem and phloem are vascular tissues of plants. Xylem is the main water‐conducting 
tissue, whereas phloem is responsible for transport of carbohydrates like sucrose along 
with other minerals and nutrients. As all cells of plants are in need of water and carbo-
hydrates, therefore a network of vascular veins is present throughout the plant body. 
Plants have primary vascular tissue, that is, primary xylem and primary phloem which 
originates from procambium. However, secondary vascular tissue, that is, secondary 
xylem (wood) and secondary phloem (bark) develop from vascular cambium which is a 
lateral meristem. It is interesting to note that sucrose acts as a signal in plants and its 
concentration determines xylem and phloem ratio, high concentration of sucrose pro-
motes development of phloem, whereas low sucrose results in formation of xylem and 
medium concentration is required both for the formation of xylem and phloem.

3.6.1  Xylem
Xylem is a complex heterogenous tissue which transports water and minerals. It is also 
responsible for the transportation of water to phloem cells, in other words, phloem 
depends upon xylem for its water supply, one of the reason that xylem develops first in 
seedlings.

3.6.2  Why Is There a Need of Water Transport?
Plants are amazing organisms as with the help of water and sunlight, they can get eve-
rything which is required for their growth and development, starting from a young 
seedling to a tall tree like Sequoia. Water is essential for life and required for growth, 
development and metabolic activities which are crucial for a cell take place in presence 

62

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

of water, that is, synthesis and breakdown of macromolecules, formation and release 
of  energy,  cell  division,  replication,  transcription  and  gene  expression.  Xylem  sap, 
phloem sap, cell cytosol, nucleoplasm, mitochondrial matrix and chloroplast stroma 
all contain water. Breakdown of ATP to energize many endergonic reactions that is, 
energy‐dependent reactions also takes place in water.

In the cross‐section of many dicot stems, you can observe that some xylem cells are 
wider, whereas some appear narrow. Cells with narrow diameter make the innermost 
xylem. They differentiate earlier during the elongation of surrounding cells and known 
as protoxylem. Lignin is deposited in protoxylem either in the form of helices or ring 
which allows it to stretch enough during growth. However, xylem cells of wider diame-
ter, that is, metaxylem, are formed when the internode cells in the surrounding do not 
elongate further and they appear during later stages, with the lignified walls that usually 
are scalariform, reticulate or pitted.

3.6.3  Leaf Morphology and Venation
Leaves of many eudicots form a complex net‐work of veins, primary vein (P) or main‐vein 
known as mid‐rid, gives rise to secondary veins (S). They combine with intramarginal 
veins (IMV) and further divide into tertiary (T) and quaternary (Q) veins (Figure 3.6). 
Tertiary veins give rise to quaternary veins. The area of leaf lamina enclosed by tertiary 
vein, while further dividing into the quaternary vein, is known as areole. This complex 
system of veins is known as reticulate venation and feature of dicot leaves. Imagine how 
water is transported from the main vein to a secondary vein, then other tertiary and 
quaternary veins and then finally to a free veinlet within an areole that represents the 
final level of foliar venation in dicot leaves, making an open system of venation. These 
veinlets may be branched or unbranched. They may be composed of few tracheids, or 
enlarged cells with thick walls. However, in many leaves where there are no free veinlets, 
their  venation  system  is  closed.  In  the  leaves  of  many  monocots,  many  large  veins 

Quaternary vein

Intramarginal vein

Aerole
Tertiary vein
Secondary vein

Primary vein
Mid rib

Veins of leaf
Free inlet within aerole
Bundle sheath parenchyma

Cells of mesophyll 

Figure 3.6  Reticulate venation in rose leaf (xylem without phloem) showing mid‐rib, secondary, 
tertiary, quaternary, and inter‐marginal veins. Arrows show movement of water molecules from 
mid‐rib to inter marginal veins.

Figure 3.7  All cells of petals need water and sucrose like 
other cells to fulfill their metabolic demands. Floral veins of 
Alcea rosea are visible in form of lines and comprise the 
xylem and phloem.

Plant Tissues Organization of Angiosperms

63

alongwith mid‐rib run parallel along the leaf lamina forming parallel venation. Xylem 
and phloem supply of many petals, that is, floral vein is usually visible in form of either 
thin lines, stripes or streaks in many flowers (Figure 3.7).

3.6.4  Tracheary Elements
Tracheary elements, that is, vessels and tracheids as water‐conducting cells of xylem. 
They originate from procambial cells through the elongation of these cells, followed by 
the lignification of cell walls which makes cells dead. Xylem fibers protect tracheary 
elements and give them enough support.

Tracheids are elongated cells with tapering ends (Figure 3.1). They may range in 
length from 1 to 1000 cm in length. They appear circular or angular in transverse sec-
tions of many plants. Many tracheids are connected by their ends through pit mem-
branes through which water molecules pass and enter adjacent tracheids. Tracheids 
have pits on their lateral walls for lateral conduction. Pits are formed in the primary cell 
walls of tracheids where lignin is not found.

Vessels are tracheary elements with pores or perforation on their end walls known as 
perforation plates through which water pass through the contiguous vessels. Vessels are 
considered to be relatively advanced or specialized cells and thought to be derived from 
tracheids.  Evolutionary  evidence  showed  that  vessels  are  advanced  tracheids  which 
became wide with the passage of time and lost their pit membranes for more efficient 
conduction of water. Vessels elements are linked axially to form vessel tubes and make 
continuous a system of open tubes from root to the flower for water conduction. This 
arrangement  is  significant  for  plants  as  all  cells  depend  upon  water  and  important 
nutrients that are transported through xylem. Each vessel has perforation at both ends, 
however, terminal vessels have perforations at one end of cells only (Figure 3.8).

(c)

Pit 
aperture

(e)

Water enters plasma membrane

through aquaporins in 

most plants

In transverse view water

transfer from xylem to parenchyma cells

(Arrow show direction of movement)

Xylem parenchyma

Pits on front side

Pits on back side (dotted)

(a)
Bordered pits 

(d)

Pit 
aperture

Pit border 

(b)

Perforation plate

Xylem vessels arranged

axially through perforation

Figure 3.8  (a‐e) Pits in xylem cells are involved in lateral transfer of water to neighbouring cells (in longitudinal section): (a) Bordered 
pits (face view), (b) Half bordered pits are present between xylem and parenchyma cells (sectional view), (c) Simple pits (face view), (d) 
Xylem vessels and parenchyma cells (longitudinal view), (e) Water enters plasma membrane through aquaporins in some cells. (See 
insert for color representation of the figure.)

Plant Tissues Organization of Angiosperms

65

3.6.5  Why Tracheids and Vessels are Water‐Transporting Cells?
Tracheids and vessels are specialized cells; their structure allows them to conduct water 
and minerals. Water transport is best suited to these tracheary elements, due to the 
following reasons:

cell walls

i)  Water molecules can adhere with tracheids and vessels due to their ligno‐cellulosic 

ii)  Empty lumen of tracheids and vessels provides a passage for water transport
iii)  Presence of pits on the side walls help in the lateral conduction to neighboring 
cells as plasmodesmata (due to their small size) may not be significant for water 
transport.

iv)  Vessels have perforation plates on their end walls for transport while tracheids have 

pit membranes

v)  Extra support in term of water storage and conduction is provided by parenchyma cells
vi)  Fibers associated with tracheary elements give them mechanical support

3.6.6  Significance of Lignification in Xylem
Lignin formation takes place on the inner sides of primary cell wall after the cell has 
elongated  enough  to  transport  water.  Formation  of  annual,  helical,  scalariform  and 
 pitted lignified walls is genetically inherited character of plants and each of these thick-
enings  have  certain  advantages  and  disadvantages  under  specific  circumstances. 
Annular and helical deposition of lignin, increases the surface area for water uptake 
but does not provide enough support to the cell wall. However, pitted, reticulate and 
scalariform thickenings of lignin give enough support to the cell wall while decreasing 
the area for the movement of water molecules. Many approaches in molecular biology 
like genomics have provided us with the information about genes and proteins which are 
involved in the formation of cell walls of xylem. They have been extensively studied in 
many model plants like Arabidopsis, Tobacco, Zea and Zinnia spp.

Lignification  is  characteristic  of  all  flowering  and  non‐flowering  plants  except 
 bryophytes. It allows plants to work in a gravitropic environment by transporting water 
and nutrients in their vascular system. However, lignin contents of plants may differ 
during different stages of growth and development.

3.6.7  Genetic Modification of Lignin for Bioenergy Crops
High lignin content of many plants often provides resistance to use them as a bioenergy 
source,  therefore,  lignin  content  of  many  plants  is  being  genetically  modified  either 
through the different approaches which involve incorporation of monomers, increasing 
the amount of cellulose through the overexpression of genes, introducing recombinant 
cellulases, or through low‐lignin biomass of transgenic plants. Reduction in the lignin 
contents allows plants to be used for the ethanol formation to help with the prevailing 
energy  crises.  Panicum  virgatum  (switchgrass)  is  a  bioenergy  crop  in  which  lignin 
 content  is  minimized  to  improve  ethanol  production  (Fu  et  al.,  2001).  Bioethanol, 
 biofuels and biogas can be produced from energy crops which can be further converted 
to  heat,  power  and  electricity.  Popular  ethanol  crops  include  barley,  maize,  potato, 
wheat and rice.

66

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

3.6.8  Pits and Pit Membranes
Pits are depressions in the primary cell wall which help in lateral transport of water, 
nutrients  and  dissolved  solutes.  They  occur  opposite  to  each  other  in  contiguous 
cells forming pit‐pairs. Multiple plasmodesmata form connections with protoplasts of 
other cells through pit‐pairs.

In order to make efficient conduction, pits occur in pairs. Pit pairs are connected by 
pit membrane which includes middle lamella and primary cell wall of two adjacent cells. 
Pit membrane accounts for almost half of xylem resistance to flow of water molecules 
(Choat et al., 2008). Although the role of pits is the same in all plants, a large variation 
may exist in the chemical composition of pit membranes.

An opening of a pit cavity is known as pit aperture. Inner side of pit aperture is usually 
narrow and makes inner pit aperture which is surrounded by a border formed by sec-
ondary wall. Wider aperture of pit which bounds the pit membrane is its outer aperture. 
Pits aperture may appear round or cross‐shaped in some species. In many gymnosperms 
like conifers, torus, form the central part of pith that is thick and lignified which makes 
it  impermeable  to  water.  In  such  plants,  outer  part  of  membrane,  that  is,  margo  is 
involved in water transport. However in angiosperms, pit membranes of border pits do 
not form torus and margo. Circular bordered pits are common in the tracheids of coni-
fers. Half‐bordered pits are feature of tracheary elements and parenchyma cells, where 
wall  of  tracheary  element  forms  border  while  parenchyma  cell  has  simple  border 
(Figure 3.8). Bordered pits are the highly evolved and advanced pits because they con-
duct water more efficiently.

Techniques  like  TEM,  SEM,  field  emission  scanning  electron  microscopy,  atomic 
force microscopy have provided details about the structure of pit membranes. These 
membranes usually are composed of compact cellulose microfibrils which are embed-
ded in matrix of hemicelluloses and pectin polysaccharides (Bret & Woldron, 1996). 
However,  their  structure  changes  with  time  due  to  incrustations  with  non‐micro 
 fibrillar material.

3.6.9  Proteomic Analysis of Xylem Sap Provides Evidences of Proteins 
Translocation Through Xylem Sap
Xylem not only transports water but many nitrate ions and some hormones are also 
transported through xylem cells in the form of xylem sap. Proteomic analysis and tan-
dem mass spectrometry have shown that xylem sap is composed of proteins, proteases, 
protease  inhibitors,  proteins  for  lipid  transfer,  walls  mobilizing  enzymes,  signaling 
proteins  (Neumann,  2007)  as  well  as  large  proteins  which  are  involved  in  cell  wall 
metabolism.

Xylem in many plants also transfers nutrients like nitrates from roots to the meso-
phylls cells of the leaves which is a major site of nitrate assimilation in many herbaceous 
plants.  Vacuoles  of  mesophyll  cells  store  large  quantities  of  nitrates  (Figure  3.9). 
However, nitrates are converted into nitrites with the help of an enzyme in the cytosol. 
Nitrites are further reduced to ammonia in the chloroplasts of leaves and form amino 
acids.  In  addition  to  this,  many  secondary  metabolites  like  nicotine  is  synthesized 
within plant roots but stored in leaves through xylem sap, so xylem sap is also involved 
in the translocation of many alkaloids and terpenoids (Figure 3.10).

(b)

Palisade mesophyll

(c)

NO

NO

NO

(e)

Spongy mesophyll

(a)

(d)

NO

NO

NO

NO

NO

Vacuole stores NO
 and transfers to

chloroplast

NO

R

N

NH

NO

NO

Amino 

acid

pla st

hlo r o

C

Figure 3.9  (a‐e) Nitrate uptake through xylem vessels and formation of amino acids in leaves: (a) Uptake of nitrates (NO3
xylem from root to leaves, (b) Cross‐section of leaf, (c) Nitrates from xylem are transferred to leaf mesophyll (in cross‐section, T.S), (d) in 
paradermal view, (e) NO3
enter chloroplast where they are converted to NO by enzyme nitrate reductase (NR) and form amino acids.

− are stored in vacuoles of leaves, however, when plants need amino ‐acids, nitrates stored in the vacuole 

−) through 

(a)

(b)

Ornithine

(e)

N i c
N i c

N i c

c
i
N

(d)

Nic

(f)

Nic

Nictone

Arginine
Putrescine
N-Methyl

Putrescine
Di amino
oxide
Quinolic acid
Nicotine

Spermine

e
n

i
t
o
c
i
N

c
i
N

c
i
N

(c)

Nic

Nic

Nic

Nic

Nic

Nic

Figure 3.10  (a‐f) Nicotine translocation takes place through xylem in Nicotiana tabacum. Nicotine synthesized within root is 
translocated through xylem to the leaves of tobacco plant where it is stored in vacuoles to provide defense against 
herbivores: (a) N. tabacum, (b) Nicotine biosynthesis takes place in root from arginine, (c, d & e) Nicotine is translocated 
through xylem to leaves, (f) It is stored in vacuoles within leaves.

Plant Tissues Organization of Angiosperms

69

3.6.10  Water Channels in Plant Membranes
Many  plants  contain  many  isoforms  of  aquaporins.  Arabidopsis  thaliana  contains 
about 30 different genes of aquaporins family. X‐ray structure analysis through electron 
cyromicroscopy revealed that aquaporins consists of a narrow hydrophobic pore having 
binding sites only for water molecules. More recently, it is reported that xylem tissues 
from the sapwood of coniferous trees can be used in suitable for removing bacteria from 
water using pressure‐driven filtration (Boutilier et al., 2014).

3.7  Phloem

Main conducting elements of phloem are sieve elements which are similar to tracheary 
elements of xylem, having sieve plates on both ends, and associated parenchmya cells 
(companion cells in angiosperms) (Figure 3.11). Both sieve elements and companion 
cells originate from one cell but they develop differently. As discussed before, many 
fibers are associated with phloem, but some of them are economically important. Sieve 
elements appear polyhedral in transverse section of roots, stem, leaves and flowers with 
thin walls, however, in longitudinal view, they look like tracheary cells of xylem, the only 
difference being an absence of lignified walls and the deposition of an additional carbo-
hydrate, callose on their sieve plates.

Sieve cells have sieve plates on their end walls which contain sieve pores or sieve areas 
(also considered to be modified plasmodesmata). They connect adjacent sieve elements 
and through these sieve pores phloem sap flows into the adjacent sieve cell. Sieve areas 
form group of pores and are surrounded by callose (Figure 3.11).

Sieve elements exhibit autolysis when they mature while plasma membrane maintains 
its integrity and is not lost during this selective autophagy. Plasmodesmata usually close 
before the differentiation of sieve elements and companion cell complexes. One of the 
unique features of sieve elements of angiosperms is the absence of nuclei and cell con-
tents at maturity but they are assisted by the nuclei of companion cells. Sieve elements 
also  have  specific  phloem  proteins  (P‐proteins).  P‐Protein  plugs  appear  on  the  sieve 
plates of damaged sieve tube members which seal them to avoid loss of phloem sap.

3.7.1  Significance of Callose Deposition
Accumulation of callose takes place on the sieve plates around the sieve pores. Callose 
is synthesized by callose synthase, an enzyme located in plasma membrane and requires 
UDP‐Glucose.  It  also  exists  around  plasmodesmata  (PD)  where  it  controls  the  size 
exclusion limit of PD (Iglesias & Meins 2000). Immunolabelling studies have reported 
that callose is also deposited on cell plate. Callose is also required for the development 
of pollen and gametophyte in many plants. It is synthesized in functional sieve elements 
in response to damage. The deposition of wound callose in the sieve pores seals off 
damaged sieve elements from surrounding tissue.

3.7.2  Companion Cells
Companion  cells  are  parenchmyatous  cells  associated  with  primary  phloem  of 
angiosperms, usually every sieve tube member is surrounded by a single companion 

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(a)

(b)

Sieve plate

Phloem

Phloem

C
e
l
l
s
 
i
n

 
(
L
S
)

.

S
i
e
v
e
 
t
u
b
e
 
m
e
m
b
e
r
 
a
n
d

 
c
o
m
p
a
n
i
o
n

 
c
e
l
l

Callose

Companion cell

Companion cell

Sieve areas are covered with callose

Note the prominent nucleus of companion cell

Lateral sieve area

Figure 3.11  (a‐f) Phloem is the main food‐conducting tissue of plants: (a) Sieve tube member surrounded by companion cell (T.S), (b) 
L.S, (c) Arrangement of phloem in root, (d) Stem, (e) Leaf, and (f) Flower.

Plant Tissues Organization of Angiosperms

71

cell. However, they are not indispensable for sieve elements, as phloem of grasses do 
not have companion cells. The presence of a dense nucleus in companion cell indi-
cates  that  they  fulfill  metabolic  demands  of  sieve  elements  which  lack  nuclei  at 
maturity.

A large number of mitochondria within companion cells indicate their role in 
energy formation. Companion cells synthesize ATP molecules within their mito-
chondria for sieve elements to ensure their vitality. Transport of ATP molecules 
from  companion  cells  to  sieve  element  takes  place  through  plasmodesmata. 
Multiple plasmodesmata are present between sieve elements and companion cells. 
Companion cells are also the site of protein synthesis and almost 100–150 proteins 
of phloem sap are synthesized by them. They are also involved in gene expression 
of phloem‐specific proteins. In addition to this, companion cells stimulate break-
down of sugars to avoid loss of photoassimilates from sieve elements. An enzyme, 
sucrose synthase on membrane of companion cells, controls sugar metabolism of 
sieve elements.

3.7.3  Evaluation of Phloem Sap Through Modern Techniques
Phloem sap is a carbohydrate‐rich fluid that is transported through phloem to all cells of 
a plant body. Phloem is also responsible for translocation of many other important mol-
ecules like proteins, nutrients, hormones, secondary metabolites and nectar to floral 
veins. Many insecticides and pesticides and some viruses are also translocated through 
phloem. Phloem sap also serves as a sugar‐rich solution for many insects (Figure 3.12).

Phloem exudates are evaluated with techniques like cDNA, AFLP, one‐dimensional 
SDS‐PAGE,  mass  spectrometry,  two‐dimensional  electrophoresis,  non‐fluid  liquid 
chromatography. Proteins within the range of 20–60 KD can be translocated through 
sieve elements of phloem. Many proteins translocated through phloem of monocots 
and dicots, are identical, which indicates high degree of conservation of phloem sap 
proteins.

There is some evidence that mRNA is also translocated through phloem, and it is 
involved in differentiation of meristem and leaf development as well as in systematic 
signal transduction (Kehr & Buhtz, 2008). Presence of mRNA is detected with real‐time 
PCR  in  the  phloem  of  Vicia  and  Brassica.  Enzymes  for  jasmonic  acid  and  ethylene 

Figure 3.12  Phloem sugars 
are not only important for the 
growth and development of 
plants but they also serve as 
food for many insects. Note in 
picture many beetles around 
flowers. It seems like their 
main attraction is phloem sap.

72

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

signaling are also translocated through sieve elements (Huase et al., 2003). Proteins of 
phloem  sap  are  required  for  signaling,  synthesis  of  hormones,  and  facilitate  sieve 
 elements as some of them metabolize sugars (Giavalisca et al., 2006). Proteins like ubiq-
uitin, thioredoxin, and cyclophilins, are detected in the phloem sap of some species. 
Glycine‐rich proteins are also translocated through phloem sap for facilitating RNAs 
trafficking  through  plasmodesmata  (Aki  et  al.,  2008).  Phloem  sap  also  transports 
enzymes for glycolytic pathways. SWEET are water‐soluble proteins that are translo-
cated through phloem and required for sugar metabolism. Secondary metabolites that 
are transported through phloem are involved in defense against pests and predators.

3.8  Future Perspectives

Environmentally safe bioplastic is being synthesized from flax fibers. Fibers from trans-
genic flax plants are being used for industry and medicinal uses and for the preparation 
of bioplastic as they are ecologically safe.

Although corn, cotton, bamboo and many fibers are being used in textile industries 
but some problems are reported caused by green textiles and apparels made by organic 
fibres. Bamboo fibers are reported to wear out in short time and banana‐based textiles 
tend to stretch, whereas corn fibers can melt upon ironing. Secondly, organic textile 
comes from many countries and it requires a carbon footprint for transport of goods 
and finished item which may be more harmful for the environment. However, polyes-
ter‐based fiber are easy to care for, but they use energy from natural reservoirs. Use of 
bamboo fibers and soy‐based foams is increasing in the market.

Many techniques like proteomic analysis, tandem mass spectrometry, x‐ray crystal-
lization and mass spectrometry can further aid our knowledge of plant structure. In 
future, xylem tissues from the sapwood of coniferous trees will be used as a water filtra-
tion device for removing bacteria from water for drinking purpose.

References

Aki, T., Shigyo, M., Nakano, R., Yoneyama, T., & Yanagisawa, S. (2008). ‘Nano scale 

proteomics revealed the presence of regulatory proteins including three FT‐like proteins 
in phloem and xylem saps from rice’. Plant and Cell Physiology, 49, pp. 767–790.

Brett, C.T. & Waldron, K.W. (1996). ‘Physiology and biochemistry of plant cell walls’, 

Boutilier, M.S.H., Lee, J., Chambers, V., Venkatesh, V., & Karnik, R. (2014). ‘Clean drinking 

Second edition. London: Chapman & Hall.

water via plants’, PLoS ONE, 9, e89934.

Choat, B., Cobb, A.R., & Jansen, S. (2008). ‘Structure and function of bordered pits: new 

discoveries and impacts on whole‐plant hydraulic function’, New Physiologist, 177, 
pp. 608–625.

Fu, C., Meilenz, J.R., Xiao, X., Ge, Y., Hamilton, C.Y., Rodriguez, M. Jr., Chen, F., Foston, M., 

Ragauskas, A., Bouton, J., Dixon, R.A., & Wang, Z.Y. (2011). ‘Genetic manipulation of 
lignin reduces recalcitrance improves ethanol production from switchgrass’, Proceedings 
of National Academy of Sciences, 108, pp. 3803–3808.

Giavalisco, P., Kapitza, K., Kolasa, A., Buhtz, A., & Kehr, J. (2006). ‘Towards the proteome 

of Brassica napus phloem sap,’ Proteomics, 6, pp. 896–909.

Plant Tissues Organization of Angiosperms

73

Hause, B., Hause, G., Kutter, C., Miersch, O., & Wasternack, C. (2003). ‘Enzymes of jasmonate 

biosynthesis occur in tomato sieve elements’, Plant and Cell Physiology, 44, pp. 643–648.

Iglesias, V.A. & Meins, F., Jr. (2000). ‘Movement of plant viruses is delayed in a 1,3‐

glucanase‐ deficient mutant showing a reduced plasmodesmatal size exclusion limit and 
enhanced callose deposition’, Plant Journal, 21, pp.157–66.

Kehr, J. & Buhtz, A. (2008). ‘Long distance transport and movement of RNA through the 

phloem’, Journal of Experimental Botany, 59, pp. 85–92.

Letcher, T.M. & Lutseke, N.S. (1990). Journal of Chemical Education. 67, p. 361.
Neumann, P.M. (2007). ‘Evidence for long‐distance xylem transport of signal peptide 

activity from tomato roots’, Journal of Experimental Botany, 58, pp. 2217–2223.
Wrobel‐Kwiakowska, M., Skorkowska‐Telichowska, K., Dyminska, L., Maczka, M., 

Hanuza, J., & Szopa, J. (2009). ‘Biochemical, mechanical and spectroscopic analysis 
genetically engineered flax fibers producing bioplastic (poly‐beta‐hydroxybutyrate)’, 
Biotechnology Progress, 25, pp. 1489–1498.

Further Reading

Beck, C.B (2005). ‘An introduction to Plant Structure and Development’, Cambridge 

University Press.

Coleman, C.M., Prather, B.L., Valente, M.J., Dute, R.R., & Miller, M.E. (2004). ‘Torus 
lignification in hardwoods,’ International Association of Wood Anatomists Journal, 
25, pp. 435–447.

Dickison, W.C. (2000). ‘Integrative Plant Anatomy,’ Harcourt Academic Press.
Durrant, W.E. & Dong, X. (2004). ‘Systemic acquired resistance’, Annual Review of 

Phytopathology, 42, pp.185–209.

Hatch, K.L. (2009). ‘The use of classification systems and production methods in 

identifying manufactured textile fibers’, In: Hatch, K.L. (ed.). Identification of Textile 
Fibers. Chapter 6. pp. 111–130.

Lev‐Yadun, S. & Aloni, R. (1995). ‘Differentiation of ray system in woody plants’, Botanical 

Mauseth, J.D. (1988). ‘Plant Anatomy.’ Addison Wesley/Benjamin Cummings San 

Reviews, 61, pp. 45–84.

Francisco, California.

Bartlett Publishers.

Mauseth, J.D. (2003). ‘Botany An Introduction to Plant Biology’. Third edition. Jones and 

McCormick, S. (1993). ‘Male gametophyte development’ Plant Cell, 5, pp.1265–1275.
Nicklas, K.J. (1991). ‘Flexural stiffness allometrics of angiosperm and fern petioles and 

rachises‐evidence for biochemical convergence’. Evolution, 45, pp. 734–750.

Rogers, L.A. & Campbell, M.M. (2004). ‘The genetic control of lignin deposition during 

plant growth and development’, New Phytologist, 164, pp. 17–30.

Sano, Y. & Nakada, R. (1998). ‘Time course of secondary deposition of incrusting materials 
on bordered pit membranes in Cryptomeria japonica’, International Association of Wood 
Anatomists Journal, 19, pp. 285–299.

Satoh, S. (2006). ‘Organic substances in xylem sap delivered to above‐ground organs by the 

roots’, Journal of Plant Research, 119, pp. 179–187.

Sjolund, R.D. (1997). ‘The phloem sieve element: A river runs through it’, Plant Cell, 9, 

pp. 1137–1146.

Taiz, L. & Zeiger, E. (2002). Plant Physiology, Third edition. Sinauer Associates.

74

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Problems Chapter 3

1  Select the best answer from options given below.

i.  Function of epidermal layer may include ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐.

A  to provide protection against pathogens
B  to prevent water loss
C  to give support to internal cells
D  all

ii.   Parenchyma is a fundamental tissue of plants and all cells (shown in options) are 

parenchymatous in nature except ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐.
A  guard cells
B  mesophyll cells
C  xylem vessels
D  trichomes

iii.  Stomatal  cells  perform  many  important  functions  in  plants,  that  is,  gaseous  

exchanges, transpiration. However, they are not involved in ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐.
A  sugar synthesis
B  release of volatile atoms
C  uptake of CO2
D  water evaporation

iv.  Which thickenings of lignin provide better support to xylem vessels?

A  Annular
B  Helical
C  Spiral
D  Scalariform

v.   Tracheids can be differentiated anatomically from fibers on the basis of pres-

ence of:
A  tapering shape
B  cellulosic cell wall
C  presence of lignin thickenings
D  hollow lumen

vi.  A bicollateral vascular bundle can be differentiated from a collateral bundle due to:

A  absence of phloem
B  presence of phloem towards epidermal side
C  presence of phloem towards pith
D  phloem present around xylem towards pith and epidermal side

2  Explain diversity in plant cells (any three). Draw labelled diagrams and justify briefly 

their role according to their shape and location.

Plant Tissues Organization of Angiosperms

75

3  Take any 10 leaves of your interest. Compare venation pattern of your household 

plants or plants in your campus. Identify:
i.  whether the venation is parallel or reticulate
ii.  locate mid‐ribs and lateral veins
iii.  trace  an  imaginary  pathway  of  movement  of  water  from  mid‐rib  to  free 

iv.  if  mid‐rib  appears  pigmented,  try  to  find  out  reason  and  make  slide  of 

 veinlets (in open venation)

 paradermal sections

4 

Identify (i) primary veins (ii) secondary veins and (iii) intramarginal veins in the 
following leaves:

5  Locate the proposed way of transportation of water molecules through xylem in the 

cells of the following flower:

6  Differentiate between the following terms:

i.  perforation plate and sieve plate
ii.  sieve cells and sieve tube members
iii.  torus and margo
iv.  circular bordered pits and half bordered pits
v.  thorns and prickles
vi.  open and closed system of venation
vii. P‐proteins and SWEET

76

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

7  Fill in the empty spaces in the diagram.

PARENCHYMA

EPIDERMIS

CORTEX

GUARD CELL MESOPHYLL

TRICHOMES

PITH

PHLOEM

8  Explain main steps involved in making textile from corn fibers.

9  Explain what techniques are being used for reducing lignin contents in order to 

increase use of crops for making biofuel?

10  Which techniques are used to measure exudates of phloem sap? Which phytohor-

mones and nutrients are transported through phloem?

77

4

Floral Cell Biology and Diversity in Floral Cells

Introduction to Angiosperms Flowers:  

4.1 
Monocots and Eudicots

Angiosperms  are  considered  to  be  a  highly  evolved  group  of  plants  due  to  many 
 morphological,  anatomical  and  physiological  adaptations  in  their  vegetative,  and 
 particularly in their floral organs which they have developed over a period of time. 
They produce specialized reproductive organs, flowers, which are relatively more con-
spicuous in many core eudicots as compared with monocots due to the differentiation 
of floral whorls, that is, sepals and petals and due to the accumulation of pigments 
within their petals. Biosynthesis of many important products which are used commer-
cially take place within floral parts or structures which are developed from flowers, that 
is, fruits and seeds. Therefore, it is important to know different aspects of floral biology 
including  floral  morphology  and  anatomy  as  well  as  intracellular  transport  within 
d ifferent floral cells. Flowers synthesize aromatic monoterpenoids _ which are widely 
used in perfumery, pharmaceutical and cosmetic products. They are used in floriculture 
due to their colorful pigments. Many flowers are edible due to their nutritional value 
and are also able to synthesize products of medicinal importance (Figure 4.1).

4.2  Morphological & Anatomical Characteristics 
of Eudicot Flowers

Many morpho‐anatomical and physiological characteristics in eudicots flowers are co‐
evolved in relation to their pollinators particularly insects. A flower is also considered 
to be a modified shoot with determinate growth which can be distinguished from the 
simple  shoot  due  to  the  presence  of  specialized  whorls,  colored  pigments  and  also 
due to its ability to synthesize and secrete fragrance which differentiates it from the 
rest of shoot.

A typical angiosperm flower comprises of perianth of two whorls, that is, sepals and 
petals. They are considered to be modified leaves which arise at the base of shoot system. 
Sepals make the outermost whorl and are often green which is indicative of their role 
in sugar synthesis. Petals make most conspicuous parts of angiosperms flowers due to 
the accumulation of bright pigments and due to the secretion of fragrant molecules. 
Arrangement  of  petals  of  flowers  whether  they  are  free  or  fused  is  an  important 

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products, First Edition. Aisha Saleem Khan. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.78

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Pigments from anthers used in 
- Dyes
- Medicines
- Food Color

Flower (cid:31)avonoids in
- Food Color
- Dyes
- Perfume
- Medicines
- Herbal Tea

Aromatherapy

Floriculture

Figure 4.1  Many important products which are widely used in different industries are synthesized in 
different parts of flowers.

Flowering plants

Basal 

Angiosperms

Monocots

Core Eudicots

Asterids

Fused petals

Rosids

Free petals

Lotus

Orchid 

Periwinkle 

Daisy 

Rose 

Brassica ﬂower 

Figure 4.2  A comparison of flowers of different group of angiosperms, that is, basal angiosperms, 
monocots and core eudicots.

character in taxonomy as two highly evolved clades of core eudicots, that is, rosids and 
asterids are classified on basis of their petals fusion, which are free in rosids and are 
fused in asterids (Figure 4.2). However, in some flowers, sepals and petals cannot be 
easily differentiated and their perianth is known as tepals.

Angiosperms flowers bear stamens as the male reproductive parts which are collec-
tively known as androecium, and carpels as female reproductive parts. Gynoecium is a 
collective  term  which  is  used  for  carpels.  Many  flowers  produce  both  stamens  and 
c arpels and are known as perfect or complete flowers. However, flowers only with stamens 
are  male  or  staminate  flowers,  whereas  female  flowers  are  also  known  as  pistillate 

Floral Cell Biology and Diversity in Floral Cells

79

flowers. However, more than 90% of angiosperms have perfect flowers, having both 
stamens, that is, stamens and carpels on the same sporophyte.

During  flower  initiation,  actively  dividing  cells  form  a  primordia  on  shoot  which 
develops mostly in whorls starting from sepals then to petals and stamens and finally 
the carpels. In many angiosperms, fusion of floral parts takes place after their forma-
tion. Flower development on shoot is under control of genes, environmental stimuli and 
under  hormonal  regulation.  Signals  for  floral  initiation  turn  on  genes  which  are 
expressed only in parts of shoot where flower development will start.

Floral organs are arranged in concentric whorls. First whorl represents sepals, second 
petals,  third  and  fourth  represent  male  stamens  and  female  carpels  respectively. 
Identities  of  individual  whorls  are  maintained  by  homeotic  genes  which  encode 
MADS‐box transcription factors along with some cofactors (Melzer et al., 2010).

Floral  development  in  angiosperms  is  best  explained  through  the  ABC  model  in 
which gene A is known to regulate whorl 1, A and B regulate whorl 2, genes B and C 
control whorls 2 and 3, whereas gene C controls whorl 4. Genes of A and C are known 
to  repress  each  other.  In  Arabidopsis,  APETALA1  (AP1)  and  AP2  indicate  genes, 
A and B, whereas AP3 and PISTILLATA (P3) are B genes, and AGAMOUS (AG) are 
C genes. C genes in Arabidopsis or AG not only controls floral development but are 
also  vital  for  the  specification  of  reproductive  organs  and  for  floral  determinacy 
(Lohmann et al., 2001).

Many  proteins  and  floral  regulators  like  LFY,  DEFICIENS  (DEF)  and  GLOBOSA 
(GLO)  move  between  histogenic  layers  of  floral  meristems  from  epidermal  to  sub‐
e pidermal  layers.  However,  in  Arabidopsis,  DEF  and  GLO  ortholog  of  AP3  and  P1 
do not travel between layers showing different ways of floral meristem initiation in 
angiosperms.

The next section will describe morphology and anatomy of floral organ, that is, sepals, 

petals, stamens and carpels.

4.2.1  Sepals Morphology and Anatomy
Sepals  are  considered  to  be  modified  leaves  due  to  the  many  similarities  in  their 
m orphological and anatomic characters and due to the presence of chloroplasts which 
indicate their role in photosynthesis. However, sepals are not necessarily present in all 
flowers, and some times merged with petals, as tepals in case of monocots flowers. 
Being outermost whorl of flowers, sepal and tapels provide protection to inner floral 
whorls, especially in young buds (Figure 4.3). Hairy texture of sepals inhibit the landing 
of many pathogens. Sepals of many flowers are photosynthetic, therefore, their epider-
mal cells have stomatal opening for exchange of gases. Sometimes they play role of 
petals by accumulating pigments and becoming aromatic to attract pollinators. They 
are also involved in the protection of plants from nectar robbing by birds and insects.

Epidermal cells of flowers particularly sepals and petals are enriched with glandular 
and non‐glandular trichomes or hairs. Some of them release oils (elaiophores) or scents 
(osmophores)  or  secretions  which  inhibit  microbial  infections  or  may  accumulate 
f lavonoids as in Rosa spp. which may indicate their role in protection of sepals against 
UV radiations.

Internal structure of sepals also resemble with leaves as sepals have both abaxial and 
adaxial epidermis, containing stomatal pores, three to four layered isodiametric cells. 

80

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 4.3  (a‐c) Sepals being the outermost whorl of many flowers, protect other internal floral whorls 
in young buds. Their green color shows their role in fixation of CO2 to synthesize sugars not only to 
meet their own metabolic demands but also to supply other floral whorls with sugars. Rose sepals are 
photosynthetic and also source of gibberellins during floral development (Ganelevin & Zieslin, 2002). 
Note in picture that presence of many aphids on pedicel on sepals indicate their dependence on sepals 
sugars. (b) Sepals of Kalanchoe pinnata are fused and bear red petals at the bottom which are also 
fused, (c) Sepals of Citrus spp. are persistent and may support development of fruits.

Vascular bundles of sepals are collateral (Figure 4.4). Although sepals do not have dif-
ferentiation of palisade and spongy mesophyll, but there is sufficient evidence which 
indicates that sugar formation takes place within a loose mass of spongy parenchyma 
cells which are separated by intercellular spaces. Secretory cavities are also present in 
the mesophyll parenchyma of sepals indicating their role in secretion of mucilage and 
t annins. Presence of sclerenchyma within sepals of some plants shows that sepals also 
need support and protection. In some plants, sepal remain photosynthetic even during 
fruit development.

Vascular supply to sepals is crucial for the transport of sugars and nutrients. In some 
flowers, sepals synthesize sugars not only for their own growth, development and meta-
bolic activities, but they also provide photosynthates produced by them for fruit devel-
opment as in case of Paris pollyphlla. However, carbohydrates synthesized by sepals 
are distributed among floral buds depending upon their stage of development. Perianth 
and bracteoles of Epiphyllum phyllanthus are composed of homogenous parenchyma-
tous with secretory cavities and collateral vascular bundles, however parenchyma of 

perianth is more compact than bracteoles. The petaloid perianth contains large epidermal 
cells and less stomata on abaxial side.

Floral Cell Biology and Diversity in Floral Cells

81

4.2.2  Petals Morphology in Response to Their Pollinators
Petals are the most visible part of eudicot flowers due to their color, size and shape 
which is a genetically controlled characteristic of many plants. There is a great diversity 
in shape, texture, color and size of petals in angiosperms. They may be fused in the form 
of tubes as in the flowers of Petunia spp, or in form of funnel in Convolvulus spp., 
whereas petals may be individually attached at their point of attachment and are not 
connected with each other, that is, petals of Nasturium spp., Rose spp., Magnolia 
spp., and scarlet honeysuckle.

Petals of some flowers have spots which are composed of a relatively dense or lighter 
pigments which differentiate them from the rest of petal. Molecular basis of petal spot 
variation has been studied in Clarkia gracilis, which form spots either near the base of 
petal, in the center and sometimes do not form spots. Variation in spot morphology 
may be due to interaction of two genetic loci, which regulate the expression of duplicate 
copy of gene which encodes dihydroflavonol reductase (DFR2). When DFR2 is expressed 
initially within a spot region, it forms a red color (which is due to red anthocyanin 
p igment, cyanidin) with the help of F3′H. However, when DFR2 is expressed in later 
stages  in  presence  of  F′3′5′H,  it  gives  a  mauve  color  in  the  background  due  to  the 
a ccumulation of malvidin.

Petals morphology in angiosperm is evolved in response to their pollinators, as incon-
spicuously colored and non‐aromatic flowers which are smaller in size are generally 
pollinated by wind, however, brightly colored and fragrant flowers are pollinated by 
birds and insects (Figures 4.5 & 4.6). The size of some petals is also related to the feeding 
organs of their pollinators which play crucial roles in the transfer of gametes from flow-
ers to flowers. There is convincing evidence which revealed that chemical composition 
of nectar in insect‐pollinated flowers and fragrances which they form are also influ-
enced by their pollinator type. Petals of many beetle‐pollinated flowers are lighter or 
white in color, and smell like decaying flesh while petals of bee‐pollinated flowers are 
generally bright and nectar secreting (Figures 4.7 & 4.8). Pollination of yellow or blue‐
colored flowers by bees show that they can differentiate between these colors. Bee‐
p ollinated  flowers  like  Silene  dioica  forms  floral  fragrance  which  contains  33% 
monoterpenoids and 46% benzoids. Bees antenna comprise almost 130 types of odour 
receptors which can widely recognize alcohols, aldehydes and ketones.

Flowers which are pollinated by beetles protect their ovules from beetles. Their ovules 
are embedded deep within the tissue. Rose, poppies, water lily and Magnolia spp. are 
pollinated by beetles. Since butterflies and moths have long tongue so flowers polli-
nated by them produce nectar at the base of long pollen tubes or spurs, a mechanism 
which protects them from other pollinators (Figure 4.9). Many moths are nocturnal 
therefore, flowers which are pollinated by them become aromatic during night. S. lati-
folia is a moth‐pollinated flower and forms fragrance comprises 44% monoterpenoids 
and 23% benzoids.

Oak, beech, chestnut, birch, poplar and walnut are wind‐pollinated trees which pro-
duce male catkins. All wind‐pollinated flowers have syncarpous inferior ovary, vestigial 
ovules and petals which indicate that they are evolved from insect‐pollinated flowers. 

Paradermal

Trichomes

Hexagonal cells are base cells of 

epidermis which form 
conical epidermal cells

(b) 

(a)

Epidermal cells in 
paradermal view

Trichomes

T.S of 
petal

Collateral 

vascular bundle (V.B)
showing xylem (in blue)
and phloem (in green)

Lower epidermis

Mesophyll made up 
of parenchyma cells

  p e t a l

L . S   o f

Xylem
Phloem

Collateral 

Mesophyll

vascular bundle

T.S

Epidermal cells 

Xylem

(c)
Phloem

Epidermal cells 

V.B 

Bi(cid:31)d
Stigma 

(d)

T.S of anther lobes 

Anther 

Filament 

(e)

Collateral 

vascular bundle

Style 

Axile placentation

T.S of (cid:31)lament

L.S of (cid:31)lament

(f) Carpel 

Figure 4.4  (a‐f) Floral anatomy of Petunia sp. (a) Paradermal view and T.S. of sepal, (b) Petal in three‐dimensional view showing 
arrangement of cells in paradermal, transverse and longitudinal section. Note the shape and position of epidermal cells, trichomes 
and vascular bundles (in b and c) which are mostly collateral in sepals and petals, (d) Transverse‐section of anther lobe, (e) T.S. and L.S. 
of filament, (f) Carpel showing axile placentation in L.S. (See insert for color representation of the figure.)

(b)

(a)

(c)

Figure 4.5  (a‐c) Angiosperms flowers have sepals and petals modified in the form of spur which 
provide nectar to their pollinators: (a) Spur of Tropaeolum majus, (b) Delphinium sp., (c) Tepals of 
Strelitzia reginae (bird‐of‐paradise) possess a cartilaginous texture which protect them from 
foraging by birds.

(a)

(b)

Figure 4.6  (a‐b) Trees like (a) Butea monosperma and (b) Erythrina suberosa are known as flame of 
forests due to bright color of their flowers and pollinated by birds.

(a)

(b)

Figure 4.7  (a‐b) Beetles pollinate flowers which may be dull white in color and are mostly non‐
aromatic. They are known to pollinate almost 88% of flowering plants: (a) Crown daisy, (b) with its 
pollinator on disc floret.

84

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 4.8  (a‐c) Flowers which are bright in color and are mostly fragrant are likely to be pollinated 
by bees.

(a)

(b)

Figure 4.9  (a‐b) Moths, butterflies and grasshoppers pollinate flowers which are bright in color, 
fragrant and nectar producing: (a) Marigold, (b) Lantana camara.

However,  not  all  flowers  produce  nectar  and  in  some  cases  pollinators  eat  part  of 
s tamens and pollens. This is energetically expensive for the flower because nectar is rich in 
carbohydrates but pollen are rich in proteins. Some plants also offer stigma as a food to 
their pollinators instead of nectar. Victoria amazonica, are pollinated by cockchafers which 
eat their stamens. Many electrophysiological techniques have shown that insects have 
usually four kinds of taste‐sensing neurons, that is, sugar, water, salt, and amino acids.
Many lineages of angiosperms of flowers have adapted features which allow them to 
be successfully pollinated by birds. Therefore, flowers which are pollinated by birds 
share slightly different morphological features from those which are pollinated by bees 
and  beetles  (Table  4.1).  Bird‐pollinated  flowers  do  not  produce  aromatic  molecules 

Floral Cell Biology and Diversity in Floral Cells

85

because birds lack a strong sense of smell. However, as birds have strong vision, there-
fore, flowers pollinated by them are red and yellow in color and produce large amount 
of nectar to fulfill metabolic demands of birds. Nectar is produced in floral tubes to 
protect them away from other pollinators. Flowers of Hibiscus spp., Bombax ceiba and 
bird of paradise, that is, Strelitzia reginae are pollinated by birds. Hummingbird is a 
close common pollinator of many flowers in North and South America.

Many bird‐pollinated flowers show contrasting pattern of nectar guide on their p etals. 
Fritillaria imperialis is known to be pollinated by birds since the eighteenth century. 
It forms nectar guides (guidelines for pollinators on petals) in form of prominent white 
depressions at the base of perianth segments and contains large drops of nectar. Flowers 
like Fuchsia and Aquilegia are adapted to be pollinated by hummingbirds due to their 
downward‐facing  petals  (Cronk  &  Ojeda,  2007),  through  which  hummingbirds  can 
direct their beak upward and can get their nectar.

Development of secondary perches by bird‐pollinated flowers is another evolutionary 
adaptation which allows them to be pollinated by birds. Inflorescence stalks of ‘rat’s tail’ 
babiana serve as a perch for foraging of malachite sunbird. Floral parts of plants like 
Strelitzia reginae form a cartilaginous texture which protects them from rough foraging 
by  their  pollinators  (Figure  4.5c).  Flowers  of  Nesocodon  mauritianus  synthesize  red‐
colored nectar due to accumulation of pigments like aurone. It is interesting that some 
plants are also known to pass waves at their passing pollinators. This can be explored 
further in order to understand the interaction through waves between plants and their pol-
linators. Recently some research also provided evidence that in absence of p ollinating 
birds, plants may reduce their perches (de Waal et al., 2011) known as relaxed selection.

Flowers which are pollinated by bats open only during nights. They release unpleasant 
odor, for example, tropical cacti and yellow‐green, red‐brown, purple‐brown in color 
are pollinated by bats. Flowers pollinated by bats are strong enough to bear bat’s claws, 
and  produce  nectar  which  contains  lot  of  water.  Inflorescence  of  such  flowers  face 
downward which facilitates its ease for bats to take the nectar. Flowers of some m embers 
of Euphorbiaceae are pollinated by ants (Figure 4.10).

4.2.3  Epidermal Cell of Petals and Elaiophores
Both adaxial and abaxial epidermal cells of petals are enriched with trichomes, papillae 
and other secretory structures, which are specially important in petals due to their role 
in secretion of volatile atoms in order to attract their pollinators. Internally, petals have 
an upper and lower epidermis, with few layers of isodiametric parenchyma cells which 
are interrupted by vascular bundles. There is great variation in size of conical epidermal 
cells of up to a 10‐fold difference in steepness and height of cones, which may be lens‐
shaped to hair‐like structure in Petunia (Figure 4.4). The base shape of cells is hexago-
nal, round, irregular, elongated or rectangular‐shaped. Epidermal cells of many petals 
are dome‐shaped having papillae in A. thaliana and this dome shape is significant for 
transfer of light to pigmented vacuoles. However, sometimes the petal surface is striated 
to scatter light to petal inferior.

Petals epidermis plays an important role in determining the shape and color of petals 

and also restricts their growth.

Conical epidermal cells of many petals is an adaptation to enhance pigment intensity of 
petals. In snapdragon plant, mutation of MIXTA gene results in the formation of non‐
conical flat epidermal cells. MIXTA encodes MYB transcription  factor. Conical epidermal 

 

s
r
e
w
o
l
F

 

 

y
b
d
e
t
a
n

i
l
l

o
p

 

d
e
t
a
n

i
l
l

 

o
p
s
r
e
w
o
l
F

 

 

y
b
d
e
t
a
n

i
l
l

 

o
p
s
r
e
w
o
l
F

d
n
w

i

s
e

i
l
f
r
e
t
t
u
b
y
b

 

 

s
h
t
o
m
d
n
a
s
t
a
b

 

 

s
d
r
i
b
y
b
d
e
t
a
n

 

 

 

y
b
d
e
t
a
n

i
l
l

 

o
p
s
r
e
w
o
l
F

i
l
l

 

o
p
s
r
e
w
o
l
F

s
e
e
b

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
C

.
s
r
o
t
a
n

i
l
l

o
p
 
r
i
e
h
t
 
o
t
 
n
o
i
t
a
e
r
 
n

l

i
 
s
r
e
w
o
l
f
 

i

m
r
e
p
s
o
g
n
a
 
f
o
 
s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
 
l

a
c
i
m
o
t
a
n
a
‐
o
h
p
r
o
m

 

 
f
o
n
o
s
i
r
a
p
m
o
c
A

 

 

 

.

1
4
e
b
a
T

l

 
s
i
 
e
c
n
e
c
s
e
r
o

l
f
n

i

 
e
l
a
m

,

n
i
k
t
a
c

,

y
r
a
v
o
 
r
o
i
r
e
f
n

 
,
s
u
o
p
r
a
c
n
y
s

i

 
s
e
l
u
v
o

s
l
a
t
e
p
d
n
a

 
l
a
i
g
i
t
s
e
v

 

,
s
l
a
p
e
t
 
e
v
a
H

 
,

i

,
s
e
d
u
g
 
r
a
t
c
e
n
h
t
i

 

p
u
o
r
g
n

 

i
 
s
r
e
w
o
F

l

w

 
e
t
a
t
i
l
i
c
a
f
 
o
t
 
d
r
a
w
n
w
o
d

 
e
c
a
f
 
e
c
n
e
c
s
e
r
o

l
f
n

i

e
g
n
a
h
c
x
e
 
r
a
t
c
e
n

 
,
e
g
r
a
l
 
s
r
e
w
o
F

l

 
y
l
d
r
a
w
p
u

 
,
s
e
h
c
r
e
p
 
y
r
a
d
n
o
c
e
s
 
f
o
n
o
i
s
i
v
o
r
p

 

 

 

 

d
r
a
w
n
w
o
d
d
n
a
 
s
d
r
i
b
g
n
h
c
r
e
p
 
r
o
f
 
d
e
t
n
e
i
r
o

i

g
n

i
g
a
r
o
f
 
h
g
u
o
r
 

m
o
r
f
 

 

h
g
u
o
t
 

m
r
o
f
 
s
r
e
w
o

m
e
h
t
 
t
c
e
t
o
r
p
o
t
 
e
r
u
t
x
e
t

l
f
 
,
s
d
r
i
b
g
n
m
m
u
h
 
r
o
f

i

 

,
r
e
t
s
u
l
c
 
n

i
 
s
r
e
w
o

l
f
 
,

d
e
p
a
h
s
 
r
a
l
u
b
u
T

 

g
n
i
r
u
d
n
e
p
o

 

 
,

d
e
t
n
e
i
r
o

e
v
a
h

 
,
e
m

i
t
 
y
a
d

 
r
a
t
c
e
n
 
s
u
o
u
c
i
p
s
n
o
c

s
e
d
u
g

i

 
,
l
a
c
i
r
t
e
m
m
y
s

 
y
l
l
a
t
n
o
z
i
r
o
h

y
l
l
a
r
e
t
a
l
i

B

s
u
o
u
c
i
p
s
n
o
c
‐
n
o
N

 

e
l
p
r
u
p
 
r
o
d
e
r
 
t
h
g
i
r
B

 

&
 
e
l
p
r
u
p

 
,

k
n
p

i

 
,

d
e
r
 
e
l
a
P

e
t
i
h
w

 
t
u
o
h
t
i

w
 
y
l
t
s
o
m

 
s
r
e
w
o

l
f
 

w
o

i

s
e
d
u
g
 
r
a
t
c
e
n

l
l
e
y
 
d
n
a
 
d
e
R

 

w
o

l
l
e
y
 
y
l
t
s
o
m
 
e
t
a
n

i
l
l

o
P

s
r
e
w
o

l
f
 
d
e
r
o
o
c

l

l

e
u
b
d
n
a

 

e
p
a
h
s
 
r
e
w
o
l
F

r
o
l
o
C

c
i
t
a
m
o
r
a
‐
n
o
N

h
s
e
r
f
 
r
o
 
t
n
i
a
F

 
,
e
m

i
t
 
t
h
g
i
n
 
e
h
t
 
g
n
i
r
u
d

,

n
o
i
t
a
n

i
l
l

o
p

 
l
a
n
r
u
t
c
o
N

 

n
e
p
o
 
y
l
t
s
o
m

 
s
r
e
w
o
F

l

 
y
e
s
u
o
m
 
e
v
a
h
 
s
r
e
w
o

l
f

l
l
e
m

s

c
i
t
a
m
o
r
a
‐
n
o
n
 
y
l
t
s
o
M

c
i
t
a
m
o
r
A

e
c
n
a
r
g
a
r
F

t
n
e
s
e
r
p
 
y
l
e
r
a
R

i

n
e
d
d
h
 
r
a
t
c
e
N

r
u
o
d
o
 
t
n
a
s
a
e
l
p
n
U

t
n
a
r
g
a
r
f
‐
n
o
N

 
s
e
s
i
r
p
m
o
c
 
s
l
i
o

 
l
a
i
t
n
e
s
s
E

 
s
e
n
o
t
e
k

 
,
s
e
d
y
h
e
d
l
a
 
f
o

s
p
u
o
r
g
 
c
i
l
o
h
o
c
l
a
 
d
n
a

 

n
o
i
t
i
s
o
p
m
o
c
 
l
a
c
i
m
e
h
c

s
l
i
o
 
l
a
i
t
n
e
s
s
e
 
f
o

 

n
i
 
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i

D

t
n
e
s
e
r
p
 
y
l
e
r
a
R

 

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
o
r
p
 
r
a
t
c
e
N

 

g
n
o

l
 
f
o
 
e
s
a
b
 
r
a
e
n

s
e
b
u
t
 
n
e
l
l

o
p

r
a
t
c
e
n
 
y
r
e
t
a

W

 
e
s
o
x
e
h
 
r
o
 
e
s
o
r
c
u
S

 
,
s
e
b
u
t
 
l
a
r
o

l
f
 
n

i
 

 
e
n
o
r
u
a
 
o
t
 
e
u
d
 
r
o
o
c
 
n

l

i
 

d
e
r
 
e
b
 
y
a
m

 
r
a
t
c
e
N

 
s
i
 
r
a
t
c
e
n
 
f
o
 
t
n
u
o
m
a
 
e
g
r
a
l
 
,
t
n
e
m
g
i
p

s
d

i
c
a
 
o
n
m
a
 
n

i

i
 

d
e
c
u
d
o
r
p

w
o

l
 
,

h
c
i
r

 

r
a
t
c
e
n
h
c
i
r
 
e
s
o
r
c
u
S

 

 

d
n
a
n
o
i
t
a
c
o
l
 
r
a
t
c
e
N

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
r
p

Figure 4.10  E. splendens is likely to be 
pollinated by ants.

Floral Cell Biology and Diversity in Floral Cells

87

cells are also known to regulate temperature of petals (Whitney et al., 2011) (Figure 4.11). 
Mutants of P. hybrida showed that PhMYB1 plays important role in control of cell mor-
phogenesis in petal epidermis. In Erysimum cheirii, adaxial epidermal cells of petals are 
conical‐shaped, however, abaxial epidermis comprises of lenticular‐shaped cells (Weston 
& Pyke, 1999). Solitary stomata without subsidiary cells are found on abaxial epidermal 
cells of petals.

4.2.4  Anatomical Characteristics of Eudicot Petals
Globular chromoplasts are widely present in epidermal and mesophyll cells of petals 
which give a different color to the petals of flower. Yellow and orange color of petals are 
due to plastids which contain carotenoids, however, purple, blue or pink colors are 
mostly due to flavonoid compounds like anthocyanins which accumulate in vacuoles. 
In Arabidopsis, chloroplasts are dominant in young petals, however, during expansion 
they are replaced by colorless leucoplasts. Mesophyll cells of petals are composed of 
cells with prominent vacuoles. Lipid bodies are also present in chromoplasts of fully 
expanded petals along with starch granules. Petal maintenance is expensive for plants in 
term of respiratory energy, nutrients and water loss. Therefore, cells of petals are always 
in high energy demand and they need a lot of energy in form of sugars to synthesize 
pigments, essential oils and for the formation of nectar.

Petals are usually supplied with a single vascular trace having collateral vascular b undles. 
In paradermal section, vascular supply to petals appears like a network of long narrow 
vessels at the base, and broader near the tip of petals (Figure 4.12). However, in transverse 
section, structure of petals resemble with sepals in having three to four layers of homoge-
nous thin‐walled spongy parenchmya cells which are rich with plastids c ontaining differ-
ent pigments. Petals are also involved in photosynthetic activity as flowers of Petunia have 
active chloroplast and have metabolites like PSI that provide sugars for the pigment forma-
tion. In some flowers like Paenoia suffructicose, sucrose level significantly declines during 
the opening of flower due to their conversion in to glucose and fructose. Petals are also 
involved in programmed cell death (PCD) after pollination as many genes for regulating 
PCD are identified in petals of flowers with the help of screening and microarray analysis.

4.2.5  Morphological and Anatomic Features of Carpels
Carpel is the female reproductive part of flower which occupies the central position and 
protected  by  other  whorls.  This  position  also  provides  support  to  fertilized  ovules 

88

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(a)

(d)

(g)

(b)

(e)

(h)

(c)

(f)

(i)

Figure 4.11  (a‐i) Variation in shape and diameter of petal epidermal cells of: (a) Nerine sarniensis 
(∼100 μm in diameter), (b) Jasminum officinale (∼20 μm), (c) Nymphaea alba do not have conical cells 
(d-f) Variations in the steepness of the cone of conical cells, (d) Geranium procurrens, (e) Hibiscus 
trionum have different cells and (f) Helianthus annuus have striations on conical cells, (g-i) Variety in 
the base shape of conical cells, (g) Gazania krebsiana with rectangular cell, (h) Veronica have amoeboid 
cells, (i) Mentzelia lindleyi with regular striations (Whitney et al., 2000). (Used with permission of Oxford 
University Press.)

within the developing fruit. Carpel comprises of stigma, style and ovary. Stigma is the 
part of flower which receives pollens and is composed of secretory papillae (Figure 4.13). 
Stigma of wind‐pollinated flowers are long and feathery so they can easily receive pollen 
grains,  however,  those  of  insect  pollinated  flowers  is  round.  Stigma  is  followed  by 
n arrow style which leads to swollen part, that is, ovary at the base of carpel. Ovary is 
composed of many ovules which develop into seeds after fertilization. Ovary is known 
to be superior if it occupies top position on disc‐like structure i.e., receptacle. However 
if ovary is located at the level below other floral organs, it is known to be inferior. Ovules 
of insect pollinated flowers are generally many in number for fertilization, as compared 
to wind pollinated flowers where they are few. Ovary wall in many flowers is composed 
of secretory or nectar‐producing cells. Nectaries are present at the base of ovaries as 
disc‐shaped structures and also at the apex. Parenchyma cells of ovary contain secretary 
cavities which are surrounded by vascular bundles.

(a)

Growing fruit

Calyx

Flower bud

Lea(cid:10)ets

Thorns

(b)

(c)
Epidermal cells

Trichomes

Glandular trichomes

(d)

(e)

Epidermal cells

l
l
y
h
p
o
s
e

M

 

h
t
i

w

 
l
l
y
h
p
o
s
e

M

s
e
c
a
p
s
 
r
a
l
u
l
l
e
c
r
e
t
n
i

(f)

(g)

Anther

Filament

Stigma

Style

Figure 4.12  (a‐g) Floral anatomy of Rosa sp. (a) Flower, (b & c) T.S. and paradermal view of sepal, (d & e) T.S. & paradermal view of 
petal, (f) Anthers, (g) Stigma. (See insert for color representation of the figure.)

90

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 4.13  (a‐e) Diversity in shape and position of stigma in many angiosperms appear to be 
evolved in response to their pollinators: (a‐j) represent structural diversity in stigma of angiosperms, 
(a) Star‐shaped stigma of Dombeya rotundifolia may provide a suitable landing platform for insects, 
(b) Lobed stigma of Hibiscus sp. contain lot of hairs which may facilitate landing of bees, (c) Stigma of 
Cucumis sativus, (d) Tube‐like stigma of Abelmoschus esculentus is born on superior ovary, (e) Thread‐
like stigma of Alcea rosea.

Each carpel is supplied with two vascular bundles. Vascular bundles of carpels are 
collateral, having xylem on adaxial side and phloem on abaxial side and connect them 
with sepals and filaments (Figure 4.14). Cells of ventral epidermis of ovary are tubular 
in shape. Epidermal cells of style are also single layered and are pigmented.

4.2.6  Ovule Anatomy
Ovules (future seeds) are connected to the ovary wall by means of placenta which sup-
plies nutrients to ovule by means of funiculus through vascular tissues (Figures 4.14 & 4.15). 
Water and nutrients are supplied through placenta to the growing ovules which are 
surrounded by one or two integuments. Integuments on the other side of ovule are 
 connected a mass of parenchymatous cells which is known as nucellus.

Ovule has an opening known as micropyle, which is the site of entry of pollen tube. 
Micropyle bursts to allow tube and sperm cells to enter the ovule. The region opposite the 
micropyle is known as chalazal region. As fertilization proceeds, nucellus cells enlarge 
(some degenerate) and usually one cell develops into megaspore mother cell. After meio-
sis, three of four megaspores degenerate, and one survives which forms future egg cell, 
known as monosporic megasporogenesis (Figure 4.15). However, bisporic and tetrasporic 
megasporogenesis also occurs in many angiosperms in which two and four megaspore 
nuclei form female gametophyte respectively. AGO9‐ dependent SiRNA pathways 

Dorsal V.B showing xylem (in red)

Epidermis

and phloem (in blue)

Papillae

Stigma

Cortex

 (b)

Style

 (c)

e
l
u
c
o
L

Ovary

Dorsal V.B

 (a)

Ovules

 (d)

Transmitting tissue

Sperm cells

(e)

Mitochondria

Transmitting tissue provides 

nutrition for growing 

Tube nucleus

pollen tube

Pollen tube in transection 

within style

Ovary wall
Embryo sac

Lateral V.B

Funiculus

Figure 4.14  (a‐e) Anatomy of carpel of angiosperms: (a) Carpel showing stigma, style and ovary, (b) T.S. of stigma, (c) T.S. of style, 
(d) T.S. of ovary showing ovules, (e) A section through transmitting tissue within style.

(a)

(b)

Epidermis

Endothecium

(c)

Pollen 
grains

Middle layer

Microspore
Mother cell

Connective

Meiosis

(d)

(e)

(f)

Nucellus

Vacuole

Micropylar end
Inner integument

Funiculus

Tapetum

(g)

Chalazal end
Antipodal

Polar nuclei of central cell

Synergids

Egg cell

3 mitotic 
divisions

Meiosis

Figure 4.15  (a‐g) Development of male and female gametophytes of angiosperm: (a‐c) Development of male gametophyte, (a) Stamen 
showing anthers and filament, (b) T.S. of anther before meiotic division, (c) T.S. of anther after meiosis, (d‐g) Female gametophyte, (d) 
Carpel, (e) Young ovule in L.S., (f) Mature ovule in L.S., (g) T.S. of carpel.

Floral Cell Biology and Diversity in Floral Cells

93

are involved in singling out of megaspore mother cells (Olmedo‐ Monfil et al., 2010). 
Ovary may have one or more ovules, and each ovule has its own megaspore mother cell. 
It is important that sperms cells fertilize each egg cell within an ovule, only fertilized 
ovules will develop into seeds. The number of seeds within a fruit generally represent the 
number of sperm cells that fertilized each ovule.

Embyro sac of angiosperms generally is composed of 80 haploid nuclei within seven 
cells,  which  forms  egg  with  a  central  binucleate  cell  having  two  polar  nuclei,  three 
antipodal cells and one egg cell with two synergids. Central cell of embryo sac is com-
posed of two polar nuclei and a large vacuole for storage of sugar, amino acids and other 
reserves. The egg cell is present in the center towards micropylar end, closely associated 
with two synergids through plasmodesmata and collectively known as egg apparatus 
(Figure 4.15).

Synergids are highly polarized cells which are important for the determination of 
direction of the pollen tube into the embryo. They are rich in calcium and comprise a 
filiform apparatus which extends into the micropyle (Rudall, 2007). Large amounts of 
cytoplasm is present in synergids towards the micropylar end, however, nucleus and 
organelle  like  mitochondria  are  present  towards  filiform  apparatus,  and  chalazal 
p ortion composed of vacuoles. In addition, synergids secrete chemical signals for the 
guidance of a pollen tube. In angiosperms there is a great diversity in number, structure 
and role of antipodal cells. They act as vegetative and transfer cells of embryo sac having 
papillate walls, which is indicative of their role in providing nutrition to embryo sac. 
In  Z.  mays,  large  number  of  mitochondria,  and  secretory  structures  are  present  in 
antipodal cells.

In angiosperms, location of micropyle is an important criterion and ovules are divided 
into following types on the basis of curvature. Anatropous ovule type is most common 
in angiosperms in which micropyle gets displaced adjacent to funiculus base due to 
curvature  during  development  of  ovule.  In  orthotropous  type,  micropyle  is  located 
opposite  the  base  of  funiculus  without  any  curvature.  Amphitropous  ovules  possess 
nucellus curved or bent both at upper and lower ends, whereas campylotropous ovules 
have nucellus bent only towards the lower end.

4.2.7  Stamens: Morphology and Anatomy
A stamen usually is composed of anthers and filaments. A mature anther bears pollens 
within  its  terminal  sac  like  structures,  that  is,  microsporangia  (Figure  4.15). 
Microsporangia enclose highly specialized cells which include epidermal, endothecal, 
middle and tapetal layers bearing microsporocytes (pollen mother cells). Anther lobes 
are  connected  by  a  loose  mass  of  parenchymatous  region,  known  as  connective. 
Microsporangia are usually found in pairs, called theca. Majority of angiosperms com-
prise of two theca, however, a few species belonging to Malvaceae, Cannaceae, and 
Lamiaceae have only one theca and are monothecal. Microsporocytes are male repro-
ductive cells which form pollens through meiotic divisions in microsporangia. However, 
somatic cells of anthers like tapetum regulate the development and release of pollens. 
Tapetum is the inner most layer of anther wall. Sometimes, tapetum contains abnormal 
cells, that may cause male sterility. In Oryza sativa, a transcription factor, that is, tape-
tum degeneration retardation (TDR) triggers programmed cell death of tapetal cells 
and controls pollen and anther development by regulating OsADF (Oryza sativa anther 

94

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

development F‐Box) expression (Li et al., 2015). Anther tips of many eudicots are com-
posed of glandular or non glandular trichomes which serve multiple functions and are 
also involved in secretions and release of toxins. Glandular trichomes in developing leaf 
primordia  of  Helianthus  annuus  synthesize  sesquiterpene  lactones  (Aschenbrenner 
et al., 2015) which protect them against herbivory invasions.

Pollens are spores which are dispersed upon the hydrolysis of anther wall and are 
carried to stigma either by birds, wind or insects. Filaments of anthers may vary in 
length  within  a  single  flower,  depending  upon  whether  the  flowers  self‐pollinate  or 
cross‐pollinate. However, some flowers may produce short or reduced filaments or no 
filaments in sessile anthers.

Presence of green pigments in filaments suggests their role in sugar formation to 
f ulfill their own metabolic demands and to supply energy to tapetum for nourishing 
young growing pollens (see Chapter 8). Yellow color of pollens is due to flavonols, a 
pigment  which  can  be  detected  by  their  pollinators.  Epidermal  cells  of  anthers  in 
Metrodorea nigra are uniseriate when immature, however upon maturity they become 
papillose surrounded by a striate cuticle.

4.2.8  Vascular Supply to Stamens
Water and many nutrients dissolved in water are carried to stamens through vascular 
tissues, like all other floral parts. In many stamens, filaments and anther are traversed 
by a single central vascular bundles which are surrounded by parenchyma cells in their 
connective.  Filaments  have  usually  single  epidermis  which  surrounds  a  thin  paren-
chyma tissue and a single vascular bundle. Stamen vasculature of crabapple is composed 
of a single vascular bundle which branches at the base of anther lobes, whereas one 
ascending bundle increases in size and gradually frays out. However, vascular supply in 
anther of Prunus virginia, comprises of only four short phloem bundles, whereas xylem 
is  present  only  in  filament.  Xylem  in  stamens  of  many  angiosperms  is  relatively 
less developed and surrounded by xylem gap near the base. Discontinuous xylem is 
advantageous for stamens as it prevents water loss from exposed anthers and delays 
pollen release through dehiscence. This discontinuity in xylem may be due to disrup-
tion of xylem during rapid elongation of anther filaments. Stomata are also present on 
epidermal cells of anthers and their possible role is to speed up anther desiccation and 
dehiscence in order to facilitate rapid dispersal of pollens.

4.2.9  Stamen Anatomy and Pollen Development
Filaments of many anthers accumulate flavonoids which might suggest their sensitivity 
to UV light and supply sucrose to anthers. Their accumulation in pollens is important 
because many mutants deficit in chalcone synthase (enzyme required for flavonoid bio-
synthesis) are not capable of fertilization. However, some evidence suggests that stigma 
can also provide pollens with important flavonoids like kaempferol.

Developing  anthers  undergo  meiotic  divisions  and  form  microspore  mother  cells 
which further produces four uninucleate single‐celled microspore. Each haploid micro-
spore  divides  asymetrically  and  develops  into  a  microgametophyte  with  a  larger 
v egetative cell (that forms pollen tube) and smaller germ or generative cell. Thus a 
microgametophyte has one vegetative cell and two sperm cells which are produced by 
generative cell.

Floral Cell Biology and Diversity in Floral Cells

95

Many genes encoding biosynthesis of pollens, perception and signal transduction 
and several hormones auxins (IAA), gibberellins, and ethylene are identified in mature 
anther. Important genes identified in many angiosperms are those which are involved 
in  the  formation  of  anther  cell,  that  is,  EXCESS  MICROSPOROCYTES  1  (EMS1), 
EXTRA  SPOROGENOUS  CELLS  (EXS)  and  TAPETUM  DETERMINANT  (TPD1) 
(Yang et al., 2005).

EMS1 gene is predominantly expressed in tapetal cells, whereas TPD is expressed in 
microsporocytes. Both EMS and TPD determine the fates of reproductive cells. Failure 
of EMS‐TPD interaction results in the formation of adopted microsporocyte differen-
tiation. Evolutionary evidence suggested that EMS‐TPD signaling pathway is conserved 
in plants due to ortholog in rice and maize. As this pathway is present in both monocots 
and dicots, further research on EMS‐TPD can throw light on the evolution of male 
reproductive structures in angiosperms.

Angiosperms pollens are vegetative cells which contain sperm cells enclosed within 
the cell wall of anthers. Pollen development involves half of genome (over 1400 genes) 
in Arabidopsis. Almost half (600) of the 1350 are transcription factors in Arabidopsis 
that are detected at stage of pollen development. Each stage of pollen development 
requires a chain in profile of mRNA.

Maturation of pollen is dependent upon the gene expression of microspores in tape-
tum. Transcriptomic analysis of microspores has provided insight on the development 
of male gametophtyic. Laser microdissection is a important tool in this regard, which 
involves the isolation of specific cells from complicated plant tissue.

4.3  Morphology of Monocots Flowers

Flowers of many monocots like grasses may be sessile or present on pedicel which has 
internal structure similar to stem as they have scattered vascular bundles, in moncots 
however in case of dicot plants, pedicels have compactly arranged vascular bundles.

Monocots produce flowers in multiple of three, in contrast to eudicot flowers which 
usually produce five petals. As mentioned before that sepals and petals of many m onocot 
flowers cannot be differentiated and known as tepals (Figure 4.2). Anatomy of tepal, 
s tamen and carpel of A. vera is shown in (Figures 4.16 & 4.17).

Flowers of monocots like grasses and many trees are generally wind‐pollinated. They 
have  evolved  many  structural  adaptations  which  facilitate  wind  pollination.  These 
adaptations include small size of flower, presence of loosely attached anthers which can 
easily disperse pollens through wind and formation of large number of pollen grains. 
Further,  stigma  of  many  wind  pollinated  flowers  is  feathey  so  it  can  easily  capture 
p ollens. Inflorescence of grasses is spikelet. A grass ovary is composed of only a single 
bitegmic ovule so that a pollen tube is delivered directly to the ovarial cavity through a 
transmitting tract toward single ovule. Self‐incompatibility is common in grasses and 
reported in 13 subfamilies of Poaceae.

Zea mays bears both male and female flowers on the same plant (Figure 4.18). Female 
flowers  are  born  within  ears  which  arise  on  a  lateral  branch  and  are  composed  of 
modified leaves which are 8–10 in number, known as husks and prophylls. Each female 
flower  comprises  a  long  style  also  known  as  silk  which  appears  green  and  red. 
Pollination is both by cross‐ and self‐pollination. Immature ovules develop into edible 

96

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(a)

(b)

Figure 4.16  (a‐b) (a) Section through tepal of A. vera, (b) Close view.

seeds  kernels  or  caryopsis  after  fertilization  which  are  borne  on  fruit,  which  is 
c ommercially known as a cob.

The terminal branch is composed of tassels which contains thousands of stamens 
which are held by florets comprising three stamens when they become mature. Within 
each of these anthers, 500 cells can initiate meiosis and can produce approximately 
2000 pollen grains per anther, so it is estimated that a maize tassel produces 107 pollens 
per anthers. Maize pollens are monocolpate like other monocots. Three MADs box 
genes are identified during the floral development of maize anthers. ZmMADS1 and 
ZmMADS3 are expressed in immature tassels, whereas ZnMADS2 is highly expressed 
in pollens.

4.3.1  An Account of Economic Importance of Z. mays (Corn)
Corn seed industry is one of the most important industry commercially among all other 
cereals. Corn hybrids are produced using techniques in plant breeding. It is one of the 
major cereal crop of U.S used as food, feed and for industrial purposes and second most 
important crop worldwide. Corn is one of the world’s ancient crop known to be culti-
vated in different regions of world including North and South America before Columbus. 
Teosinte is one of the close relative of corn, however, corns are better evolved due to 
evolved morphological characters. Formation of corn varieties by Native Americans 
have a long history when corn was considered to be ‘gift of god’. All major varieties of 
corn including dent, flint, flour, pop and sweet corns had been developed by that time. 
Major uses of corns were flour, soup, beverages and candies. Candies were produced 
from boiling and drying of immature corns kancha. A confection pinole was made by 
grinding of kernels, and alcoholic drink chicha was prepared by fermentation.

Corn seeds and products find numerous applications in food, seed oil, biofuel and 
plastic  industries.  A  mature  kernel  is  known  to  comprise  of  70–75%  starch,  8–10% 
p rotein,  and  4–5%  of  oil.  Immature  kernels  have  high  amount  of  sugar  however,  at 
maturity becomes rich with oil, protein and starch. Sweet corns are consumed while 
they are young and rich in sugar. Kernel protein, oil and sugar can be modified through 
techniques in plant breeding in order to increase their applications in future.

Starch, protein, fiber and oil extracted from corn during industrial milling are used in 
making sweeteners, food additive, alcohol, corn syrups, and distilled in ethyl alcohol for 
beverages, fuel, and pharmaceutical applications. Corn‐based starch, sugars and alco-
hol are used in making papers, textiles and paints, whereas oil extracted from endosperm 

 (a)

(c)

(e)

Pollen

Filaments

(b)

(d)

Epidermal 

cells

(f)

Anther

Papillate stigma

(g)

Figure 4.17  (a‐g) (a) Aloe vera flower, (b‐f) Anatomy of monocot flower (A. vera), (b) Tepal in L.S., 
(c) Tepal from epidermal side, (d) Tepal from inner side, (e) Anther, (f) Style, (g) Pollens.

98

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Figure 4.18  Floral anatomy of corn (Z. mays) showing 
tassels which are male flower and ear with silk, which is the 
developing female flower.

Tassels

Silk

  Ear

is  used  in  cooking  oils.  Glutamic  acid  from  corn  is  used  as  food  flavoring  agent. 
There is significant increase in corn‐based products in industries in China since 2008. 
Fuel ethanol formation from corn started on industrial scale in 2008. Waxy cornstarch 
is used for finishing purpose in textile industries due to its clean film forming properties. 
It is also used as an adhesive in making bottle labels.

4.4  Channels and Transporters Within Floral Cells

Mechanisms of intracellular transport within flowers of angiosperms are complex and 
are  yet  not  properly  understood.  Cells  of  sepals,  petals,  stamens  and  carpels  are 
c omposed  of  many  intracellular  protein  channels  through  which  organelles  of  cells 
communicate for transport of molecules. However, as explained earlier, that transport 
of molecules like sugar and water from one floral whorl to other will take place only 
through vascular tissues. Protein transporters of sepals may be different from those 
in petals as petals contain channels for pigment transport and accumulation like ABC 
channels, and also for nectar transport.

Al  transporters  genes  vacuolar  Al  transporter  (VALT)  and  plasma  membrane 
Al  transporter  1  (PALT1)  (members  of  aquaporins  family)  in  sepals  of  Hydrangea 
m acrophylla are responsible for their blue coloration. Their identification in vacuolar 
and plasma membrane have suggested presence of Al transport system (Negishi et al., 
2012). Date from reverse transcription‐PCR and immunoblotting techniques showed 

Floral Cell Biology and Diversity in Floral Cells

99

that VALT and PALT1 are highly expressed in sepal tissue of H. macrophylla. Al sensitive 
plants are produced through using Dhsp150 yeast (Figure 4.19). In a study, overexpression 
of VALT and PALT1 in Arabidopsis thaliana conferred Al tolerance and Al‐sensitivity, 
respectively. This study can be further explored in making heavy metals‐resistant plants.
Temperature  dependent  opening  and  closing  of  petals  is  controlled  by  proteins 
c hannels which are localized within cell membranes of petals. Flow of water molecules 
during day time from stem to petals of tulips cause phosphorylation of cell membrane 
localized  aquaporins  which  result  in  opening  of  petals  and  rapid  decrease  in  water 
molecules at low temperature close petals. When petals are fully opened, water mole-
cules  remain  constant  within  them  (Figure  4.20).  Dephosphorylation  of  aquaporins 
result in closing of tulips petals. TgPIP2;2 is present in all organs of tulip and regulates 
m ovement of water molecules.

The vacuoles of epidermal cells of petals of many angiosperms accumulate many pig-
ments which are vital for their pollination. These pigments occupy large part of petals 
epidermal cells in order to enhance coloration and make them more attractive. However, 
color of tissue is dependent upon pH of vacuole and is affected by low pH. In Ipomoea 
tricolor (morning glory), low vacuolar pH gives red color at young stage, however, an 
increase in pH imparts blue color to flowers. This change in color and pH is controlled 
by a PURPLE gene which encodes Na+/H+ exchanger which functions by transporting 
of Na ions into the vacuole and H out of vacuole and gives blue color to vacuole (Fukuda‐
Tanaka et al., 2000). NHX1 genes encodes vacuolar Na+/H+ exchanger which catalyze 
exchange  of  Na+  for  H+  across  tonoplast.  Na+  transport  in  vacuole  is  promoted  by 
NHX1 proteins which are energized by H+ gradient generated by vacuolar H+ ATPase 
and  H+‐pyrophosphatase  (Figure  4.20).  Pollens  comprise  tandem  pore  K+  channel 
TPK4, which is only found in pollen and is important for maintaining ion homeostasis 
during pollen growth tube.

ABC  transporters  also  regulate  transport  of  secondary  metabolites  like  alkaloids. 
Morphine  is  also  assumed  to  be  transported  through  ABC  transporters  in  opium. 
Berberine produced by Cortis japonica is transported by ABC transporter CjMDR1 
localized  on  cell  membrane,  however  for  its  transport  in  vacuole,  H+‐  antiporter  is 
involved. Berberine is biosynthesized in root tissues, translocated and accumulated in 
rhizome as anti‐microbial compound against soil‐borne microorganisms. Cell mem-
brane localized CjMDR1 transports this alkaloid inward and within a vacuole it is trans-
ferred by proton developed gradient in energy‐dependent way.

Transport of sclareol, antifungal terpenoid by Nicotiana spp, is dependent on pleio-
tropic  drug  resistance  (PDR)‐type  ABC  transporter  located  on  cell  membrane. 
Arabidopsis and Spirodela comprise of many PDR members which transfer sclareol 
within cell. Phenolic compounds exist in glycosylated form in vacuoles of many plants.
Multidrug  resistance‐associated  proteins  (MRP  or  ABCC)  play  important  role  in 
sequestration of glucosides. In barley, proton antiporters of vacuoles transport flavo-
noid glucosides like isovitexin and saponarin, and ABC transporters transport herbi-
cides (Frangne et al., 2002). In maize, ZmMRP3, ABC transporter localized in tonoplast 
is involved in accumulation of anthocyanins in vacuoles. In Arabidopsis and tomato 
multidrug and toxic compound extrusion (MATE) family is responsible for vacuolar 
transport  of  proanthocyanidin  and  anthocyanins  through  antiport  mechanism. 
ABC transporters (ABCG‐type) localized in plasma membrane of Arabidopsis are also 
involved in wax secretion on stem surface.

100

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(a)

stage 1

stage 2

stage 3

cytosol

?

?

Al3+

HO

COOH

RO

OH

OH

O

HO

O

HO

O

OH

vacuole

Al3+

Al3+

O

OH

O

OH

OH

Al3+

HO

Schematic model of blue coloration 

transverse section of stage

(b)

Ɗ hsp 150 yeast 

(weak cell wall)

Al3+

cDNA library

cytosol
Al3+

Al3+
Al3+

Al3+

vacuole

Al-sensitive

microarray

candidate gene

Al3+

cytosol

Al3+

Al3+

Al3+

Al3+
vacuole

Al-tolerant

Figure 4.19  (a‐b) Identification of Al transporters in Hydrangea sepals. (a) Development of blue color in 
sepal of H. macrophylla is due to Al3+ complex of delphinidin 3‐glucoside and quinic acid esters in the 
vacuoles of the second layer (Scale bar of the transverse section = 50 mm). (b) Scheme showing 
identification of gene responsible for vacuolar Al transporter. Main steps involved selection of candidate 
gene, refining by cDNA microarray analyses and comparing the results of database search functions and 
subcellular localizations. Dhsp 150 yeast with weak cell wall was used for screening in order to facilitate 
Al entry within cell. If the candidate gene encoded a vacuolar Al transport activity, transformant in 
Dhsp150 yeast became tolerant of Al and segregated Al in vacuoles (Negishi et al., 2012).

(a)

(b)

(c)

V-ATPase

V-PP 
(vacuolar pyrophosphate)

r
e
g
u
l
a
t
i
n
g

 

p
H

C
h
a
n
n
e
l
s
 
i
n

 

v
a
c
u
o
l
e
 

Purple
Color

Blue
Color

Tulip Petal

Low
Fe3+

High
Fe3+

VITI
(vacuolar iron trasnporter)
expressed in blue part of tulip 
petals (homologue of 
Arabidopsis VITI)

Metals ions (Fe3+) determine petals color in 

tulip petal

(e)

Na+ / H+ exchanger encoded by NHXI gene

(f)

transports Na+ in vacoule

Vacuole

V-ATPase & V-PP regulate anthocyanin 

transport in vacuole of petal

(d)

Red
Color

Low
pH

H+
H+

Blue
Color

High
pH

H+
H+

H+

H+

H+

H+
H+ H+
H+

H+

 Young petal cell of 

Ipomoea tricolor

Mature petal of 

I. tricolor

Gradient developed by H+in Petunia 
causes increase in pH and changes

petal color

Figure 4.20  (a‐f) Role of vacuolar channels of petals: (a) V‐ATPase and V‐PP (vacuolar pyrophosphate) regulate anthocyanins 
transport in vacuoles of petals, (b &c) Metals like Fe3+ are involved in regulating color of tulip petals. Low Fe3+ gives pink color to 
petals while higher amount of Fe3+ gives blue color to tulip petals. VIT1 (vacuolar ion transporter) is expressed in blue part of petals, 
(d) Low pH gives red color to petal of Ipomoea tricolor, (e) High pH gives blue color, (f) Gradient developed by H+ in Petunia causes an 
increase in pH and a change in color of petal.

102

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Secondary metabolism in petals is active during the later stages of petal developments 
producing  many  flavonoids,  carotenoids  and  fragrant  molecules.  Petals  accumulate 
high amount of pigment during the cell expansion phase.

4.5  Future Perspectives

Protein channels for intercellular transport within cells of sepals, petals and stamens 
and carpels need to be identified in many flowers so their primary metabolism and 
physiological pathways can be well understood and genes for resistance can be over‐
expressed in other plants to increase their resistance against stress conditions.

Genetic mechanisms underlying evolutionary shifts between bird pollination and bee 
pollination need to be recognized. Major trait associated with bird pollination is the red 
color, which is related with anthocyanin pathways so characterization of further genes 
involved in this pathway can aid information about evolution of bird pollination. So far 
only  one  gene  has  been  linked  with  shifts  to  bird  pollination  which  includes  flavo-
noid‐3′‐hydroxylase  (F3′H)  in  Ipomoea.  Over‐expression  of  CYCLOIDEA  genes  is 
reported in hanging bell‐shaped flowers of Cadia which are suggested to be involved in 
acquisition  of  morphological  features  required  for  pollination  by  birds.  With  the 
increase in whole‐genome information, evolutionary mechanisms in relation to bird 
pollination can be understood properly.

References

Aschenbrenner, A.K., Amrehn, E., Bechtel, L., & Spring, O. (2015). ‘Trichome 

differentiation on leaf primordial of Helianthus annuus (Asteraceae): morphology, gene 
expression and metabolite profile’, Planta, 241, pp. 837–847.

Cronk, Q. & Ojeda, I. (2007). ‘Bird‐pollinated flower in an evolutionary and molecular 

context’, Journal of Experimental Botany, 59, pp. 715–727.

Frangne, N., Eggmann, T., Koblischke, C., Weissenbock, G., Martinoia, E., & Klein, M. 
(2002). ‘Flavone glucoside uptake into barley mesophyll and Arabidopsis cell culture 
vacuoles. Energization occurs by H + ‐antiport and ATP‐binding cassette‐type 
mechanisms’, Plant Physiology, 128, pp. 726–733.

Fukada‐Tanaka, S., Inagaki, Y., Yamaguchi, T., Saito, N., & Iida, S. (2000). ‘Color‐enhancing 

protein in blue petals’, Nature, 407(6804), p. 581.

Li, L., Li, X., Song, S., Deng, H., Li, N., Fu, X., Chen, G., & Yuan, L. (2015). ‘An anther 
development F‐Box (ADF) protein regulated by tapetum degeneration retardation 
(TDR) controls anther rice development’, Planta, 241, pp. 157–166.

Lohmann, J.U., Hong, R.L., Hobe, M., Busch, M., Parcy, F., Simon, R., & Weigel, D. (2001). 
‘A molecular link between stem cell regulation and floral patterning in Arabidopsis, Cell, 
105, pp. 793–803.

Melzer, R., Wang, Y.Q., & Theissen, G. (2010). ‘The naked and the dead: the ABCs of 
angiosperm reproduction and the origin of angiosperm flower’, Seminars in Cell & 
Developmental Biology, 21, pp. 118–128.

Negishi, T., Oshima, K., Hattori, M., Kanai, M., Mano, S., Nishimura, M., & Yoshida, K. 

(2012). ‘Tonoplast and Plasma Membrane‐Localized Aquaporin‐Family Transporters in 

Floral Cell Biology and Diversity in Floral Cells

103

Blue Hydrangea Sepals of Aluminum Hyperaccumulating Plant’, PLoS ONE, p. e43189. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0043189.

Olmedo‐Monfil, V., Duran‐Figueroa, N., Arteaga‐Vazquez, M., Demesa‐Arevelo, E., 

Autran, D., Grimanelli, D., Slotkin, R.K., Martienssen, R.A., & Vielle Calzada, J.P. (2010). 
‘Control of female gamete formation by small RNA pathway in Arabidopsis’,  Nature, 464, 
pp. 628–632.

Rudall, P. (2007). Anatomy of Flowering Plants: An Introduction to Structure and 

Development. 3rd Edition. Cambridge University Press.

de Waal, C., Anderson, B., & Barrett, C.S. (2012). ‘The natural history of pollination and 

mating in bird‐pollinated Babiana (Iridaceae)’, Annals of Botany, 3, pp. 667–679.

Weston, E.L. & Pyke, K.A. (1999). ‘Developmental Ultrastructure of Cells and Plastids in 

the Petals of Wallflower (Erysimum cheiri)’, Annals of Botany, 84, pp. 763–769.

Whitney, M.H., Bennett, K.M.V., Dorling, M., Sandbach, L., Prince, D., Chittka, L., & 
Glover, B.J. (2001). ‘Why do so many petals have conical epidermal cells?’ Annals of 
Botany, 108, pp. 609–616.

Yang, S.L., Jiang, L., Pua, C., Xie, L.F., Zhang, X.Q., Chen, L.Q., Yang, W.C., & Ye, D. (2005). 
‘Overexpression of TAPETUM DETERMINANT1 alters the cell fates in the Arabidopsis 
carpel and tapetum via genetic interaction with EXCESS MICROS‐POROCYTES1/
EXTRA SPOROGENOUS CELLS’, Plant Physiology, 139, pp. 186–191.

Further Reading

Azad, A.K., Katsuhara, M., Sawa, Y., Ishikawa, T., & Shibata, H. (2008). ‘Characterization of 

four plasma membrane aquaporins in tulip petals: a putative homolog is regulated by 
phosphorylation’, Plant Cell Physiology, 49, pp. 1196–208.

Blumwald, E., Aharon, G.S., & Apse, M.P. (2000). ‘Sodium transport in plant cells’, 

Biochimica et Biophysica Acta, 1465, pp. 40–151.

Chang, M.T. & Neuffer, M.G. (1994). ‘Chromosomal behavior during microsoporogenesis’, 

In: Freeling M, Walbot V, eds. The Maize Handbook. New York: Springer‐Verlag. 
pp. 460–475.

Causier, B., Schwarz‐Sommer, Z., & Davies, B. (2010). ‘Floral organ identity: 20 years of 

ABC’,  Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology, 21, pp. 73–79.

Dudareva, N., Pichersky, E., & Gershenzon, J. (2004). ‘Biochemistry of plant volatiles’, 

Plant Physiology, 135, pp. 1893–1902.

Ganelevin, R. & Zieslin, N. (2002). ‘Contribution of sepals and gibberellin treatment to 
growth and development of rose (Rosa hybrida) flowers,. Plant Growth Regulation, 
37, pp. 255–261.

Guilfoyle, T.J. & Hagen, G. (2007). ‘Auxin response factors’, Current Opinion in Plant 

Biology, 10, pp. 453–460.

Heuer, S., Hansen, S., Bantin, J., Brettschneider, R., Kranz, E., Lörz, H., & Dresselhaus, T. 

(2001). ‘The maize MADS box gene ZmMADS3 affects node number and spikelet 
development and is co‐expressed with ZmMADS1 during flower development, in egg 
cells, and early embryogenesis’, Plant Physiology, 127, pp. 33–45. doi: 10.1104/
pp.127.1.33.

Honys, D., Oh, S.A., Renak, D., Donders, M., Solcova, B., Johnson, J.A., Boudova, R., & 
Twell, D. (2006). ‘Identification of microspore‐active promoters that allow targeted 

104

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

manipulation of gene expression at early stages of microgametogenesis in Arabidopsis’, 
BMC Plant Biology, 6, pp. 1–9.

Jasinski, M., Stukkens, Y., Degand, H., Purnelle, B., Marchand‐Brynaert, J., & Boutry, M. 
(2001). ‘A plant plasma membrane ATP binding cassette‐type transporter is involved in 
antifungal terpenoid secretion’, Plant Cell, 13, pp. 1095–1107.

de Souza, L.A., Moscheta, I.S., Mourão, K.S.M., & da Rosa, S.M. (2004). ‘Morphology and 
Anatomy of the Flower and Anthesis of Metrodorea nigra St. Hill. (Rutaceae),’ Brazilian 
Archives of Biology & Technology, 47, pp. 107–112.

McSteen, P. & Zhao, Y. (2008). ‘Plant hormones and signaling: common themes and new 

developments’, Developmental Cell, 14, pp. 467–473.

Nakazono, M., Qui, F., Brsuk, L.A., & Schnable, P.S. (2003). ‘Laser‐capture microdissection, 

a tool for the global analysis of gene expression in specific plant cell type: identification 
of genes expressed differentially in epidermal cell or vascular tissues of maize’, Plant Cell, 
15, pp. 583–596.

Nonomura, K., Miyoshi, K., Eiguchi, M., Suzuki, T., Miyao, A., Hirochika, H., & Kurata, N. 

(2003). ‘The MSP1 gene is necessary to restrict the number of cells entering into male 
and female sporogenesis and to initiate anther wall formation in rice’, Plant Cell, 15, 
pp. 1728–1739.

Otani, M., Shitan, N., Sakai, K., Martinoia, E., Sato, F., & Yazaki, K. (2005). 

‘Characterization of vacuolar transport of the endogenous alkaloid berberine in 
Coptis japonica,’  Plant Physiology, 138, pp. 1939–1946.

Reddy, S.M. (2007). University Botany III (Plant Taxonomy, Plant Embryology, Plant 

Physiology), 3, New Age International Publishers.

Yazaki, K. (2006). ‘ABC transporters involved in the transport of plant secondary 

metabolites’, FEBS Letters, 580, pp. 1183–1191.

Floral Cell Biology and Diversity in Floral Cells

105

Problems Chapter 4

1  Compare flower morphology of the following group of angiosperms: (a) Monocots 

(b) Rosids (c) Asterids.

2  What major products of industrial importance are mainly synthesized by flowers of 

eudicots?

3  Explain different floral and anatomical features of monocots flowers which differentiate 

them from eudicots flowers.

4  Differentiate sepal anatomy from petal anatomy with the help of diagrams.
5  What evidences will you give to justify that plant A is pollinated by wind, however, 
plant B is pollinated by birds. Give your answer by filling the blanks in column A and B.

Characteristics

Plant A

Plant B

Shape of petals
Nectar guides
Nectar rich in sucrose
Size of flower
Secretion of volatile compounds

‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐-
Rarely present
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐-
Small
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
Yes
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐-
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐-‐

6 

Identify  and  label  different  parts  of  flowers  below  and  also  name  their  possible 
pollinators.
(a)

(b)

7 

Justify that presence of tepals, feather stigma, and formation of large number of 
pollens by monocot flowers ensure successful pollination through wind.

8  Explain  different  adaptations  which  many  bird‐pollinated  flowers  have  evolved 

 during the course of evolution in order to be pollinated by birds.

106

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

9  Stigma of grasses is feathery while in eudicots it is composed of papillate in many 
species. How do both kinds of stigmas ensure landing and germination pollen tube 
on their surfaces?

10  Anther  lobes  of  some  stamens  are  supplied  with  phloem  as  a  vascular  tissue. 
However, xylem does not enter the anther lobes and ends in filaments. Explain 
your answer with reasons.

11  What is the significance of intercellular spaces in sepal mesophyll?
12  Do  you  think  apopetaly  is  a  advanced  feature  as  compared  with  Gamopetaly? 

Justify your answer.

13  Collateral vascular bundles are present in petals of many plants, which means that 
they surround xylem directly towards sunlight, whereas phloem is directed towards 
gravity. This arrangement is opposite as compared in most stems where phloem is 
towards  epidermis  and  xylem  towards  pith.  How  this  arrangement  of  vascular 
bundles is advantageous for petals?

14  What is role of aquaporins in opening of petals?
15  How  vacuoles  are  important  for  a  flower?  Explain  their  role  in  cells  of  sepals, 

p etals, stamens and carpels?

16  Explain various protein channels which are present in cell membrane of epidermal 

cells of petals with their brief roles.

17  Explain floral morphology of any one economically important member of family 

18 

Poaceae.
Identify the flowers as you see below and explain which of them are:
A  monoecious and dioecious
B  staminate and carpellate flowers
C  insect pollinated and wind pollinated

(a)

(b)

107

5

Signaling During Sexual Reproduction in Angiosperms

5.1 

Introduction

Angiosperms have evolved many efficient means of sexual reproduction over the period 
of time which include adaptation of various morphological characteristics in response 
to different climatic conditions and in response to their pollinators. Flower morphology 
and anatomy is evolved in a way that it ensures successful pollination and fertilization 
and also increase the chances of survival of angiosperms. Biosynthesis of pigments, 
release of aromatic signals, secretion of nectar, signals which act as molecular or chemi-
cals cues for recognition of pollen, exudation of pollen receptive fluids by stigmatic 
papillae, entry and development of pollen tube within carpel, expression of proteins 
like gamma‐aminobutyric acid (GABA) all of these factors facilitate pollination and 
fertilization within angiosperms.

As plants cannot move, therefore, they have to rely upon their pollinators which are 
responsible for the transfer of pollen (microspore (n)) to egg (n) present within the 
embryo sac of ovules. Floral initiation is a genetically controlled feature which is regu-
lated by many factors like physiological age, sugar and nutrients availability, regulation 
of  hormones,  and  environmental  conditions.  Depending  upon  species,  a  plant  may 
enter reproductive stage within few weeks, however in many plants, it starts over a 
period of years. Many monocots and herbaceous plants complete their life cycle earlier 
than tall woody plants.

Angiosperms  produce  stamens  (microsporophylls)  and  carpel  (megasporophylls) 
either on the same sporophyte (2n) or on a different sporophyte. When they bear sta-
mens and carpel on same flower, or on the same plant, they are known as monoecious, 
if they bear it on different plants, they are dioecious. Monoecious usually self‐pollinate, 
however,  dioecious  cross‐pollinate.  Nymphaeae  thermarum  (one  of  the  threatened 
basal angiosperm) prevents self‐pollination by releasing pollens before the opening of 
female flower and through deposition of callose in cell wall of micropyle (opening of 
ovule) (Povilus et al., 2015).

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products, First Edition. Aisha Saleem Khan. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.108

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

5.2  Angiosperms Show Diversity in Their Sporophytic 
and Gametophytic Generations

Floral initiation in angiosperms is an indication of transition from vegetative to repro-
ductive stage. Environmental conditions and many abiotic factors also play crucial role 
in the flower initiation like nutrients availability in soil, temperature, sunlight, humidity 
and other climatic conditions. Floral initiation is delayed in many plants if these factors 
are not sufficient to fulfill the metabolic demands of growing cells.

Signaling by phytohormones, that is, gibberellines (GA3), auxins, methyl jasmonates, 
brassinosteroids and other hormones also plays an important role in growth and devel-
opment of floral organs. Floral initiation is energetically expensive for plants because it 
requires energy. Furthermore, less availability of important nutrients due to stress con-
ditions may also cause disturbance of hormones required for floral development and 
this may also effect formation of flowers (Chaudhry & Khan, 2006). If enough sugars are 
not  produced,  flower  formation  will  be  delayed  which  also  results  in  delay  in  fruit 
formation.

5.3  Angiosperms Spend Most Part of Their Lives as 
Sporophytes and Produce Gametophytes for a Shorter 
Period of Time

Angiosperms like tall trees spend most part of their lives as sporophytes. Sporophyte 
(2n) is a spore‐bearing structure which is produced by male (sperms) and female (egg) 
cells. It is a dominating stage in many angiosperms. A sporophyte gives rise to gameto-
phyte. Many plants (particularly in autumn) which we see all around us are in their 
sporophytic stage which have not yet started flowering or either produce flowers under 
certain environmental conditions. Formation of bud represents the beginning of game-
tophytic stage which leads to floral initiation, pollination, fertilization, seed and fruit 
formation. Fertilization represents the end of gametophytic stage, and also the begin-
ning of sporophytic stage which through several mitotic divisions forms sporophyte. 
In angiosperms, meiotic divisions take place only within the anthers and ovaries of 
flowers. Whole growth and development from seed germination to huge trees is entirely 
through mitotic divisions.

In angiosperms two generations, that is, haploid gametophyte and a diploid sporophyte 
alternate with each other and differ in shape and functions. Diploid (2n) reproductive 
organs of plants have haploid (n) gametophytic structures comprising a few cells within 
their  micro  and  megagametophytes.  Development  of  these  gametes  is  regulated  by 
gametophtyic and sporophtyic gene expression.

Figures 5.1 through 5.8 show different developmental stages in the life cycles of 
monocots and eudicots from flower initiation leading to fruit formation. Compare 
how  sporophytic  generation  of  these  economically  important  angiosperms  differ 
from their gametophtyic generation and also diversity in structures of gametophtyic 
in different groups of angiosperms. As an example of monocot herbs, life cycles of 
Allium  cepa  and  Z.  mays  which  are  popular  monocot  herbs  world‐wide.  Daisies 

(a)

Signaling During Sexual Reproduction in Angiosperms

109

(b)

(c)

Figure 5.1  (a‐c) Life cycle of Allium cepa (onion): (a) Leaves with bulbs represent sporophyte (2n), 
whereas (b & c) flower are gametophytes which bear haploid microspores (n) and embryo sac with 
haploid cells like egg cells (n) which after fertilization form a diploid zygote (2n). Formation of zygote 
is beginning of a sporophytic generation (2n) in angiosperms.

represents example of dicot herbs which are an important medicinal and ornamental 
plants. Life cycle of two ornamental shrubs, that is, Rosa spp. and Alcea spp. are 
included  as  they  are  also  very  popular  worldwide  and  their  products  are  used  in 
many industrial products. Trees also exhibit a great diversity in their gametophtyic 
and sporophytic generations. As an example, life cycle of Carica papaya and Citrus 
sp. is shown.

110

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(c)

(d)

(e)
Male (cid:21)ower 
with anthers

(b)

(a)

Anther 

(f)

(g)

Pollens falling

on female (cid:9)ower 

silk style
(h)

(m)

 Life cycle of Z. mays (corn)

(i)

(j)

Silk style
(withers after 
pollination)

Seeds 
(fertilized ovules)
(l)

Shank

Silk

Husk

Column of 
ovules

(k)

Silk

L.S of female (cid:21)ower

Figure 5.2  (a‐l) (a & b) Different stages in life cycle of Z. mays (corn) showing sporophytic and 
gametophytic generations, (c‐e) Tassels are male inflorescence of corn plants and bear male flowers on 
top, (f‐g) Ears are female inflorescence which form corn kernel and bear red colored style,  
(h) A section through style of female flower (i‐j) Female inflorescence (k) Mature ear, (l) Section through 
kernel bearing seeds, (m) Corn cob bearing kernels.

In order to understand sexual reproduction in angiosperms, it is important to go 
through  the  development  of  male  and  female  gametes  within  their  micro  and 
mega‐gametangia.

In  maize  ovary,  a  single  embryo  sac  containing  haploid  egg  is  formed  by  meiotic 
 division of a single cell, however in anthers haploid pollen grains are produced by more 
than one cells. Maize stigma also known as maize silk are one of the longest as  compared 
with eudicots. Stigma is extended and fused over most of its length, thus comprising 
two transmitting tracts, one in each silk half. Xylanase XYN1, hydrolases, and class B, 
ß‐expansins play important role in stigma invasion in maize. Pollen tubes generated 
flavonols support pollen tube growth (Dresselhaus et al., 2011) (Figure 5.2 ii). Maize silk 
which is almost 20 cm in length supports growth of pollen tube because reserves in 
pollen can support growth only upto 2 cm.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Signaling During Sexual Reproduction in Angiosperms

111

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 5.2  (ii) Steps in pollen adhesion, germination and growth towards female gametophyte 
(pollens stained with aniline blue). (a) Growth of pollen within silk which is a corn stigma that initially 
involves pollen capture, adhesion and hydration. (b) Cross‐section of an unpollinated maize silk 
(xylem vessels are indicated by asterisks). (c) Cross‐sections of a pollinated silk. Maize pollen tubes 
(arrows) growth in the intercellular spaces of fusiformous transmitting tract cells. (d) Small grass 
pollen such as from blue moor grass (Sesleria cearulea) germinate normally on maize silk hairs (an 
emerged tube is marked with an arrow), without invading the intercellular spaces between papilla 
hair cells. (e) Maize silk pollinated with Arabidopsis thaliana. Although pollen germinated at stigmatic 
hairs but tubes (arrows) do not invade stigmatic tissues. (f) A single pollen tube (arrow) penetrates the 
nucellus to discharge its contents in the receptive synergid cell upon its entry through micropyle. 
Abbreviations: fg, female gametophyte; ph, phloem; tt, transmitting tract (Dresselhaus et al., 2011). 
(Used with permission of Oxford University Press.)

5.4  Septs From Pollination to Fertilization

After pollination, pollens are transferred to stigma of female flowers which represents a 
pre‐requisite in fertilization.

5.4.1  Stigma of Angiosperms May be Dry or Wet
Angiosperms exhibit morphological diversity in stigma types (as described in Chapter 4) 
which is the receptive part of carpel, however, here the main focus is on exudating and 
non‐exudating stigma. Stigmatic surface is enriched with glandular and non‐glandular tri-
chomes and epidermal cells forming papillae which secrete many signals to recognize com-
patible pollens in order to facilitate rehydration of pollens and also for the growth of pollen 
tube within style. Contact of pollen with papillar cells of stigma is a prerequisite for pollen 
activation in members of family Brassicaceae, that is, Arabidopsis and Brassica. Stigma of 

112

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 5.3  (a‐d) Developmental stages of Osteospermum sp. (cape daisy): (a) Bud formation, (b) Flower 
initiation. Composite flower is composed of ray and disc florets, (c) Withered flower, (d) Achenes are 
seeds which develop into a new daisy plant which is a sporophyte (2n).

angiosperms are composed of dorsal and ventral vascular bundles surrounded by compact 
or loose mass of glandular and metabolically active parenchmya cells which form transmis-
sion tissue. It supports the growth of pollen tube through the style. Cells of self‐incompatible 
stigma discourages self‐pollination by inhibiting pollen hydration, germination and inva-
sion of pollen tube. Figure 5.9 shows main  pollination events on the rose stigma.

Angiosperms may have wet and dry stigmas depending upon the presence or absence of 
an exude. Exudates of wet stigma completely cover the pollen grains which promotes the 
growth of pollen tube. These exudates rehydrate the desiccated pollens and allow them to 
germinate by acting as signals. Wet stigmas have a smooth surface which is associated with 
binucleate pollen grains. In wet stigma, exudates are composed of carbohydrates, proteins, 
lipids which facilitate germination of pollen tube. Tobacco has wet stigma which secretes 
lipid trigylcerides for pollen germination. Intercellular spaces of stigma also secrete exudates 
and guides the direction of the pollen tube. In addition to triglycerides, stigma exudates also 
is composed of many phenolic compounds, proteins, enzymes and glycoproteins. Glycine‐
rich lipids (GRL) are found in Brassicaceae and act as a signal in pollen recognition.

Stigma of some plants like Arabidopsis, O. sativa, and Crocus is dry (Li et al., 2007). 
In dry stigma, exine of pollens stimulates adhesion reaction through the mobilization of 
pollen coat. Some members of family Asteraceae have semi‐dry stigma.

Angiosperms have many genes which encode proteins in order to facilitate the interac-
tion of pollen and carpel, that is, γ‐thionins, flower specific γ‐thionins, FST, transmitting 

(a)

(c)

(e)

(g)

Signaling During Sexual Reproduction in Angiosperms

113

(d)

(b)

(f)

(h)

Figure 5.4  (a‐h) Life cycle of Alcea spp. (a‐c) monoecious flowers having both stamens and carpels. 
Petal color in Alcea is dependent upon soil type. Many hybrids of Alcea spp. are popular in floriculture, 
(d‐e) pollens on style, (f‐h) Seeds (grey in color) and fruit formation (schizocarp).

114

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(a)

(b)

(c)

(e)

(d)

(f)

Figure 5.5  (a‐m) Life cycle of Rosa spp. (a) Bud initiation is start of gametophytic phase, (b‐c) 
Gametophytes of rose is monoecious and is composed of carpel in the center surrounded by cluster of 
stamens, (d) glandular trichomes are responsible for secretion of volatile compounds and serve to 
attract pollinators and also prevent flowers against microbial attack, (e‐f) Close view of anthers 
(yellow) and stigma (red), (g‐i) pollens in Rosa spp., (j‐l) stages in fruit and seed formation. Young fruit 
(rose hips) are green and their ripening is indicated by carotenoids accumulation in epidermal cells of 
exocarp, (m) seed formation. (See insert for color representation of the figure.)

Signaling During Sexual Reproduction in Angiosperms

115

(h)

(j)

(l)

(g)

(i)

(k)

(m)

Figure 5.5 (Cont’d)

116

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(b)

(e)

(a)

(c)

(d)

Figure 5.6  (a‐e) Developmental stages of dioecious Carica papaya showing: (a) A mature sporophyte 
bud initiation, (b) male flower, (c) female flower developing in fruit. Note the color of young fruit 
which is initially green and an indication it synthesizes its own carbohydrates to fulfill its major 
metabolic demands, (d & e) However when fruit ripens plastids (chloroplasts) are converted in 
chromoplast and appear yellow due to carotenoids accumulation in epidermal cells of exocarp. Red 
color of flesh fruit of papaya is due to lycopene, however in yellow flesh fruit lycopene is converted to 
beta‐carotene (yellow) by an enzyme lycopene beta‐cyclase.

tissue‐specific proteins (TTS), TTS1 and TTS2, lectin nictaba Hav1 and cyst‐rich extension‐
like proteins in flower. TTS is a protein rich in arabinogalactan and acts as an attractant 
for the growth of pollen tube. Almost 5% of these proteins including γ‐thionins, trypsin, 
proteinases,  nictaba  and  polyphenol  oxidase  are  also  involved  in  defensive  mechanism 
and protect carpel from potential fungal attack. Evolutionary evidence suggested that stigma 
and style of many plant species have common conserved molecular functions. Stigmatic 
 surface of eudicots like rose are composed of many papillae and trichomes which facilitate 
pollen tube formation and also release signals to inhibit the growth of incompatible pollens.

(a)

(c)

(e)

(b)

(d)

(f)

Figure 5.7  (a‐e) Citrus sinensis showing developmental stages during fruit formation: (a) Sporophyte bearing orange fruits, (b) 
Monoecious flower showing diadelphous anthers and exudating stigma, (c) fertilized ovary forming fruit, (d‐e) developing fruits, (f) 
ripening of hesperidia is indicated by plastids conversion from chloroplast to chromoplasts which accumulate carotenoids. Over 100 
different carotenoids are identified in citrus fruits.

118

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(b)

(a)

Figure 5.8  (a‐b) (a) Flower and (b) fruit formation (capsule) in Abelmoschus esculentus. Note the 
accumulation of flavonoid at the base of developing flower.

(b)

(a)

(c)

R
o
s
e
 
p
o
l
l
e
n
s

S

t
y
l
e
 
a
n
a
t
o
m
y

T
r
i
c
h
o
m
e
s
 

o
n
 
e
p
i
d
e
r
m
a
l
 
c
e
l
l
s

Germinating pollen
tube in style tissue

Pollen on rose style

Figure 5.9  (a‐c) Pollination events on stigma of Rosa sp. (a) Pollens on stigma (b) A section through 
style (c) Germination of pollen.

Signaling During Sexual Reproduction in Angiosperms

119

5.4.2  Pollen Landing on Stigma (Rehydration)
Important steps which take place on the surface of stigma upon pollen arrival include 
adhesion, rehydration and loosening of stigmatic and pollen cell wall so that growth of 
the pollen tube can take place either through pollen aperture or through the exine wall 
(Mollet et al., 2013). However, these steps will only take place if pollen is compatible; if 
a pollen of rose falls on jasmine plant or even other species of rose, pollen tube germina-
tion will not take place. As described above, in order to recognize a compatible pollen, 
stigmatic  surface  is  rich  with  many  recognition  signals  like  signaling  proteins,  hor-
mones, enzymes and secretions secreted within the papillate cells of stigma. Plants also 
have callose plugs which are secreted by stigmatic surface and may block the entry of 
incompatible  pollens.  In  apple  flowers,  secretion  of  arabinogalactan‐poteins  by 
 stigmatic surface play role in recognition of compatible pollens (Losada & Herrero, 
2012). In Albuca species, modified tepals play role of stigma as pollen germination takes 
place only in flowers which deposit pollens.

Pollens of many angiosperms bind tightly and are metabolically inactive. They desic-
cate at maturity but when they fall on their compatible stigma, they are rehydrated 
through water supplied by stigmatic cells or through pollen components. Pollen hydra-
tion is regulated both temporally and spatially. Inappropriate hydration may have dele-
terious efforts which may lead to premature germination within anther. Rehydration is 
crucial for the germination and represents first step in pollination. Membrane proteins, 
that is, aquaporins play a key role in pollen hydration in many plants. Aquaporins genes 
Bo‐PIP1b1 and Bo‐PIP1b2 are identified in both in pollen and stigma of Brassica olera-
cea (Marin‐Olivier, 2000). However, time of pollen rehydration varies in plants from few 
minutes  to  hours.  In  Secale  cereale,  rehydration  is  accomplished  in  7  minutes,  in 
Arabidopsis, it takes almost 15 minutes, however, in B.oleracea it may last up to an hour. 
In Zea mays and other grasses, time for pollen rehydration occurs within 1–3 minutes 
and pollen germination in grasses occurs within 5 minutes.

Rehydration is followed by adhesion in which pollens strongly adhere with papillae on 
stigma. In order for fertilization to take place, compatibility between pollen and stigma 
must be strong. Binding force of this adhesion reaction is reported to be 10−7 per pollen 
grain (Preuss, 2002). Most of these adhesives are secreted by exine. Many proteins and 
lipids also enhance mobility of pollen coat at this stage. In Arabidopsis, pollen coat con-
tains long and short‐chain lipids with proteins, including six lipases, and eight Gly‐rich 
oleosin  protein  containing  lipid‐binding  domain.  The  most  abundant  protein  in 
Arabidopsis pollen coat is Gly‐rich oleosin GRP‐17.

Once pollen grain is received by stigma, development of pollen tube and transport to egg 
cell takes place within few hours. In Arabidopsis, the whole process of post‐pollination 
events need 8–10 hours for completion at 25°C. Pollens of Z. mays are reported to possess 
allergens that have cell wall loosening actions similar to the expansins of the cell wall. Pollen 
tube either grows out of aperture or break directly through the exine wall which requires 
enzymatic degradation. In angiosperms with open style, the stigma is covered with an epi-
dermis that is continuous with style but in closed stigma, the pollen tube grows through the 
cuticle and cell walls of the stigma papillae to enter the style.

5.4.3  Style Anatomy and Types in Angiosperms
Morphological diversity in angiosperm stigma and style is described earlier. Here, our 
main focus will be on the internal organization with reference to the growth of the 

120

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

pollen tube and transmitting tissue of style. Epidermal cells of style are usually one cell 
thick and are composed of glandular hairs and trichomes which serve many important 
functions and also inhibit microbial infections. Ground tissue of style is composed of 
compactly or loosely or compactly arranged parenchymatous cells surrounded by  lateral 
and dorsal vascular traces.

Styles of angiosperms may be solid, semi‐solid or hollow depending upon the pres-
ence or absence of transmitting tissue which fills the center of style. A solid transmitting 
tissue is composed of loosely packed cells with large intercellular spaces in middle and 
compact towards periphery, for example, in Arabidopsis although length of style is short 
but a solid style is surrounded by parenchyma cortex and epidermis. Space in the center 
is composed of mucilage‐filled cells which facilitate the growth of the pollen tube. In 
solid style, no part is without a cell and rows of thick‐walled cells that are connected 
through  plasmodesmata  and  middle  lamella  make  up  their  transmitting  tissue 
(Figure 5.10). Eudicots usually have a solid style with compact transmitting tissue and 
the pollen tube grows through the mucilage‐filled intercellular spaces between trans-
mitting tissue cells. In semi‐solid style, there is a mass of extracellular matrix (ECM) 
which fills the space between transmitting tissue. In such case, pollen tube grow of 
pollen tube is confined to ECM central core of style. In hollow style, one or more layers 
of glandular cells are found along the canal of style. They secrete sugars, glycoproteins, 
phenolic compounds and proteins.

5.4.4  Growth of Pollen Tube
The pollen tube is eventually carried at target embryo sac in ovule through coordina-
tion  of  molecular  and  chemical  signals  which  are  expressed  within  cells  of  ovary. 
Movement of pollen tube within female gametophyte basically takes place in two steps. 
First step involves the funicle guidance to placenta, and the second step involves micro-
pylar guidance from microplye to embryo sac.

Pollen tubes are considered to be one of the fastest‐growing cells known to elongate 
at the rate of 4 µm/sec upto few cm in length to reach the egg cell. This process requires 
energy, one of the reasons for the presence of large number of mitochondria within the 
growing pollen tip as their presence is indicative of high‐energy demand of the pollen 
tube cell. Citric acid cycle is fully active in the developing pollen tube to fulfill various 
metabolic demands of the growing cell.

Length of style is another important factor which determines the time required by 
pollen tube to reach ovules. In flowers with long style, the pollen tube entry in an egg 
cell may require longer time. In Z. mays, the pollen tube grows as fast as 1 cm/hr and 
can extend 1 ft in length within 24 hours.

Pollen tubes are polarized cells and divided into apical, nuclear and vacuolar domains. 
Tip domain is rich in Golgi secretory vesicles that outlines an inverted cones. Sub‐apical 
domain  contains  organelles‐like  mitochondria,  golgi  bodies,  ER  and  many  other 
 vesicles. However, nuclear domain have large organelles, and male germ unit. Vacuolar 
domain enlarges with the growth of tube. A callose plug isolates the growing part from 
rest of tube, and eventually dies, so the front part of tube (towards the base of ovary) is 
functional (Figure 5.11).

Many  polarized  signal  are  involved  during  the  elongation  of  pollen  tube,  which 
include water, lipid or RHO proteins (ROP1), GTP‐binding proteins, F‐actin dynamics 

(a)

Dorsal V.B (vascular bundle)

(b)

Epidermis

Cortical 
parenchyma

Ventral V.B

Epidermal cells
in L.S

Transmission tissue

Extracellular mass

(d)

(e)

(c)

(f)

Glandular cell
(hollow mass)

S
t
y
l
e

O
v
a
r
y
w

 

i
t
h

 

o
v
u
l
e
s

Parenchymatous
cortex

Ovules

Locule
Funiculus

Figure 5.10  (a‐f) Style type in angiosperms: (a) Closed style (T.S.), (b) Semi‐open style (T.S.), (c) Open‐style (T.S.), (d) Closed style (L.S.), 
(e) Semi‐open style (L.S.), (f) Open style (L.S.).

(a)

Pollen germination

Papillar cell
on stigma

Dorsal V.B

Epidermis

Cortex

(b)

Citric acid cycle & ATP synthase
provide energy for pollen growth

Ventral V.B
showing xylem (in red)
and phloem (in blue)

Callose plugs in
growing pollen tube

Epidermis

CAC

Golgi body

Transmitting tissue

Sperm cells

Mitochondria

ER vesicles

Tube nucleus

Style transmitting
 tissue

Secondary wall

Pollen tip with Golgi

vesicles

t
r
a
n
s
m

i
t
t
i
n
g

 
t
i
s
s
u
e

p
o
l
l
e
n
 
t
u
b
e
 

g
r
o
w
t
h

 
t
h
r
o
u
g
h

S
o
l
i
d
 
s
t
y
l
e
 
s
u
p
p
o
r
t
i
n
g

O
v
a
r
y
w

 

 

i
t
h
o
v
u
l
e
s

Funiculus

Septum

Figure 5.11  (a‐b) (a) Development of pollen tube through style, (b) Main events on the pollen tip. (See insert for color representation of 
the figure.)

Signaling During Sexual Reproduction in Angiosperms

123

and Ca gradient at the tip of tube, ROP1 and ROP INTERACTING CRIB. During  pollen 
tube elongation, formation of cytoskeleton filaments takes place which wraps around 
the nucleus of pollen and actin cytoskeleton polarizes towards the site of tube emer-
gence, which is responsible for re‐orientation of vegetative nucleus so that it enters 
extending tube before the generative cell.

5.4.5  Physiological Activities Within Pollen Tube
Like all other cells of plants, cell wall is the integral part of pollen tube and is differenti-
ated between primary and inner secondary wall. Primary cell wall of pollens are com-
posed of pectins along with middle layer of hemicellulose and secreted in the tip of 
growing tube. Inner cell wall is composed mainly of callose and deposited behind the 
growing tip. As mentioned before, the pollen tube grows exclusively at its tip compris-
ing of single layer of pectin (without cellulose) where the newly synthesized cell wall is 
being deposited. Absence of cellulose in the growing tip is significant for elongating the 
pollen tip as it gives plasticity for directional growth because the pollen tube makes 
many sharp turns during its elongation within intercellular spaces of style. Secondary 
tube walls of Z. mays and N. tabacum are enriched with hyrdoxyproline‐rich glycopro-
teins (HRGP).

Many physiological and molecular events which take place during the elongation of 
pollen tube include the polymerization of pectins, their methyl esterification, modifica-
tion in side chains within Golgi bodies and finally transport of Golgi‐derived vesicles to 
the growing pollen tip. It is a complex multi‐step process which is achieved through 
coordination  of  molecular  cues  including  actin  filaments,  molecular  motors  like 
dyneins, kinesin and myosin, enzymes producing secondary messengers which include 
PIP2 (phosphatidylinositol 4,5‐bisphosphate), IP3 (inositol 1,4,5‐triphosphate) and DAG 
(diacyl glycerol). All of them are required for developing calcium ion gradient and for 
modification of the pollen tube wall. Rac GTPases are also important enzymes which 
regulate membrane fusion events during signaling process. In order to form a new layer 
of pectin within elongating pollen walls, the transport and discharge of golgi‐derived 
vesicles cause de‐esterification by pectin methylesterases (PMES) while cross‐linking 
the Ca ions in pectin. PMES are also expressed in floral buds and pollens.

In Arabidopsis, VGD1(Vanguard 1) is a novel gene expressed in pollen grains and 
tube. It encodes 595‐ amino acids‐long PME‐like protein and is localized on the plasma 
membrane and cell wall. VGD is a functional PME and its imbalance may result in 
developmental, morphological and mechanical changes in the pollen tube (Jiang et al., 
2005). AtPPME1 is another pollen‐specific protein characterized in Arabidopsis through 
fluorescent tagging of full‐length proteins (FTFLP) technique (Tian et al., 2006).
In addition to Ca2+, chloride ions and potassium ions are also required for elongation 
of the pollen tip (Zonia et al., 2001). A gradient developed by calcium along with actin 
microfilaments plays a key role in the elongation of pollen tube. Cytosolic calcium con-
centration maintained by angiosperms is usually within the range of 100nM, however, 
during the growth of tube higher concentration is reported around the apex of the 
growing tube. The role of calcium‐binding protein calreticulin (CRT) which is localized 
in the ER and Golgi compartments of cells of style and ovary is also reported to be 
crucial during pollen germination and in the development of transmitting tract of style 
in Petunia hybrida (Lenartowski et al., 2015).

124

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Other important proteins which are localized within different parts of carpel includ-
ing stigma and integuments of ovules are GABA proteins which act as molecular cues 
in pop2 mutants. They are involved in developing gradient from stigma to style, septum 
and to the integuments of ovary (Timmermans, 2010). They can attract pollen tubes to 
micropyle at a distance of 75 mm. In N. tobacum, transmission tissue‐ specific (TTS) 
proteins guide the growing tube.

Armadillo  repeat  only  1  (ARO1)  is  another  group  of  recently  discovered  proteins 
which regulate growth of the pollen tube. Physiology of pollen tube growth has been 
studied  through  cytosolic  ion  concentration  imaging,  ion  vibrating  probes  and  a 
patch clamp.

5.4.6  Cysteine Rich Proteins (CRP) Facilitate Pollen and Pistil Interaction
Many proteins peptides also serve as attraction signal in cell‐to‐cell communication of 
pollen and stigma interactions. Mostly these peptides are cysteine‐rich proteins (CRP) 
which are required for the growth and defense of the pollen tube and also for the trans-
fer of lipids. All CRP is composed of N‐terminal signal peptide with a polar polypeptide 
and  conserved  cysteine  residues.  They  represent  a  large  family  of  genes.  Almost 
825 genes encoding CRP are reported in Arabidopsis and 598 in rice. In Arabidopsis, a 
 synergid cell specific transcription factor gene (MYB 98) serves as a signal in the micro-
pylar guidance at micropyle of ovule at 50 µm (Marton et al., 2005). Distance of pollen 
tube attraction, for example, synergid cell is 100–200 µm in vitro.

Chemocyanin is another signal, secreted by many stigma and determines the direc-
tional movement of pollen tube towards an opening in the hollow stylar canal of lily. 
However, in pollens of tomato, autocrine serves as an important signal. Other attractant 
molecules, that is, LURES proteins are identified in the synergid cells of Torenia through 
expressed sequence tag analysis. They are detected in filiform apparatus through green 
fluorescent protein fusion (GFP) and expressed specifically in the synergid cells.

5.4.7  Steps Involved in Fertilization
In Arabidopsis, contents of pollens are usually discharged within two to three minutes 
after entry in the synergids. Synergids may undergo programmed cell death upon or 
before the entry of the pollen tube in many plants. Bursting of pollen tube leads to 
 syngamy which involves plasmogamy and karyogamy, that is, fusion of one sperm cell 
with egg while other sperm cell fertilizes polar nuclei in the center of embryo sac and 
forms triploid (3n) endosperm, a process known as double fertilization. During the fer-
tilization,  membrane  of  sperm  cell  bursts  and  releases  its  protoplasm  and  nucleus 
within the egg cell resulting in formation of zygote which represents the beginning of 
sporophytic stage of plant. Both tube and sperm cells control the growth of pollen tube 
and germ cell specifications through activating distinct genetic and epigenetic mecha-
nisms. Sperm cells are required in pair to ensure double fertilization and reported to 
fertilize egg cell in Arabidopsis.

Fertilization in eudicots is followed by zygote formation, which further leads to dicot 
seeds formation within the fruit. Figures 5.12 and 5.13 represent the main events and 
steps in embryo and seed formation. After fertilization, the zygote develops into embryo 
which includes many morphological and physiological changes regulated by phytohor-
mones. Angiosperm embryos appear different during their developmental stages which 

(a)

(b)

Septum

Orthotropous 

ovules

(c)

Dorsal V.B

Septum

Pollen tube

Carpel

Locule

(d)

Ventral V.B

showing xylem (in red)
and phloem (in blue)

Ovary wall

Chalazal end

Antipodal cells

(e)

Zygote 
formation

Sperm nucleus

Sperm nucleus 
tube
Pollen tip

Sperm cells enter
micropyle

Funiculus

Outer integument

Synergids

Micropyle

Inner integument

Pollen tube within

ovule

Polar nuclei of central cell

Vacuole

Egg cell

Figure 5.12  (a‐e) A summary of events of sexual reproduction in angiosperms starting from pollination to fertilization, (a & b) T.S. of 
carpel showing trilocular ovary, (c) Trilocular ovary showing unfertilized ovules, (d) A close view of female gametophyte showing entry 
of pollen tube, (e) Entry of pollen tube and main events in fertilization. (See insert for color representation of the figure.)

(a)

(b)

Ovary wall

(c)

Developing 
fruit wall

Embryo
proper
Suspensor
Basal cell

Locule

Globular shape embryo

(e)

Hypocotyl

(d)

Cotyledons

Heart shape embryo

Torpedo

Epidermis

Seed coat
Cotyledons
(Dicot)
Endosperm

Ground tissues

Suspensor

Vascular bundles
(phloem-blue, xylem-red)

Mesocarp
Mature fruit wall
(Exocarp)
Fertilized ovule
(seeds) (Endocarp)

Mature embryo (seed)

Mature ovules (seed) within developing fruit

Figure 5.13  (a‐e) Post‐fertilization stages in angiosperms starting from embryo formation to fruit formation: (a) Globular‐shaped embryo, 
(b) Heart‐shaped embryo, (c) Torpedo‐stage, (d) T.S. of developing fruit showing fertilized ovules (seeds), (e) Mature embryo (dicot seed). 
(See insert for color representation of the figure.)

Signaling During Sexual Reproduction in Angiosperms

127

include globular, heart‐shaped and torpedo, finally leading to seed formation having 
one cotyledons in moncots or two cotyledons in case of dicots and eudicots.

5.4.8  Sperm Cell in Angiosperms
Sperm cells are unusually small, 3 µm or even smaller in diameter containing few orga-
nelles like ribosomes, endoplasmic reticulum, mitochondria, Golgi bodies and vesicles 
(typically without plastids) and have densed chromatin which shows florescence with 
DNA‐flourochromes. Within pollen tube, two sperm cells are connected to each other.
Preferential fertilization is also reported in some plants where a specific sperm cell 
has more chances to fuse with the egg cell. Unique polypeptides are reported in the 
sperm cell of higher plants as revealed through energy dispersive x‐ray analysis of  pollen 
components.  They  revealed  significant  amount  of  carbon,  oxygen,  phosphorus, 
 selenium, potassium, with small amount of chromium, manganeses, magnesium, and 
 silicon suggesting their role in fertilization.

One of the technique to purify sperm cells of Arabidopsis is fluorescence‐activated 
cell  signaling  (FACS).  Vegetative  nucleus  controls  the  expression  of  transposable 
 element (TE) and produces RNAs (siRNA) that accumulates in gametes.

5.4.9  Molecular Basis of Reproduction
Formation of sperm cell production in many angiosperms is regulated by DUO POLLEN 
1 (DUO1). In Arabidopsis, proteins like DUO, POLLEN, DUO, positively regulates male 
germline development. DUO 1 is important for gamete expression and plays a key role 
in the regulation of functional sperm cells in flowering plants (Stewart & Globig, 2011). 
Furthermore DUO1 is integral for the entry of male germ cells into the mitosis and also 
for the expression of germline.

Some proteins like F‐Box proteins are also required for the guidance of pollen tubes 
and include one of the most highly expressed genes in the sperm cell of Arabidopsis. 
They also play an important role in cell cycle, transcription, signal transduction, circa-
dian rhythm and floral development. In Brassica campestris, gene BcMF8 encoding 
arabinogalactan protein (ACP) is crucial for pollen tube development and pollen tube 
growth (Lin et al., 2014).

Grain development in monocots, that is, T. aestivum involves regulation of senes-
cence,  phytohormones  like  auxins,  cytokinins,  ABA  and  ethylene,  remobilization  of 
nitrogen  and  carbohydrates  reserves  from  vegetative  to  reproductive  organs  (Kong 
et al., 2015). Almost 60–95% of nitrogen is provided to developing grain due to remobi-
lization from vegetative organs before anthesis, however some is derived from N‐uptake 
post‐flowering.  Gpc‐B1  encodes  a  transcription  factor  (NAM‐B1)  in  T.  aestivum  to 
accelerate the rate of protein mobilization from leaves and senescence. Comparative 
proteomic  analysis  during  grain  development  in  wheat  is  being  evaluated  through 
matrix‐assisted laser disorption ionization time of flight (MALDI‐TOF) and MALDI‐
TOF/TOF mass spectrometry.

5.4.10  Temperature Affects Pollination
Temperature also plays a key role in pollination. Hot and cold temperature may result in 
poor seed yield, asynchrony of male and female reproduction or defects in parental 

128

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

tissues (Kelly et al., 2010). Heat stress negatively affects the growth of pollen and pollen 
tube by reducing the number, decreasing the size, and may also cause deformity of floral 
organs and poor anther dehiscence. It may also cause degradation of tapetum in wheat 
plants. Cold temperature also effects pollen growth and can cause pollen sterility. Pollen 
sterility may be due to disruption of sugar metabolism in tapetum which minimizes 
energy reserves in pollen grains. Under high stress, cotton flowers showed reduced 
 carbohydrates  reserves  (particularly  sucrose)  and  ATP  production  in  pistils  (Snider 
et al., 2009). Cold stress is also reported to disrupt mitosis I and II and prevents rice 
microspores from maturity into tricellular pollen grains. It can also affect length of 
 pollen tube. Female plants fail to produce fruits, when crossed with pollen from plant 
grown under 32–36°C.

5.5  Future Perspectives

During  the  courses  of  evolutionary  process,  angiosperms  have  developed  different 
ways of pollen adhesion, hydration, germination, guidance and delivery to sperm cells. 
Understanding of genetic and molecular perspectives of sexual reproduction in angio-
sperms can improve our knowledge which will be helpful in molecular systematics and also 
in many genetic engineering techniques. There is a need to conduct research to explore 
aspects of gene expression during female gametogenesis. Many polarized signal involved 
during the elongation of pollen tube including RHO proteins (ROP1), GTP binding pro-
teins, F‐actin dynamics and Ca gradient at the tip of tube need to be understood further.

Temperature also plays an important role in pollination, as an increase or decrease 
in temperature may result in pollen sterility, degradation in tapetum and also reduction in 
the number of pollens, however, temperature dependent pollination is carried out 
in many species is still not well understood.

Modern  techniques  in  pollen  biotechnology  are  aimed  at  manipulation  of  pollen 
development to enhance and improve yield of many crops, to develop pollination con-
trol systems for use in hybrid seed production, in restoration of male fertility, to develop 
techniques for preservation of pollens, or to regulate flavonol biosynthesis in anthers of 
hybrid plants which may be achieved through neutralization of antisense transcript 
(which interferes with chalcone synthase gene expression) through a construct in male 
fertile parent.

References

Chaudhry, N.Y. & Khan, A.S. (2006). ‘Improvement of pistillate flowers yields with GA3 in 

heavy metals treated plants’, Plant Growth Regulation, 50, pp. 211–217.

Dresselhaus, T., Lausser, A., & Marton, M.L. (2011). ‘Using maize as a model to study 

pollen tube growth and guidance, cross‐incompatibility and sperm delivery in grasses’, 
Annals of Botany, 108, pp. 727–737.

Jiang, S.S., Liang, X.N., Li, X., Wang, S.L., Lv, D.W., Ma, C.Y., Li, X.H., Ma, W.J., & 

Yan, Y.M. (2012). ‘Wheat drought‐responsive grain proteome analysis by linear and 
non‐linear 2‐DE and MALDI‐TOF mass spectrometry’, International Journal of 
Molecular Sciences, 13, pp. 16065–16083.

Signaling During Sexual Reproduction in Angiosperms

129

Kelly, E.Z., Tunc‐Ozdemir, M., & Harper, J.F. (2010). ‘Temperature stress and plant sexual 

reproduction: uncovering the weakest links’, Journal of Experimental Botany, 61, 
pp. 1959–1968.

Kong, L., Guo, H., & Sun, M. (2015). ‘Signal transduction during wheat grain development’, 

Planta, 241, pp. 789–801.

Lenartowski, R., Suwinska, A., & Lenartowski, M. (2015). ‘Calreticulin expression in 

relation to exchangeable Ca2+ level that changes dynamically during anthesis, progamic 
phase, and double fertilization in Petunia’, Planta, 241, pp. 209–277.

Li, M., Xu, W., Yang, W., Kong, Z., & Xue, Y. (2007). ‘Genome‐wide gene expression 

profiling reveals conserved and novel molecular functions of the stigma in rice (Oryza 
sativa L.)’, Plant Physiology, 144, pp. 1797–1812.

Lin, S., Dong, H., Zhang, F., Qiu, L., Wang, F., Cao, J., & Huang, L. (2014). ‘BcMF8, a 

putative arabinogalactan protein‐ encoding gene, contributes to pollen wall 
development, aperture formation and pollen tube growth in Brassica campestris’, Annals 
of Botany, 113, pp. 777–788.

Losada, J.M. & Herrero, M. (2012). ‘Arabinogalactan‐protein secretion is associated with the 
acquisition of stigmatic receptivity in the apple flower’, Annals of Botany, 110, pp. 573–584.

Marin‐Olivier, M., Chevalier, T., Fobis‐Loisy, I., Dumas, C., & Gaude, T. (2000). 

‘Aquaporins PIP genes are not expressed in the stigma papillae in Brassica oleracea’, The 
Plant Journal, 24, pp. 231–240.

Marton, M.L., Cordts, S., Broadhvest, J., & Dresselhaus, T. (2005). ‘Micropylar pollen tube 

guidance by EGG APPARATUS 1 of maize’, Science, 307, pp. 573–576.

Mollet, J.C., Leroux, C., Dardelle, F., & Lehner, A (2013). ‘Cell Wall Composition, 

Biosynthesis and Remodeling during Pollen Tube Growth’, Plants, 2, pp. 107–147.

Povilus, R.A., Losada, J.M., & Friedman, W.E. (2015). ‘Floral Biology and ovule and seed 

ontogeny of Nymphaeae thermarum, a water lily at the brink of extinction with potential 
as a model system for basal angiosperms’, Annals of Botany, 115, pp. 211–226.

Preuss, D. (2002). ‘Sexual Signaling on a Cellular Level:Lessons from Plant Reproduction’, 

Molecular Biology of the Cell, 13, pp. 1803–1805.

Snider, J.L., Oosterhuis, D.M., Skulman, B.W., & Kawakami, E.M. (2009). ‘Heat stress‐

induced limitations to reproductive success in. Gossypium hirsutum’, Physiologia 
Plantarum, 137, pp. 125–138.

Stewart, P. & Globig, S. (2011). Research Progress in Botany: Reproductive Physiology in 

Plants, Apple Academic Press Inc.

Tian, G.W., Chen, M.H., Zaltsman, A., & Citovsky, V. (2006). ‘A pollen‐specific pectin 

methylesterase involved in pollen tube growth’, Developmental Biology, 294, pp. 83–91.

Timmermans, M.C.P. (2010). Plant Development. Elsevier Inc.
Zonia, L., Cordeiro, S., & Feijo, J.A. (2001). ‘Ion dynamics and hydrodynamics in the 

regulation of pollen tube growth’, Sexual Plant Reproduction, 14, pp. 111–116.

Further Reading

Chen, Y., Peumans, W.J., Hause, B., Bras, J., Kumar, M., Proost, P., Barre, A., Rouge, P., & 

Van Damme, E.J. (2002). ‘Jasmonic acid methyl ester induces the synthesis of a 
cytoplasmic/nuclear chito‐oligosaccharide binding lectin in tobacco leaves’, Federation of 
American Societies for Experimental Biology, 16, pp. 905–907.

130

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Cheung, A.Y., May, B., Kawata, E.E., Gu, Q., & Wu, H.M. (1993). ‘Characterization of 
cDNAs for stylar transmitting tissue‐specific proline‐rich proteins in tobacco’, Plant 
Journal, 3, pp. 151–160.

Clement, C., Mischler, P., Burrus, M., & Audran, J.C. (1997). ‘Characteristics of 

photosynthetic apparatus and CO2‐fixation in flower bud of Lilium 2. Anther’, 
International Journal of Plant Science, 158, pp. 801–810.

Clifford, S.C. & Sedgley, M. (1993). ‘Pistil structure of Banksia menziesii R. Br. (Proteaceae) 

in relation to fertility’, Australian Journal of Botany, 41, pp. 481–490.

Derkx, A.P., Oxford, S., Griffith, S., Foulkes, M.J., & Hawkesford, M.J. (2012). ‘Identification 

of differentially senescing mutants of wheat and impact on yield, biomass and nitrogen 
partitioning(f)’, Journal of Integrative Plant Biology, 54, pp. 555–556.

Devitt, L.C., Fanning, K., Dietzgen, R.G., & Holton, T.A. (2010). ‘Isolation and functional 

characterization of lycopene beta‐cyclase gene that controls fruit color of papaya 
(Carica papaya L.)’, Journal of Experimental Botany, 61, pp, 33–9.

Gu, Q., Kawata, E.E., Morse, M.J., Wu, H.M., & Cheung, A.Y. (1992). ‘A flower‐specific 

cDNA encoding a novel thionin in tobacco’, Molecular Genetics & Genomics, 234, 
pp. 89–96.

Higashiyama, T. (2002). ‘The synergid cell: attractor and acceptor of the pollen tube for 

double fertilization’, Journal of Plant Research, 115, pp. 149–160.

Hirel, B., Le Gouis, J., Ney, B., & Gallais, A. (2007). ‘The challenge of improving nitrogen 

use efficiency in crop plants: towards a more central role for genetic variability and 
quantitative genetics within integrated approaches’, Journal of Experimental Botany, 58, 
pp. 2369–2387.

Jiang, L., Yang, S.L., Xie, L.F., Puah, C.S., Zhang, X.Q., Yang, W.C., Sundaresan, V., &Ye, D., 

(2005). ‘VANGUARD1 encodes a pectin methylesterase that enhances pollen tube 
growth in the Arabidopsis style and transmitting tract’, Plant Cell, 17, pp. 584–596.
Johnson, S.D., Jurgens, A., & Kuhlmann, M. (2012). ‘Pollination function transferred: 

modified tepals of Albuca (Hyacinthaceae) serve as secondary stigmas’, Annals of Botany, 
110, pp. 565–572.

Kandasamy, M.K., Nasrallah, J.B., & Nasrallah, M.E. (1994). ‘Pollen‐pistil interactions and 

developmental regulation of pollen tube growth in Arabidopsis’, Development, 120, 
pp. 3405–3418.

Lausser, A. & Dresselhaus, T. (2010). ‘Sporophytic control of pollen tube growth and 

guidance in grasses’, Biochemical Society Transactions, 38, pp. 631–634.

Mohapatra, S.S. & Knox, R.B. (2012). Pollen Biotechnology: Gene expression and Allergen 

Characterization, 1st Edition, Chapman and Hall.

Oliver, S.N., Van Dongen, J.T., Alfred, S.C., Mamun, E.A., Zhao, X., Saini, H.S., 

Fernandes, S.F., Blanchard, C.L., Sutton, B.G., Geigenberger, P., Dennis, E.S. & Dolferus, R. 
(2005). ‘Cold‐induced repression of the rice anther‐specific cell wall invertase gene 
OSINV4 is correlated with sucrose accumulation and pollen sterility’, Plant, Cell and 
Environment, 28, pp. 1534–1551.

Palanivelu, R., Brass, L., Edlund, A.F., & Preuss, D. (2003). ‘Pollen tube growth and 

guidance is regulated by POP2, an Arabidopsis gene that controls GABA levels’, Cell, 
114, pp. 47–59.

Pullin, A.S. (2002). Conservation Biology. Cambridge University Press.
Rotman, N., Durbarry, A., Wardle, A., Yang, W.C., Chaboud, A., Faurej, J.E., Berger, F., & 
Twell, D. (2005). ‘A novel class of MYB factors controls sperm‐cell formation in plants’, 
Current Biology, 15, pp. 244–248.

Signaling During Sexual Reproduction in Angiosperms

131

Schoft, V.K., Chumak, N., Choi, Y., Hannon, M., Garcia‐Aguilar, M., Machlicova, A., 
Slusarz, L., Mosiolek, M., Park, J.S., Park, G.T., Fischer, R.L., & Tamaru. H. (2011). 
‘Function of the DEMETER DNA glycosylase in the Arabidopsis thaliana male 
gametophyte’, Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences, 108, pp. 8042–8047.

Schwager, K.M., Calderon‐Villalobos, L.I., Dohmann, E.M., Willige, B.C., Knierer, S., Nill, C., & 
Schwechheimer, C. (2007). ‘Characterization of the VIER F‐BOX PROTEINE genes from 
Arabidopsis reveals their importance for plant growth and development’, Plant Cell, 19, 
pp. 1163–1178.

Shimizu, K.K. & Okada, K. (2000). ‘Attractive and repulsive interactions between female 

and male gametophytes in Arabidopsis pollen tube guidance’, Development, 127, 
pp. 4511–4518.

Showalter, A.M. (2001). ‘Arabinogalactan‐proteins: structure, expression and function’, 

Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences. 58, pp. 1399–1417.

Slotkin, R.K., Vaughn, M., Borges, F., Tanurdzic, M., Becker, J.D., Feijo, J.A., & Martienssen, 

R.A. (2009). ‘Epigenetic reprogramming and small RNA silencing of transposable 
elements in pollen’, Cell, 136, pp. 461–472.

Tung, C.W., Dwyer, K.G., Nasrallah, M.E., & Nasrallah, J.B. (2005). ‘Genome‐wide 

identification of genes expressed in Arabidopsis pistils specifically along the path of 
pollen tube growth’, Plant Physiology, 138, pp. 977–989.

Valdivia, E.R., Stephenson, A.G., Durachko, D.M., & Cosgrove, D. (2009). ‘Class B beta‐

expansins are needed for pollen separation and stigma penetration’, Sexual Plant 
Reproduction, 22, pp. 141–152.

Von Besser, K., Frank, A.C., Johnson, M.A., & Preuss, D. (2006). Arabidopsis HAP2 (GCS1) 

is a sperm‐specific gene required for pollen tube guidance and fertilization. 
Development, 133, pp. 4761–4769.

Wolters‐Arts, M., Van Der Weerd, L., Van Aelst, A.C., Van Der Weerd, J., Van As, H., & 

Mariani, C. (2002). ‘Water‐conducting properties of lipids during pollen hydration’, Plant 
Cell & Environment, 25, pp. 513–519.

Wu, H.M., Zou, J., May, B., Gu, Q., & Cheung, A.Y. (1993). ‘A tobacco gene family for 

flower cell wall proteins with a proline‐rich domain and a cysteine‐rich domain’, 
Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences, 90, pp. 6829–6833.

Wheeler, M.J., Franklin‐Tong, V.E., & Franklin, F.C.H. (2001). ‘The molecular and genetic 

basis of pollen‐pistil interactions’, New Phytologist, 151, pp. 565–584.

Wittink, F.R.A., Knuiman, B., Derksen, J., Capkova, V., Twell, D., Schrauwen, J.A.M., & 

Wullems, G.J. (2000). ‘The pollen‐specific gene Ntp303 encodes a 69‐kDa glycoprotein 
associated with the vegetative membranes and the cell wall’, Sexual Plant Reproduction, 
12, pp. 276–284.

132

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Problems Chapter 5

1  Fruits  are  botanically  ripened  ovaries  or  structures  which  develop  from  flowers 
after fertilizations. However many people think that fruits are always sweet and 
edible, therefore many fruits which we eat in our daily lives are considered to be 
vegetables although vegetables are botanically vegetative parts of plants which may 
be either roots, stems, or leaves of plants. Based on this information, characterize 
that plants in column A which we use in our everyday lives in our food are fruit or 
vegetables?

Vegetable (Root, stem or leaves)?

Fruit

Edible Plants

Tomatoes
Potatoes
Brinjal
Cauliflower
Olives
Onions
Green chilise
Ginger
Garlic
Pumpkin
Ladyfinger
Cucumber
Clove
Cinnamon
Carrots
Broccoli
Saffron
Cumin

2  Stigma of angiosperms receive pollens and may be dry or wet. Pollen landing on 
stigma is followed by its entry in style, and then to ovary. However, due to diversity 
in stigma type and shape, entry of pollen tube in ovary may differ from plant to 
plant. In pictures, given below as you can see stigma of Begonia flower is star‐shaped 
(a), however, in case of Petunia, it is pin‐shaped (b). What hypothesis will you make 
about the entrance of a pollen tube through the stigmas of these flowers? Which one 
of them represents a modern way of entry of a pollen tube? Give reasons to support 
your answer. Also make a slide selection of stigma and style of these flowers in order 
to support your answer.

(a)

(b)

Signaling During Sexual Reproduction in Angiosperms

133

3 

In the figure below, developing fruits of some plants (a) Citrus sp. (b) Cucurbita sp. 
and (c) Bouhinia sp. are shown. Development of fruit is indicating the end of game-
tophytic generation and formation of new sporophytic plant through seeds present 
within these fruits. It also shows a stage where gametophytic generation is alternat-
ing with sporophytic generation.

(b)

(a)

(c)

134

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

A  Identify and label different structures which are visible in these pictures that 
which one of them are part of gametophytes and which one of them are part 
of sporopytes?

B  Identify which of the following plant forms ‘pod’ as a fruit. Also write the fam-

ily name.

4 

Identify which of the following plants are examples of edible seeds and which of the 
following represent edible fruits.

Edible seed

Edible fruit

Plant

Chickpeas
Almonds
Plums
Tamarind
Peas
Strawberry
Mangoes
Cumin
Fennel

5  Explain life cycle of moncot herb with a dicot herb highlighting structure of their 
sporophytes and gametophtyes. Take “wheat” as an example of monocot herb and 
“coriandar” as an example of dicot herb.

6  Compare and contrast development of male and female gametophytes with the help 

of labelled diagrams.

7  Pollen tubes are guided by many chemical and molecular signals during their growth 
towards the micropylar end of ovules. They are one of the most rapidly growing and 
physiologically active cells. However, many factors affect their growth and there-
fore, time required to fertilization differs within angiosperms. These factors also 
include shape of pollen, type and shape of stigma whether dry or wet, length of style, 
solid, semi‐solid or hollow and number of ovules. Many chemical and molecular 
protein signals also play crucial role during pollen tube development. How would 
you trace events starting from landing of “tricolpate” pollen on the surface of “wet” 
stigma, growth of pollen tube through a “solid” style, and then its entry in ovule, 
leading to fertilization through “porogamy” and finally to the formation of fruit in 
any ONE plant of your choice. (Be careful about the selection of your plant as you 
must know that your plants as they must have a solid style and possess a wet stigma).
8  Explain different aspects of molecular reproduction in angiosperms highlighting 

the role of
A  DUO POLLEN 1
B  Chemocyanin
C  LURES
D  Cysteine rich proteins
E  VGD1 (Vanguard 1)
F  RHO proteins

135

6

Physiologically Active Metabolic Pathways in Floral Cells

6.1 

Introduction to Floral Physiology

All  cells  of  flowering  plants  require  energy  in  the  form  of  sugars,  ATP  and  other 
m olecules  for  their  growth,  development,  metabolic  activities  and  in  order  to  divide 
through mitotic and meiotic divisions (which take place only in megaspore and micro­
spore  mother  cells).  Energy  is  also  required  all  developmental  stages  including  seed 
f ormation and germination, development of male and female gametophytes, fertilization 
and finally for fruit formation. In order to meet metabolic demands of floral cells, res­
piratory pathways are highly active in cells of sepals, petals, stamens and carpels (Figure 6.1).
Flowers  are  important  not  only  for  reproduction  but  they  also  synthesize  many 
important secondary metabolites including terpenoids, glycosides, flavonoids and alka­
loids. Therefore, it is important to go through floral physiology in order to understand 
metabolism of many secondary metabolites in plants. In many monocots and eudicots, 
cells of sepals, filaments, carpels and exocarp of fruit are green in color when they are 
young but change their color upon maturity (Figure 6.2). There is a convincing evidence 
which indicates role of flowers and fruits in photosynthesis due to the presence of chlo­
roplast within their cells. In fact, sepals of many flowers are main source of supplying 
sugars to developing flowers in early spring in many deciduous trees when new leaves 
emerge. Angiosperm flowers are known to complete almost 60% of their sugar demands 
by acquiring carbon atoms through non‐foliar photosynthesis (Aschan & Pfanz, 2002). 
So photosynthesis does not takes place only in leaves but there is evidence which supports 
the fact that any green part of plant can photosynthesize sugars.

However,  photosynthesis  in  leaves  is  main  source  for  supplying  carbohydrates  to 
whole plant body, whereas many floral organs photosynthesize just to fulfill their own 
metabolic demands as photoassimilates from leaves might not be sufficient to sustain 
growth and metabolic activities of these floral organs (Figure 6.3). In some flowers, 
carbohydrate metabolism provides important intermediates for the formation of pig­
ments while petal development is still taking place, however, energy for formation of 
volatile compounds is provided during later stages after the opening of flowers.

This chapter will briefly cover primary metabolism of flowers about how sugars are 
transported to flowers from leaves, how cells of different floral organs catabolize g lucose 
in order to fulfill their metabolic demands, how carbohydrate metabolism takes place 
during  fruit  development,  and  how  photosynthesis  in  flowers  contributes  to  their 
growth and development.

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products, First Edition. Aisha Saleem Khan. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.Sun

(d)

Sucrose is supplied
for anther growth and
metabolic activities

(a)

Sugar 

for

tapetum 

development

(e)

Cells of carpel also contain chloroplasts 

and can synthesize their own sugars 

(c)

Chromoplast

Carotenoid
synthesis

MEP 
pathway

(b)

 CO2 (cid:31)xation

Carbohydrates are also supplied 

to petals by sepal

Carbohydrate formation 

for sepal

Figure 6.1  (a‐f) (a) An overview of floral metabolism, (b) Sepals of many flowers contain chloroplasts and can 
synthesize sugars not only for their metabolic demands but can also supply petals with carbohydrates, (c) Petals of 
many flowers synthesize pigments and aromatic molecules within their plastids to attract their pollinators, (d) 
Cells of filaments of many flowers can photosynthesize and supply carbohydrates to anther sac for developing 
pollen grains, (e) Epidermal cells of anthers also contain chloroplast and can synthesize sugars for tapetum 
development.

Physiologically Active Metabolic Pathways in Floral Cells

137

Figure 6.2  Growing fruits of Citrus 
sinensis showing green color which is 
due to chloroplasts, however, upon 
ripening chloroplasts are converted 
into chromoplast which results 
change in color of fruit.

Figure 6.3  Chlorophyll concentration 
of Lilium sp. in tepals is 30% as 
compared with leaves, however, CO2 
assimilation is 73% as compared with 
their leaves.

6.2  Glucose Fates in Floral Cells Differ According to Their 
Metabolic Demands

Glucose is a universal source of energy for all living organisms. Plants are main organ­
isms which produce 50 billion tons of glucose annually. Glucose catabolism provides 
energy in the form of ATP and as reducing powers, that is, NADH, NADPH and FADH2. 
All cells depend upon ATP hydrolysis in order to fulfill their own metabolic demands. 
ATP is synthesized by an enzyme ATP synthase which is present either in inner mito­
chondrial membrane of mitochondria or in thylakoid membrane of chloroplasts. ATP 
synthase is a transmembrane protein which is composed of two parts, that is, Fo (factor 
oligomycin which can inhibit function of Fo part through binding with enzyme) and 
F1 which is a globular structure and present either in mitochondrial matrix or towards 
stroma within chloroplasts (Figure 6.4). Formation of ATP takes place within mito­
chondrial matrix with the help of ADP and Pi. Gradient developed by H+ across the 
membranes acts as a driving force for the rotation of F1 part of ATP synthase, resulting 
formation of ATP.

ATP synthesis requires energy and is known as endergonic. However, breakdown of 
ATP results in formation of ADP and Pi and is known as exergonic. It provides energy 
to many endergonic reactions taking place within same cell. Main energy providing 
pathways in cells are glycolysis, electron transport chain, citric acid cycle, pentose phos­
phate pathways (PPP) and beta‐oxidation of fatty acids (Figure 6.5). They provide energy 

Cytosol

Outer mitochondrial

membrane porin

Inter membrane

space

NH2
N

–O

O
OP
O–

O
P
O–

OCH2

N

O

N

N

+O

O
–OP
O

O P

O

ADP

Pi

NH2
N

N

N

N

OCH2
O

O

P
O–

ATP

O

O

O

OP
O–

ATP

ADP +Pi

OH

OH OH
Pi

ADP

Inner mitochondrial

 membrane

Pi

F1

Inner mitochondrial

 membrane

ADP 

ATP

ADP /Pi returns to

mitochondrial

H+ 

H+ 

F0 

H+ 

H+ 

Energy provided
for endergonic

reactions

ATP synthase on inner
mitochondria membrane

Exergonic 

ADP + Pi

ATP + H2O 
ADP + Pi 

ADP + Pi

ATP

Coupled 
reaction 

Endergonic 

Figure 6.4  ATP synthesis in mitochondria by enzyme ATP synthase is followed by transfer of ATP to cytosol through porins in 
mitochondrial membranes. Energy of ATP is used for endergonic reactions taking place within same cell which results in formation of 
ADP and Pi. These molecules are again transported to mitochondria where they can form ATP with the help of enzyme ATPsynthase.

(a)

(b)

Physiologically Active Metabolic Pathways in Floral Cells

139

ATP

formation 

ADP + Pi

Energy provided for
endergonic reactions
ATP
ADP + Pi

reactions & pathways

within the cell i.e. glycolysis and

Energizes many

endergonic

translation.

ADP +Pi

ATP

Vacuole

ATP is required for

replication and
transcription

Figure 6.5  (a‐b) (a) Energy released by breakdown of ATP molecule is used for many endergonic 
reactions (b) Many steps in processes like replication, transcription, translation and fatty acid synthesis 
are dependent upon ATP which provides energy for these anabolic pathways.

in form of ATP or reducing powers. This energy is used for many endergonic reactions 
or pathways like DNA replication, transcription, and protein translation as well as for 
photosynthesis.

However, energy fates differ according to the metabolic demand and physiological 
age of floral cells. Flowers manage their energy needs as cells of petals divert most 
of their energy for pigment formation and for secretion of volatile and non‐volatile 
compounds through specialized structures. However, tapetal cells of stamen pro­
vide  nutrition  to  growing  microspores  therefore,  most  of  their  energy  will  be 
diverted towards formation of nutrients (amino acids) which are required for pollen 
development.

Angiosperm flowers mainly depend upon sucrose for their energy requirements 
and for the formation of organic molecules for their primary and secondary metab­
olism. Sucrose is supplied through phloem to floral cells. Sugar also acts as a signal 
for  floral  initiation,  as  in Arabidopsis  application  of  sucrose  is  known  to  induce 
flowering.

However, flux is regulated at certain points in metabolic pathways taking place in 
flowers. In snapdragon flowers Antirrhinum majus, glycolysis and PPP provide precur­
sors for the formation of volatile terpenoids, phenylpropanoids and for anthocyanins 
formation. Expressed sequence tag (EST) analysis revealed that glycolysis is main source 
for providing energy for petal development in snapdragon flower (Figure 6.6). Glycolysis 
is down‐regulated during anthesis, however, no change is observed in PPP during petal 
development in snapdragon flower whereas in A. thaliana there is down‐regulation of 

140

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Sucrose

SUS

Fructose

INV

Glucose

Cellulose

CESA

UDP-glucose

FRK

UGP

HXK

Glucose-1-P

PGM

Fructose-6-P

Glucose-6-P

PGI

ADP-glucose

AGPase

Comparisons
d-3
to d1

d1
to d4

d4
to d7

Outcome

Down-regulated
Up-regulated
No change

Figure 6.6  Gene expression in sucrose metabolism over petal development. In order to observe gene 
expression in sucrose metabolism, expressed sequence tag (ETS) were annotated. They were assigned 
to enzymatic steps with reference to their homology to A. thaliana genes involved in each enzymatic 
step. Three boxes represent changes in expression of each EST corresponding to the three 
comparisons: d‐3versus d1, d1versus. d4, d4 versus d7. Each enzymatic step has a different number of 
three boxes according to the number of identified EST. Color of boxes represent change in gene 
expression: Red and blue boxes indicate significant up‐ and down‐regulation (p‐value < 0.05), 
respectively, for a given comparisons. White boxes indicate no significant change in gene 
expression (p‐value > 0.05). Abbreviations used: AGPase: ADP‐glucose pyrophosphorylase, FRK: 
fructokinase, CESA: cellulose synthase, HXK: hexokinase, INV: invertase, PGI: phosphoglucose 
isomerase, PGM: phosphoglucomutase, SUS: sucrose synthase, UGP: UDP‐glucose pyrophosphorylase 
(Muhlemann et al., 2012). (Used with permission.)

PPP (Chen et al., 2003). Difference between regulation of PPP of Arabidopsis and in 
snapdragon flowers is due to the difference in volatile compounds as in snapdragon, 
erythrose‐4‐phosphate synthesizes volatile phenylpropanoids methylbenozate during 
PPP.  During  petal  development  in  snapdragon,  tobacco  and  in  Arabidopsis  flowers 
(Wagstaff et al., 2009), an increase in biomass and anthocyanins level is reported with a 
decrease in chlorophyll and total fatty acids. Further, during floral development in snap­
dragon, expression of genes in floral volatiles, shikimate and isoprenoid pathways is 
up‐regulated, however, their expression is down regulated for photosynthesis and fatty 
acid formation. Developmental regulation of metabolism in sepals differs widely from 
petals in snapdragon flower (Muhlemann et al., 2012).

In order to translocate sugars, angiosperms have different transporters. SWEET 
transporters  are  small  proteins  which  supply  sugars  within  monocots  and  dicots. 
They are half in size of monosaccharide channels. Arabidopsis has six transporters for 
transport of glucose out of which AtSWEET8 is expressed in tapetum and required 
for growth of pollen as mutation of this channel can cause male sterility. AtSWEET5 

is thought to supply generative cells with sugar. Hexose transporters are also found 
in vacuoles and plastids.

Physiologically Active Metabolic Pathways in Floral Cells

141

6.3  PPP Provides Floral Cells With Their Nucleotides 
and Important Pigments

PPP is one of the important oxidative pathway in cytosol and plastids of plant cells. It is 
the main pathway which is responsible for providing pentose sugars and NADPH to 
cells of roots, stem, leaves and flowers during their vegetative and reproductive stages. 
It also contributes to formation of fruits. PPP provides pentoses for nucleotide synthe­
sis, therefore it is more active in rapidly dividing young cells. Ribose‐5‐phosphate which 
is  produced  during  PPP  can  also  be  shunted  for  nucleic  acid  metabolism,  forming 
deoxyriboses and riboses during the S‐phase of the cell cycle. However, as PPP also 
provides cells with NADPH, so it can be diverted towards formation of pyruvate if cells 
are in demand of energy but this is significant when NADPH breakdown is coupled 
with ATP hydrolysis and less amount of energy is released as heat.

During PPP, phosphorylated glucose is oxidized to phosphorylated pentoses with the 
release of carbon in form of CO2. During initial stages of this pathway, glucose‐6‐ phosphate 
forms  6‐phosphogluconolatone  in  an  endergonic  reaction  catalyzed  by  glucose‐6‐ 
phosphate dehydrogenase. This step produces NADPH. Next, 6‐phosphogluconolatone 
is hydrolyzed by lactonase forming 6‐phosphogluconate which is further converted into 
5‐carbon sugar (pentose), that is, ribulose‐5‐phosphate by removing carbon in form of 
CO2, through action of 6‐phosphogluconate dehydrogenase. Further steps in pathway 
involve  isomerization  and  interconversion  of  pentoses  which  is  regulated  according 
to metabolic need of cells. Enzymes like transketolase and transaldolase which are 
confined to stroma in higher plants can transform five‐carbon sugars like ribulose‐5‐
phosphate into fructose‐6‐phosphate and glyceraldehye‐3‐phosphate so conversion of 
pentose phosphates in triose and hexose phosphates does not occur in cytosol.

Formation  of  ribulose‐5‐phosphate  by  PPP  leads  to  two  branches.  Oxidative 
PPP  comprises of two branches, oxidative branch synthesizes NADPH and ribulose‐ 
5‐phosphate. However, non‐oxidative branch which is reversible, converts ribulose‐5‐ 
phosphate to ribose‐5‐phosphate and to xylulose‐5‐phosphate by enzymes ribulose‐ 
5‐phosphate  isomerase  and  ribulose‐5‐phosphate  epimerase.  Ribose‐5‐phosphate 
serves as an precursor for nucleotide biosynthesis (Figure 6.7). Erythrose‐4‐phosphate 
is an important intermediate of PPP which can further form aromatic amino acids via 
shikimic acid pathway.

Enzymes of oxidative PPP are found in both cytosol and stroma, whereas enzymes of 
PPP are predominantly present in plastids. In plants, transport of pentose phosphates 
can take place within plastids. More than 20% of erythrose‐4‐phosphate and phospho­
enolpyruvate (both serve as precursors of shikimic acid pathway) can be transported 
into  plastids  for  formation  of  aromatic  amino  acids  depending  upon  conditions. 
In p etals of angiosperm flowers, PPP forms erythrose‐4‐phosphate which is involved in 
pigment formation (Figure 6.7).

In differentiating vessels of woody plants, PPP produces four carbon sugar, that is, 
erythrose‐4‐phosphate which forms lignin and flavonoids through shikimic acid path­
way, therefore during differentiation, vegetative cells divert PPP towards the formation 

Glucose

Glucose-6-phosphate

(a)

(b)

(c)

Glucose-6-phosphate

6-Phosphogluconolactone

NADPH

6-Phosphogluconate

NADPH

Ribulose-5-phosphate

Ribose-5-phosphate

Nucleic acid metabolism

Glucose-6-phosphate

6-Phosphogluconolactone

6-Phosphogluconate

Ribulose-5-phosphate

Epimerase

Xylulose -5-P

Sedoheptulose -7-P

Shikimate pathway

Ribose-5-phosphate

Xylulose -5-P

3-Phosphoglycerate

Erythrose-4-Phosphate

Deoxyribose in DNA 

Ribose in RNA 

Liganan

Essential 
amino acid Monolignol

Lignin

Coniferyl
alcohol

Caumaryl
alcohol

Sinapyl
alcohol

Glucose-6-phosphate

6-Phosphogluconolactone

6-Phosphogluconate

Ribulose-5-phosphate

Epimerase

Ribose-5-phosphate

Xylulose-5-phosphate

Xylulose-5-phosphate

Erythrose-4-Phosphate

Anthocyanin
accumulates in

vacuole 

Chalcone
isomerase

Chalcone

Flavanone

Flavone Flavonol

Iso(cid:31)avanol  Anthocyanidin 

Figure 6.7  (a‐c) A comparison of Pentose Phosphate Pathway (PPP) in (a) Parenchyma cell (b) Differentiating xylem vessel (c) Flower. 
Note: Depending upon metabolic need and nature of plant cells, objectives of PPP will differ as in young parenchyma cell, PPP will be 
used in nucleic acid metabolism. In differentiating xylem vessels, PPP is directed towards formation of erythrose‐4‐phosphate which 
serves as a precursor of lignin formation. However, in cells of flowers, erythrose‐4‐phosphate will be diverted towards formation of 
pigments like chalcones.

Physiologically Active Metabolic Pathways in Floral Cells

143

of erythrose‐4‐phosphate which is also precursor for synthesis of essential amino acids 
like tyrosine, phenylalanine and tryptophan. However, in meristematic cells and c ambial 
cells, PPP diverts towards ribose formation for nucleic acids.

6.4  ATP and NADPH Produced Through Photochemical 
Reactions Provide Energy for Sugar Formation in Stroma 
of Chloroplasts

Ability of plants to respond to sunlight and to convert it into chemical energy to form 
carbohydrates is known since many billion years. However, prokaryotic organisms, that 
is, purple bacteria and green sulphur bacteria are considered to be relics during evolu­
tion of photosynthesis. Leaves of angiosperms are main photosynthetic organs which 
are responsible for providing sugar to each and every cell of plant body through phloem. 
Presence of antenna pigments in chloroplasts, stomatal pores, their distribution and 
shape, position, size and arrangement of leaf lamina are main characteristics which 
allow absorption of photons of light and CO2 fixation.

All antenna pigments are present in chloroplasts. They include chlorophyll a, b, lutein 
and xanthophylls. Chlorophyll is the main photosynthetic pigment which absorbs light 
at a wavelength of below 480 nm and between 550 and 700 nm. Richard Willstatter was 
awarded  with  Nobel  Prize  for  his  discovery  of  structure  of  chlorophyll  in  1915. 
Chlorophyll a is found in abundance in plants more than chlorophyll b. It is the main 
photosynthetic pigment, whereas chlorophyll b helps in absorbing energy for chloro­
phyll a. Both chlorophyll a and b make antenna pigments of photosystems which are 
bound with proteins. This complex is known as PSII and PSI. Both photosystems have 
a common origin but PSII has absorption maximum of 680 nm, whereas PSI has absorp­
tion maximum of 700 nm. Further, PSII mostly exists as a dimer with almost four copies 
of light harvesting complex (LHC) trimmers. LHC is a cluster of antenna pigments and 
proteins. It captures energy of photons and transfers it effectively to reaction center 
which is a special pair of chlorophyll a molecules surrounded by specific proteins. The 
breakdown of water photolysis occurs at the reaction center. LHC associated with PSII 
is  named  as  LHCII  and  LHCI  is  associated  with  PSI  but  LHCII  is  also  part  of  PSI 
c omplex (Figure 6.8).

Almost 300 chlorophyll molecules are associated with one reaction center. In addition 
to antenna proteins and pigments, PSII also is composed of cofactors, beta‐carotene, 
phaeophytin, plastoquinone, heme, bicarbonate and possesses almost 20 lipids. LHCII 
also comprises of more pigments and less proteins. Plants may have LHC a, b, c, d, and e, 
among which LHCII is abundant protein which is encoded in nucleus (Figure 6.9i & ii). 
Total number of trimmers LHCII per PSII dimer is almost 8 (Peter & Thornber, 1991).
When  photons  strike  antenna  pigments  through  resonance,  their  energy  is  trans­
ferred to reaction centers where photolysis takes place. Eight photons are required in 
order to release one molecule of O2. Breakdown of water results in flow of electron 
and proton in thylakoid membrane. Protons develop gradient in thylakoid lumen and 
transferred to ATPsynthase which is located on stromal side of thylakoid membrane. 
In contrast to mitochondria, ATPase activity of chloroplast ATPase is relatively slow 
(McCarty, 2005). ATPase of thylakoid, synthesizes ATP which diffuses in stroma and is 
used in the Calvin cycle during CO2 fixation.

Sun

Photons from 

sunlight strike on
photosynthetic 
pigments on 

thylakoid through

resonance

(b)

Energy of
photons are 
transferred
to reaction 
center by 

antenna pigments

Chloroplast

(a)

PSII - LHCII

PSI - LHCII

2H2O

4H+ + 4e– + O

(c) Energy transfer to reaction center 

Reaction center

showing chlorophyll, a (in yellow) 

and chlorophyll b (in green)

    

(d)

results in photolysis

LHC II

PS II

e–

H+

H+

2H2O
(e)

PQ

PQH2

4H+ + 4e– + O
H+

(f)
H+

LHC II

Pc

Cyt
b6f
e–

H+

H+

NADP

e–

Fd

PS I
e–

PS II

PS I

LHC II

LHC II

LHC II

(e & f)

H+

FNR

NADPH

(g)

ATP

H+

ATP

synthase

Stroma

ADP + Pi

Calvin
cycle

(h)

Triose

phosphate

Triose 

phosphate

Hexose

formation

Sucrose

Sucrose

Figure 6.8  (a‐h) Main events in light reaction: (a) Light strikes in the form of energy packets (photons) through resonance on antenna 
pigments which are located on thylakoid membrane, (b) Energy of photons is transferred to a reaction center within a photosystem 

Physiologically Active Metabolic Pathways in Floral Cells

145

However, electrons from water molecules pass through electron transport proteins 
carriers on thylakoid membrane and reduce NADP+ to form NADPH. Formation of 
NADPH is coupled to ATP formation. NADPH and ATP are main products of photo­
chemical reactions which fuel the Calvin cycle. Triose phosphates synthesized through 
the Calvin cycle are exported out of chloroplasts through triose phosphate transloca­
tors (TPT), where they form sucrose.

Sucrose synthesis takes place in cytosol of mesophyll cells. It is then transported out of 
cell through plasmodesmata and loaded in sieve tube members either through apoplastic 
or symplast ways. Apoplastic loading of sucrose in phloem requires sucrose‐proton 
cotransporters which relies on ATP‐ driven proton pump. The inner convoluted wall of 
companion cell increases area for sucrose transport. In symplast loading, sucrose is 
transported from mesophyll cells to companion cells through plasmodesmata. Sucrose 
transporters (SITS) on plasma membrane of sieve cells and companion cells uptake 
sucrose from apoplast.

Sieve tube members transport sucrose to other organs (sink) where energy is required. 
Companion cells assist in transport of carbohydrates and connected with sieve tube 
members through plasmodesmata. A pressure flow gradient developed between source 
and sink is responsible for sucrose translocation. Concentration of sucrose in the meso­
phyll of cytosol is 10 to 50 mM, whereas in phloem it is 1 M, this difference in concen­
tration of sucrose develops pressure which acts a driving force for sugars translocation 
along with increase in osmotic potential. When sugars like glucose enters cell cytosol, it 
is catabolized during glycolysis, so energy can be provided for many metabolic activities 
which take place within the cell (Figure 6.10).

6.5  Floral Photosynthesis Contributes to Sugar 
Requirements of Floral Whorls

As mentioned before, CO2 assimilation may take place in any part of flowers for their 
growth and development. Photosynthetic apparatus of sepals and petals is also func­
tional and capable of fixing CO2 in N. tabacum and rate of carbohydrate metabolism in 

which is surrounded by special proteins and a pair of chlorophyll a molecules (c) Transfer of energy to 
a reaction center causes breakdown of water molecule (photolysis) which results in flow of electrons, 
protons and release of molecular oxygen (O2), (d) A light harvesting complex (LHC) is composed of 
outer part of antenna proteins which bind antenna pigments, that is, chlorophyll b on outer side while 
chlorophyll a on inner side which are further supported by lutein molecules in the center. LHC II is 
associated mostly with photosystem II, (e) Protons (formed from breakdown of water molecules) 
accumulate within thylakoid lumen and develop a gradient across thylakoid membrane. This proton 
gradient serves as driving force for the formation of ATP by ATPsynthase which is located on stromal 
side of thylakoid membrane (f) Electrons from water molecules pass through a set of carrier proteins 
(electron transport chain carriers) located on thylakoid membrane, that is, plastoquinone (PQ), 
cytochrome b6/f complex (cytb6/f), plastocyanin (PC) and ferrodoxin (Fd) and reduce cofactor NADP+ 
by enzyme ferrodoxin‐NADP reductase (FNR) near PSI forming NADPH, (g) Both ATP and NADPH are 
main products of light reactions which diffuse into stroma where they are used in formation of 
carbohydrates during Calvin cycle. RubiScO (Ribulose‐1,5‐bisphosphate carboxylase) is main enzyme 
in Calvin cycle which cause CO2 fixation, (h) Reactions of Calvin cycle synthesize three‐carbon sugars, 
triose phosphates which further form hexoses (six‐C sugars) which is followed by formation of sucrose 

146

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 6.9  i  (a‐c) (a) Three‐dimensional crystal packing of LHC‐II of spinach, (b) LHCII of pea showing 
type 1 crystals, (c) Hexagonal plates of pea LHC‐II (Barros & Kuuhlbrandt, 2009). (Used with permission 
of Elsevier.) ii. (a‐c) Structure of LHC‐II (a‐c) (a) Trimeric complex from the stromal side, (b) view from 
the membrane, and (c) from the lumenal side. (Barros & Kuuhlbrandt, 2009). (Used with permission 
of Elsevier.)

Physiologically Active Metabolic Pathways in Floral Cells

147

Stroma

Lumen

(a)

(b)

(c)

Stromal side

Lumenal side

Figure 6.9 (Cont’d)

148

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Invertase

Sucrose

Glucose + Fructose

Glucose

Glycolysis

Citric acid cycle

CAC

Acetyl
CoA

Figure 6.10  Phloem transports carbohydrates to all cells of plants mostly in the form of sucrose. 
When sucrose enters plant cell, it is converted into glucose and fructose by enzyme invertase in cell 
wall. Glucose enters cell through through its channel on plasma membrane. Once within cell, breakdown 
of glucose takes place through glycolysis, which is followed by energy formation. End products of 
glycolysis are used by citric acid cycle which takes place in mitochondria and electron transport chain. 
During glucose catabolism, energy is released which is used by metabolic activities of cells.

petals is reported to be highest as compared with other floral whorls (Muller et al., 
2010). Contribution of floral photosynthesis for most of plant species range between 
0–60% however, in monocots it is relatively higher as compared with eudicots. In Acer 
platanoides, 64.5% of carbon is provided from floral photosynthesis for seed maturity. 
Flowers of Malus pumila can fulfill almost 30% of their sugar demand for vital meta­
bolic  activities  from  floral  photosynthesis  while  oat  panicles  can  complete  63%  of 
requirements from carbon supply from flowers.

Photosynthesis also takes place in floral organs of monocots and is more significant 
as in wheat all parts of ear and exposed peduncles can assimilate CO2 (Figure 6.11). 
It can contribute to 40–50% of photoassimilates required for developing wheat grain. 
Removal of upper two leaves cause significant reduction in grain yield. The average 
stomatal  density  observed  is  80.23 ± 9.41 mm−2  in  exposed  areas  of  peduncle  (Kong 
et al., 2010).

Physiologically Active Metabolic Pathways in Floral Cells

149

Figure 6.11  Monocot ears are 
also exposed to sunlight and 
are photosynthetically active 
sites as higher grain yield is 
reported in plants having 
large ears.

6.5.1  Presence of Stomata and Chloroplasts in Flowers Facilitate 
Sugar Formation
Formation  of  sugars  within  flowers  is  an  indication  that  they  contain  chloroplasts. 
However, their chloroplasts are slightly different from those which are present within 
leaves. Interestingly, chlorophylls of floral chloroplasts in some plants are reported to be 
more efficient in sugar formation as compared to the leaves of same plants. Area and 
amount of green tissue in flowers is also an important factor in floral photosynthesis. 
Chlorophyll concentration of orchids is 15–17% of leaves content. However, rate of pho­
tosynthesis may vary from flower to flower as in lily anthers, CO2 assimilation is 73% as 
compared with their leaves, however in Cymbidium flowers it is only 10% of foliar pho­
tosynthesis (Aschan & Pfanz, 2002). In tobacco petals, CO2 fixation takes place before 
flower opening, however, a decrease is observed when chlorophylls degradation takes 
place in buds.

Chloroplasts in floral cells of Petunia although similar to leaves, are converted in 
chromoplast upon maturity. Chloroplasts of some flowers like Dendrobium are smaller 
with low efficiency of PSII. Net photosynthesis is observed in all the parts of many flow­
ers,  in  sepals  of  Diospyros,  Cymbidium,  and  Dendrobium  and  petals  and  anther  of 
Lilium.  Sepals  are  known  to  be  most  efficient  site  for  CO2  fixation  in  Dendrobium 
flowers.

Another adaptation of angiosperms flowers which allows them to synthesize sug­
ars is the presence of stomata on the epidermal layers of floral organs which facili­
tate gaseous exchange, however, there is a great diversity in the number of stomata 
on flowers. The cells of carpel of Alpine butter cup possess only one or two stomata, 
however,  the  number  of  stomata  reported  in  cells  of  apples  sepal  are  200 mm2 
(Vemmos  &  Goldwin,  1994).  Developing  wheat  grains  are  composed  of  upto  30 
stomata in the epidermal cells of grains, however their chloroplast disintegrate at 
maturity.

Photosynthesis in monocot spikelets is more efficient as cells of ear, rachis, lemma, 
palea, awn, glumes and panicles are sites of photosynthesis and contribute to grain for­
mation (Imaizumi et al., 1997). They contain enzyme PEPCase and contribute to refix 
CO2  during  reproductive  development.  PEPCase  is  localized  in  scutellum  of  grains 
and  in  aleurone  layer  for  refixation  of  CO2.  Further,  awns  also  play  crucial  role  in 

150

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Figure 6.12  Fruit development in 
tomatoes involves photosynthetic 
activity in both vegetative and 
reproductive parts of tomatoes and 
almost 14% of sugars are synthesized 
in cells of sepals, green shoulder and 
pericarp.

photosynthesis by increasing the area for photosynthesis as wheat grains without awns 
contribute  only  upto  18%  in  grain  development  (Vehrich  et  al.,  1995).  However, 
m onocots like wheat and barley possess 10 to 30 stomata within a single fruit.

6.5.2  Sepals of Angiosperms have Developed Many  
Adaptations for Foliar Photosynthesis
Sepals of many flowers are green and photosynthetic due to the presence of chloro­
plasts and stomata which allow gaseous exchange (Figure 6.12). They enclose other 
floral whorls making the outermost whorl of flower during the bud stage and this posi­
tion is significant in absorbing radiant energy for forming photoassimilates. Furthermore, 
sepals become aligned vertically in order to get maximum sunlight when fruit expan­
sion  takes  place.  However,  stomatal  density  of  sepals  is  10  to  100  times  lower  than 
abaxial epidermis of leaves which suggests their dependence on leaves for their sugar 
supply, but it varies from species to species.

Sepals of Helleborus niger are yellow at anthesis but turn green during ripening of 
fruits with an increase in rate of electron transport chain (almost 60% of leaves) but 
when sepals become anthocyanic, one‐fourth decrease in electron transport chain 
is  observed  of  respective  leaf  rate.  Similarly  chlorophyll  content  of  green  sepals 
were high (390 mg m−2) as compared with red ones (80 mg m−2). Stomata are also 
found  in  fruits  of  black  currant,  grape  berries  and  in  grains  of  cereals  including 
wheat and barley.

6.5.3  Photosynthesis in Anthers is Required for Metabolic  
Demands of Developing Pollen Grains
Anthers of many angiosperms contain photosynthetic chloroplasts. Epidermal cells of 
many  anthers  like  Triticum  aestivum,  Secale  cereale  and  Lilium  spp.  also  contain 
p lastids which photosynthesize and calvin cycle is even more efficient than in leaves 
(Clement et al., 1997). The presence of stomata in epidermal cells of anther which are 
in double density in some species also facilitates CO2 to enter the bud during pollen 

Physiologically Active Metabolic Pathways in Floral Cells

151

development. It indicates that CO2 produced during anther development in closed 
buds is used by anthers for photosynthesis. In anthers, sugars are required as impor­
tant nutrients for pollen development. Sucrose is, however, the main sugar in young 
filaments  and  supplied  to  anthers  through  filaments.  There  are  many  hypotheses 
which support their role in providing sugars to developing anthers when they are 
photosynthetic as sucrose level in filaments declines significantly after anther growth. 
However, after mitotic division in anthers, the level of sucrose declines in filament 
and it enters the metabolic activities of filament. It is also reported that some photo­
active radiations can enter flower bud in young anthers and CO2 fixation can take 
place due to presence of chloroplasts which are present in epidermis, endothecium 
and middle layers in many species. Once pollen mitosis takes place, there is no more 
supply of sugars from filament and this is followed by degradation of starch in anther. 
However,  in  mature  anthers,  chloroplast  is  replaced  by  chromoplasts  after  pollen 
mitosis.

Anthers have variations in sugars during their developmental stages as in Hordeum 
vulgare, Oryza sativa and Secale cereale, main sugars in anther are sucrose, maltose, 
glucose and fructose. However, in mature pollens of angiosperms, sucrose is dominant 
sugar which may constitute 23% of dry weight of pollen in Typha. A higher amount of 
sucrose in pollens protects cell membrane phospholipids from desiccation and ensures 
its survival for a longer period of time.

6.5.4  Chloroplasts in Exocarp of Fruits are Modified and are Photosynthetic
In addition to epidermal cells of sepals, young anthers and filaments sugars are also 
actively synthesized by young photosynthetic fruits which are also known to contain 
chloroplasts and stomata in their exocarps (Clijister, 1999). In plants with photosyn­
thetic flowers, an increase in fruit yield is observed. In chloroplasts of pea fruits, maxi­
mum number of grana are present in exocarp and minimum in endocarps. In many 
plants,  photosynthesis  in  fruits  contributes  from  5%  to  15%  of  carbon  requirements 
(Fleancu, 2007). Chloroplasts in exocarps are same as in leaves, however, those found 
in  endocarps  are  larger  in  size  due  to  starch  accumulation;  they  also  resemble 
amyloplasts.

The amount of chlorophyll varies significantly among fruit peel of different species. 
In  members  of  family  Cucurbitaceae,  chlorophyll  content  is  almost  850 µg/g  fresh 
weight. however it is lower in apples and contributes only 7 µg/g fresh weight of fruit 
peel (Carrara et al., 2001). Exocarps of fruits are also known to possess cuticle which are 
more  permeable  than  leaf  cuticle.  PEPCase  is  found  in  higher  concentration  which 
s uggests a different mechanism for CO2 fixation in fruits.

In pea pods, number of stomata is 25% less than in leaves. Apples have maximum 
stomata during early growth of fruits, however, their number decrease with passage 
of time. Both chl a and b are present in epidermal peel of apple fruits. At a wavelength 
of 850 nm, exocarp of apple transmitted 10–11% of incident PAR. Further, in green 
apples, absorption of wavelength takes place at 678 nm, whereas in red apples, it is 
reported at 480 nm. Exocarps of tomatoes which are almost 6 mm thick receive 14–16% 
of incident PAR.

In monocots like wheat, both flag leaves and peduncle are sites of photosyn­
thetic activities (Figures 6.13 & 6.14) due to their well‐developed chloroplasts and 

152

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Figure 6.13  (a‐f) Different stages of wheat peduncle: (a) Semithin section of exposed peduncle, 
(b) Higher magnification showing chlorenchyma cells containing chloroplasts, (c) Semithin 
section of middle part of an exposed peduncle, (d) Decline in the number of chloroplasts in the 
chlorenchyma and stomata, (e) Stomata are arranged axially in rows, (f ) SEM (scanning electron 
microscope) of stomata. Abbreviations used: Chl: chloroplast, CS: chlorenchyma strand, 
Ep: epidermis, GP = ground parenchyma, Sc: sclerenchyma, St: stomata, and VS = vascular strand. 
Bars: (a and c), 200 µm; (e), 100 µm; (b, d and f ), 30 µm (Kong et al., 2010). (Used with permission.)

(a)

En

(c)

(e)

(g)

G

S

(b)

S

G

(d)

G

Th

S

Pg

Pg

En

Pg

(f)

(h)

Figure 6.14  (a‐p) Ultrastructure of the chloroplast during different stages in flag leaves of wheat 
(Transmission electron microscope images) (a‐f) Exposed peduncles (g‐p). (a, g and h): stage 1; 
(b, I and j): stage 2; (c, k and l): stage 3, (d, m and n): stage 4; (e, f, o and p): stage 5. (h), (j), (l), (n) and (p): 
Higher magnification shown in (g), (l), (k), (m) and (o), respectively.

(i)

(k)

(m)

(o)

(j)

(l)

(n)

(p)

Figure 6.14 (Cont’d)  Stages 1‐5 correspond respectively to the end of anthesis (Bars: (a‐d), 2 µm; 
(e, g, l, k, m, o), 5 µm; (f, h, j, l, n, p), 1 µm. CW, cell wall; En, envelop; g, granum; Mt, mitochondrion; 
Pg, plastoglobuli; S, starch; Th, thylakoid. (Kong et al., 2010). (Used with permission.)

Physiologically Active Metabolic Pathways in Floral Cells

155

heat‐tolerant activity of PEPCase which can adapt to ecological environment during 
later stages of grain development.

During development of wheat grain, chloroplasts of flag leaves and peduncle undergo 
many changes. They involve change in shape from lens‐shaped to ellipsoid, as well as 
the dilation of the thylakoid membrane. This is followed by the irregular arrangement 
of thylakoid stacks and a decrease in starch content. An increase in the formation of 
plastoglobuli is observed which leads to leaf senescence and degradation of chloroplast. 
Chloroplast  become  smaller  and  swollen  with  disintegrated  thylakoids  and  grana 
(Figure 6.14).

However, chloroplasts of peduncle do not contain starch granules, although thylakoid 
and grana lamella are well developed and distinguishable. However, during later stages, 
number of plastoglobuli and vesicles increase and chloroplast become spherical‐shaped 
and  loss  of  parallel  arrangement  of  grana  lamellae.  As  compared  to  flag  leaves, 
c hloroplasts of peduncle retain grana lamellae.

6.6  Future Perspectives

A complete understanding of primary metabolism in flowers is lacking. There is not 
enough information on sepal and petals metabolism. CO2 fixation is studied in petals of 
few flowers and it is not clear that whether a decrease in pool of C in petals is due to 
respiratory activities or due to senescence. Glycolysis and pentose phosphate pathways 
provide  energy  and  intermediates  which  are  required  for  growth  and  development 
of flowers, but there is a need to conduct sufficient research to explore primary and 
secondary metabolism in flowering plants and to relate them with metabolic pathways 
in vegetative parts.

References

Aschan, H. & Pfaz, H. (2002). ‘Non‐foliar photosynthesis‐ a strategy of additional carbon 

acquisition’, Flora, 198, pp. 81–97.

Barros, T. & Kuuhlbrandt, W. (2009). ‘Crystallization, structure and function of plant 

light‐harvesting Complex II’, Biochimica et Biophysica Acta, 1787, pp. 753–772.

Carrara, S., Pardossi, A., Soldatini, G.F., Tognoni, F., & Giuidi, L. (2001). ‘Photosynthetic 

activity of ripening tomato fruit’, Photosynthetica, 39, pp. 75–78.

Clijister, H. (1999). ‘On the photosynthetic activity of developing apple fruit’, Qualitas 

Plantarum et Materiae Vegetabiles, 19, pp. 129–140.

Chen, F., Tholl, D., D’Auria, J.C., Farooq, A., & Pichersky, E., & Gershenzon, J. (2003). 

‘Biosynthesis and emission of terpenoid volatiles from Arabidopsis flowers’, Plant Cell, 
15, pp. 481–494.

Clement, C., Mischler, P., Burrus, M., & Audran, J.C. (1997). ‘Characteristics of the 

photosynthetic apparatus and CO2‐fixation in the flower bud of Lilium. II. Anther’, 
International Journal of Plant Sciences, 158, pp. 801–810.

Fleancu, M. (2007). ‘Correlations among Some Physiological Processes in Apple Fruit 
During Growing and Maturation Processes’, International Journal of Agriculture & 
Biology, 9, pp. 613–616.

156

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Imaizumi, N., Samejima, M., & Ishihara, K. (1997). ‘Characteristics of photosynthetic 

carbon metabolism of spikelets in rice’, Photosynthesis Research, 52, pp. 75–82.
Kong, L., Wang, F., Feng, B., Li, S., Si, J., & Zhang, B. (2010). ‘The structural and 

photosynthetic characteristics of the exposed peduncle of wheat (Triticum aestivum L.): 
an important photosynthate source for grain‐filling’, BMC Plant Biology, 10, pp. 141.

McCarty, R.E. (2005). ‘ATP synthase of chloroplast thylakoid membranes: a more in depth 

characterization of its ATPase activity’, Journal of Bioenergetics & Biomembrane, 
37, pp. 289–297.

Muller, G.L., Drincovich, M.F., Andreo, C.S., & Lara, M.V., 2010. ‘Role of photosynthesis 

and analysis of key enzymes involved in primary metabolism throughout the lifespan of 
the tobacco flower’, Journal of Experimental Botany, vol. 61, pp. 3675–3688.

Muhlemann, J.K., Maeda, H., Chang, C., Miguel, P.S., Baxter, I., Cooper, B., Perera, M.A., 

Nikolau, B.J., Vitek, O., Morgan J.A., & Dudareva, N. (2012). ‘Developmental Changes in 
the Metabolic Network of Snapdragon Flowers’, PLoS ONE, 7, p.e40381. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0040381.

Peter, G.F. & Thornber, J.P. (1991). ‘Biochemical composition and organization of higher 

plant photosystem II light‐harvesting pigment proteins, Journal of Biological Chemistry, 
266, pp. 16745–16754.

Vemmos, S.N. & Goldwin, G.K. (1994). ‘The photosynthetic activity of Cox’s orange pippin 

apple flowers in relation to fruit setting’, Annals of Botany, 73, pp. 385–391.

Vehrich, R.A., Carner, B.F., & Martin, B.C. (1995). ‘Photosynthesis and water use efficiency 

of awned and awnletted lines of hard red winter wheat’, Crop Sciences, 35, pp. 172–176.

Wagstaff, C., Yang, T.J., Stead, A.D., Buchanan‐Wollaston, V., & Roberts, J.A. (2009). 
‘A molecular and structural characterization of senescing Arabidopsis siliques and 
comparison of transcriptional profiles with senescing petals and leaves’, Plant Journal, 
57, pp. 690–705.

Further Reading

Araus, J.L., Bort, J., Brown, R.H., Bassett, C.L., & Cortadellas, N. (1993). 

‘Immunocytochemical localization of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase and 
photosynthetic gas‐exchange characteristics in ears of Triticum durum Desf’, Planta, 
191, pp. 507–514.

Antlfinger, A.E. & Wendel, L.F. (1997). ‘Reproductive effort and floral photosynthesis in 

Spiranthes cernua (Orchidaceae)’, American Journal of Botany, 84, pp. 769–780.

Blanke, M.M. & Lanze, F. (1989). ‘Fruit Photosynthesis‐A Review’, Plant Cell Environment, 

12, pp. 31–46.

Blanke, M.M. & Notton, B.A. (1992). ‘Light transmission into apple fruit and leaves’, 

Scientia Horticulturae, 51, pp. 43–53.

Clement, C., Laporte, P., & Audran, J.C. (1998). ‘The loculus content and tapetum during 

pollen development’, Sexual Plant Reproduction, 11, pp. 94–106.

Czarnowski, M. & Starzecki, W. (1992). ‘Spectral properties and CO2 exchange of tomato 

fruits’, Photosynthetica, 27, pp. 513–519.

Debnam, P.M. & Emes, M.J. (1999). ‘Sub‐cellular distribution of enzymes of the oxidative 
pentose phosphate pathway in root and leaf tissues’, Journal of Experimental Botany, 50, 
pp. 1653–1661.

Physiologically Active Metabolic Pathways in Floral Cells

157

Fischer, K., Kammerer, B., Gutensohn, M., Arbinger, B., Weber, A., Häusler, R., & Flugge, 
U.I. (1997). ‘A new class of plastidic phosphate translocators: a putative link between 
primary and secondary metabolism by phosphoenolpyruvate/phosphate antiporter’, 
Plant Cell, 9, pp. 453–462.

Galen, C., Dawson, T.E., & Stanton, M.L. (1993). ‘Carpels as leaves: meeting the carbon 

cost of reproduction in an alpine buttercup’, Oecolagia, 95, pp. 187–193.

Hetherington, S., Smillie, R., & Davies, W. (1998). ‘Photosynthetic activities of vegetative 

and fruiting tissues of tomato’, Journal of Experimental Botany, 49, pp. 1173–1181.

Henkes, S., Sonnewald, U., Badur, R., Flachmann, R., & Stitt, M. (2001). ‘A small decrease of 
plastid transketolase activity in antisense tobacco transformants has dramatic effects on 
photosynthesis and phenylpropanoid metabolism’, Plant Cell, 13, pp. 535–551.

Herrmann, K.M. & Weaver, L.M. (1999). ‘The shikimate pathway’, Annual Review of Plant 

Physiology & Plant Molecular Biology, 50, pp. 473–503.

Hoekstra, F.A., Crowe, J.H., & Crowe, L.M. (1991). ‘Effect of sucrose on phase behavior of 

membrane in intact pollen of Typha latifolia L., as measured with Fourier transform 
infrared spectroscopy’, Plant Physiology, 97, pp. 1073–1079.

Khoo, G.S. & Hew, C.S. (1999). ‘Developmental changes in chloroplasts ultrastructure and 
carbon fixation metabolism of Dendrobium flowers (Orchidaceae)’, International journal 
of Plant Sciences, 160, pp. 699–705.

Marcelis, L.F.M. & Hofman‐Eijer, L.R.B. (1995). ‘The contribution of fruit photosynthesis 

to the carbon requirement of carbon requirement of cucumber fruits as affected by 
irradiance, temperature and ontogeny’, Physiologia Plantarum, 93, pp. 476–483.

McDowell, S.C.L. & Turner, D.P. (2002). ‘Reproductive efforts in invasive and non‐invasive 

Rubus’, Oecologia, 133, pp. 102–111.

Pessarakli, M. (2005). Handbook of Photosynthesis, 2nd Edition, CRC Press, Taylor & 

Francis Group.

Rosyara, U.R., Sharma, R.C., Shrestha, S.M., & Duveiller, E. (2005). ‘Yield and yield 

components response to defoliation of spring wheat genotypes with different level of 
resistance to Helminthosporium leaf blight’, Journal of the Institute of Agriculture and 
Animal Science, 26, pp. 43–50.

Smillie, R.M. (1992). ‘Calvin cycle activity in fruit and the effect of heat stress’, Scientia 

Horticulturae, 51, pp. 83–95.

Smillie, R.M., Hetherington, S.E., & Davies, W.J. (1999). ‘Photosynthetic activity of the 
calyx, green shoulder, pericarp and locular parenchyma of tomato fruit’, Journal of 
Experimental Botany, 50, pp. 707–718.

Speranza, A., Calzoni, G.L., & Pacini, E. (1997). ‘Occurrence of mono or disaccharides and 

polysaccharides reserves in mature pollen grains’, Sexual Plant Reproduction, 10, 
pp. 110–115.

Streatfield, S.J., Weber, A., Kinsman, E.A., Hausler, R.E., Li, J., Post‐Beittenmiller, D., Kaiser, 
W.M., Pyke, K.A., Flugge, U.I., & Chory, J. (1999). ‘The phosphoenolpyruvate/phosphate 
translocator is required for phenolic metabolism, palisade cell development and plastid‐
dependent nuclear gene expression’, Plant Cell, 11, pp. 1609–1621.

Wang, Z.M., Well, A.L., & Zheng, D.M. (2001). ‘Photosynthetic characteristics of non‐leaf 

organs of winter wheat cultivars differing in ear type and their relationship with grain 
mass per ear’, Photosynthetica, 39, pp. 239–244.

Venmos, S.N. & Goldwin, G.K. (1993). ‘Stomatal and chlorophyll distribution of Cox’s Orange 

Pippin apple flowers relative to other cluster parts’, Annals of Botany, 71, pp. 245–250.

158

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Weiss, D., Shomer‐Ilan, A., & Halevy, A.H. (1990). Photosynthesis in flowers of Petunia 
hybrida: low CO2‐ flow and coordinated reduction between photosynthetic systems. 
In: Altscheffsky, M. (ed.): Current Research in Photosynthesis, IV, 417–419. Kluwer 
Academic Publ., The Netherlands.

Yonemori, K., Itai, A., Nakano, R., & Sugiura, A. (1996). ‘Role of calyx lobes in gas exchange 

and development of persimmon fruit’, Journal of the American Society for Horticultural 
Science, 12, pp. 676–679.

Physiologically Active Metabolic Pathways in Floral Cells

159

Problems Chapter 6

1  Select the best answer from options given below:

i.  One of the following is an example of thermodynamically favorable reaction.

A  ATP synthesis
B  DNA replication
C  B‐Oxidation of fatty acids
D  Protein synthesis

ii. 

iii. 

iv. 

v. 

 Photosynthesis is a type of ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐ reaction, whereas respiration is a type 
of ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐ reaction.
A  catabolic; anabolic
B  anabolic; hydrolytic
C  catabolic; anabolic
D  anabolic; catabolic

 Breakdown  of  two  molecules  of  water,  produces  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐  electrons  that  are 
accepted by NADP located close to PSI.
A  two electrons
B  four electrons
C  six electrons
D  eight electrons

 When resonance takes place, chlorophyll loses its electrons which is ultimately 
replaced by ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐.
A  splitting water
B  NADP+ reduction
C  electron transport chain
D  ATP formation

 ATP synthase located on thylakoid membrane is proton dependent and these 
protons develop gradient across membrane so they can cause rotation of F1 
part  of  enzyme,  synthesizing  ATP  with  the  help  of  ADP  and  Pi  which  then 
d iffuses in ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐.
A  nucleoplasm
B  matrix
C  stroma
D  cristae

2  Draw a diagram of a chloroplast showing the following events.

A  Resonance
B  Photolysis
C  Electron flow
D  NADPH formation
E  NADPH diffusion in stroma

160

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

F  CO2 fixation by RuBisCo
G  G‐3‐P formation
H  Sucrose formation

3  What is light harvesting complex (LHC)? Explain the structure of LHC with the 

help of a diagram.

4  How  photolysis  is  important  in  the  flow  of  electrons  across  the  thylakoid 

membrane?

5  Differentiate between antenna pigments and polypeptides of PSI and PSII.

6 

Identify which of the following pathways are exergonic and which are endergonic.

Pathways/Reactions

Exergonic

Endergonic

ATP synthesis in chloroplast thylakoid membrane
Pentose phosphate pathway synthesizing nucleic acid sugars
Breakdown of ATPduring a Calvin cycle
Formation of NADPH on a thylakoid membrane
Pigment formation in cytosol of floral cells
Glycolysis in sepal cells

7  Explain how photosynthesis in anthers differs from filament photosynthesis?

8  How sugar formation in grass spikelets may differ from photosynthesis in eudicot 

flowers?

9  Exocarps  of  some  fruits  are  photosynthetic  due  to  presence  of  chloroplasts. 
However,  during  fruit  maturation,  there  is  interconversion  of  chloroplasts  into 
chromoplasts.  Explain  various  steps  involved  in  chloroplast  differentiating  into 
chromoplasts with the help of diagram in wheat plant.

10  Explain different adaptations in floral whorls which facilitate CO2 fixation within 

flowers.

161

7

Anthocyanins: Accumulation in Plants and Role 
in Industries

7.1  Anthocyanins Accumulation in Different Organs Is 
Indicative of Their Multiple Roles

Many eudicots and monocots accumulate pink, red, blue and purple colors in their 
vegetative and reproductive organs. It is due to a group of flavonoid phenolic com-
pounds which are soluble in water and known as anthocyanins. Formation of such phe-
nolic compounds by plants reveals their ability to adapt to changing biotic and abiotic 
conditions by forming such pigments which also have defensive role. Anthocyanins also 
increase ornamental value of many plants. Many floriculture and food industries largely 
depend on the capability of angiosperms to form these pigments which are synthesized 
naturally within cytosol of their cells. Current research is focussing on the development 
of  models  for  anthocyanin  biosynthesis  through  the  expression  of  genes  encoding 
anthocyanin biosynthesis in many plants in order to increase their applications in food, 
agriculture,  floriculture,  cosmetic  nutraceuticals  and  pharmaceutical  products. 
Therefore it is important to discuss their biosynthesis, accumulation with respect to 
their role in different plant organs as well as many current and future challenges involved 
in order to increase their uses in commercial products.

Anthocyanin is a Greek word derived from ‘flower’ and ‘blue’ which was first used by 
Marquart in 1835 to describe blue color of flowers. They are crucial for pollination, 
seed dispersal, development and protection of young leaves. The well‐known function 
of anthocyanins in many plants includes their role as defensive pigments against abiotic 
and biotic conditions. Their main role against abiotic conditions include protection of 
young leaves against UV, against high or low temperature, role as anti‐oxidants as well 
as  to  scavenge  reactive  oxygen  species.  However,  the  role  against  biotic  conditions 
includes protection from pathogenic attack. They also form colored venations of modi-
fied leaves of pitcher plants in order to allure insects. They are important pigments 
required for pollination and also possess nutritive compounds, therefore, they are being 
used in many nutraceutical products.

More than 635 anthocyanins are identified in different plants. Family Rosaceae (apple, 
peach, plum, strawberry, raspberry, blackberry and cherry) and Vitaceae (grape) are 
major edible source of anthocyanins with health benefits and anti‐tumor properties, 
which are described later in this chapter. Family Brassicaceae, Solanaceae (eggplant), 
Ericaceae (blueberry and cranberry), and Saxifragaceae (red and black currants) are 
also important sources of edible anthocyanins.

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products, First Edition. Aisha Saleem Khan. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.162

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Anthocyanin accumulation takes place almost in every part of plant, however their 
synthesis in many plants is under control of many developmental, and environmental 
factors like light, temperature, nutrients and stress conditions. Synthesis and accumula-
tion  of  anthocyanins  may  take  place  within  the  same  site  in  some  plants.  They  are 
 synthesized in cytosol of cell and actively sequestered into vacuolar tonoplast with the 
help of glutathione pump and ATP binding cassettes (Mars et al., 1995). Their distribu-
tion within many tissues and organs is genetically determined by the tissue‐specific 
expression of regulatory genes. These genes control expression of structural genes in 
response to developmental and environmental stimuli. However, color development is 
controlled at the level of individual cell. Their biosynthesis is well‐studied in plants like 
Antirrhinum majus, Petunia hybrida, Zea mays, Gerbera, Eustoma and Dianthus spp.
Anthocyanin accumulation takes place in vacuoles of epidermal and sub‐epidermal 
regions of many flowers, stem, leaves and fruits. It is interesting that genes encoding 
anthocyanin formation are expressed at certain stages within a plant. For example, in 
many plants like in young leaf of Psidium guajava, genes for anthocyanins may be 
expressed in different areas of young leaf, which give lamina its red color. However, 
upon maturity, leaves becomes green in order to perform their normal function of 
photosynthesis. Then during later stages, genes for anthocyanins are expressed again 
in leaves turning them red (Figure 7.1). This indicates that anthocyanins may provide 
protection to young leaves against UV‐light or against other abiotic conditions, how-
ever, during senescence, they may help to transfer nutrients to stem before leaves fall. 
Similarly, in many Rosa species, accumulation of anthocyanins takes place in leaves 
during different stages of their growth. Their formation within the petals of flowers is 
a genetically controlled as rose petals are anthocyanic naturally. However, develop-
ment of anthocyanins during different stages of plant development need to be studied 
further (Figure 7.2).

7.2  Anthocyanidin Biosynthesis Takes Place in Cytosol 
of Cells, However, They Are Accumulated in Vacuoles

Anthocyanins are flavonoids compounds which are present in almost all plants with a 
C6‐C3‐C6 structure known as flavylium. They contain three rings, that is, A, B and C 
rings which is fused with A‐ring or aromatic ring and a B‐ring with a phenyl constitu-
ent. They are water‐soluble pigments and therefore stored in vacuoles. Their color is 
influenced  by  their  chemical  structures  which  may  include  number  and  position  of 
hydroxyl and methyl groups attached at different positions with anthocyanin rings, pH 
of vacuole and also presence of esterified amino acids. They are produced differently in 
monocots and eudicots through flavonoid pathways.

Carbohydrates like erythrose‐4‐phosphate (E‐4‐P) and phosphoenol pyruvate (PEP) 
act as precursors for flavonoids biosynthesis in plants (see Figure 2.2). Shikimic acid 
 produced  through  the  shikimate  pathway  synthesizes  chorismic  acid,  which  is  then 
converted into prephenic acid. This intermediate phase further forms phenylalanine, an 
amino acid. Phenylalanine synthesizes cinnamic acid, which is further converted into 
p‐caumaric acid. This molecule is further converted in p‐caumaryl‐CoA with addition 
of three molecules of malonyl‐CoA. Malonyl‐CoA is produced in plastids and is impor-
tant for fatty acid biosynthesis and for anthocyanidin formation.

(a)

(b)

Anthocyanins: Accumulation in Plants and Role in Industries  163

Mid-vein

(c)

Epidermis
Palisade mesophyll cells

Main-vein surrounded

by anthocyanic
parenchyma cells

(d)

Xylem

Phloem

(e)

(f)

Vascular veins

(g)

Epidermis

Palisade
anthocyanic cells

Mid-vein

Anthocyanins accumulated
in adaxial epidermal cell
Xylem

Phloem

Figure 7.1  (a‐g) Genes encoding anthocyanins are expressed during different stages of a plant either 
in response to some stress or as a genetically controlled characteristic of plants. In many plants like, 
Psidium guajava, anthocyanin accumulation takes place in different areas within leaves. (a‐c) 
Anthocyanins accumulation in cells surrounding mid‐vein and vascular tissues, (d) Upon maturity, 
leaves become green, (e‐g) During senescence, genes encoding anthocyanins are expresses in lamina 
of leaf except vascular tissues. (See insert for color representation of the figure.)

Anthocyanin synthesis starts with malonyl‐CoA and coumaryl‐CoA in the cytosol. 
Three molecules of malonyl‐CoA and one molecule of coumaryl‐CoA serves as a pre-
cursor for formation of 2,4,6,4‐Tetrahydroxychalcone (THC) with the help of chalcone 
synthases (CHS). The next enzyme involved in anthocyanin biosynthesis is chalcone 
isomerase  (CHI)  which  form  naringenin,  which  is  further  acted  upon  by  enzyme 
 flavanone‐3‐hydroxylases (F3H) to form dihydrokaemferol. Formation of dihydrokae-
mferol  may  lead  to  formation  of  pelargonidin  through  dihydroflavonol‐4‐reductase 
(DFR) anthocyanidin synthase (ANS). However, dihydrokaemferol may by also be acted 

(a)

(c)

(b)

Serrate margins

Mid-vein

Anthocyanin accumulation in 
adaxial (upper) epidermal cells

(f)

(d)

(d)

Mid-vein

Epidermis

(e)

Xylem

Phloem
Trichomes

Serrate margins

Anthocyanic vacuole of 

epidermal cell 

Figure 7.2  (a‐f) Many Rosa spp. accumulate anthocyanins during different stages. In roses anthocyanins exist as anthocyanidin mixtures. 
Their expression in petals of rose flower is a genetically controlled feature. However, expression of anthocyanins in leaves, petioles, and 
ligules of Rosa spp. species seems to be in response to certain abiotic and environmental factors, (a & b) In young juvenile leaves, their 
role seems to protect photosynthetic apparatus from high intensities of light or against temperature and give whole lamina red color, (c 
& d) Serrate margins of rose leaves accumulate anthocyanins in their adaxial epidermal cells (paradermal section), (e) Genes for 
anthocyanins are also expressed in glandular trichomes of leaves, (f) Three‐dimensional view of rose leaf showing anthocyanin 
accumulation in adaxial epidermal cells of leaves. (See insert for color representation of the figure.)

Anthocyanins: Accumulation in Plants and Role in Industries  165

upon by enzyme flavanoid‐3′‐hydroxylase (F3′H) to form dihydroquercetin which acts 
as  a  direct  precursor  for  cyanidin  formation.  Alternatively,  enzyme  flavonoid  3′,5′‐
hydroxylase  acts  on  dihydrokaemferol  to  form  dihydromyricetin  which  synthesizes 
delphinidin  (Figure  7.3).  Pelargonidin,  cyanidin  and  delphinidin  are  major  types  of 
anthocyanins  in  angiosperms.  Cyanidin  forms  peonidin,  whereas  delphinidin  forms 
malvidin and petunidin which are also common types of anthocyanins. Malvidin is 
most  common anthocyanin pigments in plants. Increase in number of hydroxyl group 
gives blue color to petals. Blue color of Viola is due to violanin, and pigment responsible 
for blue coloration of cinenaria is cinerarin.

Anthocyanin synthesis is regulated by transcription factors and structural genes. More 
than  20  genes  are  known  to  regulate  anthocyanin  biosynthesis  in  plants.  Structural 
genes encode enzymes for the formation of molecules which act as precursors in antho-
cyanin biosynthesis. Regulatory genes encode regulatory factors which control gene 
expression and transcription factors like MYB, R2R3, basic helix loop helix (bHLH), 
WDR (WD40 repeat) proteins. They regulate activation, spatial and temporal expres-
sion of structural genes for anthocyanin biosynthesis. However, their biosynthesis in 
carpels and stamens requires regulation of MYB‐bHLH‐WD40 complex. In Arabidopsis, 
a ternary complex of TT2, TT8 and TTG1 activate proanthocyanidins synthesis in seed. 
In vegetative tissues of Arabidopsis, anthocyanin synthesis is regulated by TTG1 and a 
WD40 transcription factor, different bHLH (TT8, GL3 and EGL3) and MYB transcrip-
tion factors (PAP1 and PAP2).

With the increase in knowledge of regulatory factors controlling anthocyanin bio-
synthesis, it is becoming possible to alter pigmentation pattern in plants. Leaf color 
(Lc) is bHLH regulators from maize. When expressed in petunia, it resulted in an 
increase in anthocyanin formation in vegetative tissues. Anthocyanin formation and 
pigmentation is altered in many plants with the help of these transcriptional factors. 
Anthocyanin biosynthetic genes are isolated from grapes and apples and transformed 
for production of novel flower colors for ornamental purposes. Formation of trans-
genic blue rose is achieved through expression of genes forming blue pigments from 
pansies in the rose plants.

7.3  Anthocyanins Exist in Modified Forms in Cells

Anthocyanins in vacuoles exist as a mixture of complex solution and their shades are 
influenced  by  their  attachment  with  different  hydroxyl,  glycosyl,  methyl,  acyl  and 
amino groups. They may also form complex with metal ions which is suggested to 
increase their structural stability. Generally blue color of anthocyanin is due to pres-
ence  of  free  OH  groups,  whereas  red  color  is  due  to  methylation.  Methylation  of 
anthocyanins increase their structural and color diversity. Many anthocyanins in cells 
exist in methylated form. Anthocyanins attached with sugar are glycosylated, however, 
those  without  sugar  are  aglycosylated.  In  flowers,  anthocyanins  exist  in  glyco-
sylated form

Anthocyanin  are  glycosylated  or  acylated  with  the  help  of  glycosyltransferases 
and acyltransferases. Acylation of sugars in anthocyanins give them chemical stabil-
ity. Sometimes, they also make bond with chelated metal ions, and flavone copig-
ments (Figure 7.4).

(a)

(b)

(c)

Anthocyanin Biosynthesis

Coumaryl-CoA + Malonyl-CoA
(3 Molecules)
CHS (Chalcone synthase)
2߰,4,6߰,4-Tetrahydroxychalcone
CHIC (Chalcone isomerases)

Naringenin

F3߰H (Flavanone 3-hydroxylase)

Coumaryl-CoA + Malonyl-CoA
(3 Molecules)
CHS (Chalcone synthase)
2߰,4,6߰,4-Tetrahydroxychalcone
CHIC (Chalcone isomerases)

Naringenin

 Dihydrokaempferol

 Dihydrokaempferol

DFR (Dihydro(cid:20)avonol-4-reductase)
AS (anthocyanidin synthase)

F3߰H (Flavanone 3-hydroxylase)

Dihydroquercetin

Coumaryl-CoA + Malonyl-CoA

(3 Molecules)
CHS (Chalcone synthase)
2߰,4,6߰,4-Tetrahydroxychalcone
CHIC (Chalcone isomerases)

Naringenin

F3߰,5߰H ( Flavonoid 3߰,5߰-hydroxylase)

 Dihydrokaempferol

DFR, ANS

F3߰,5߰H ( Flavonoid 3߰,5߰-hydroxylase)

Dihydromyricetin

Pelargonidin
Accumulated in vacuole

Cyanidin

Accumulated in vacuole

Delphinidin

Accumulated in vacuole

Figure 7.3  (a‐c) Main steps in anthocyanin biosynthesis in petals of flowers showing main anthocyanin types in angiosperms, that is, 
pelargonidin, cyanidin and delphinidin. Cyanidin is a precursor of peonidin, whereas delphinidin forms malvidin and petunidin. 
Malvidin is most common anthocyanin pigments in plants. Increase in the number of hydroxyl group gives blue color to petals.

4-coumaroyl + CoA 3 × malonyl-CoA

CHS

OH

HO

OH

OH

O

Tetrahydroxylchalcone

CHI

OH

HO

O

OH

O

Naringerin
F3H

HO

O

OH

OH

OH

O

Dihydrokaempferol

F3߰H

OH

OH

HO

O

OH

OH

O

Dihydroquercetin

DFR

OH

OH

HO

O

HO

O

Chalcones

Flavanones

Dihydroflavonols

DFR

OH

OH

OH

Leucoanthocyanidins

HO

O

F3߰5߰H

OH

OH

OH

OH

OH

O

Dihydromyricetin

DFR

OH

HO

O

OH

OH

OH

Leucodelphinidin

LDOX/ANS

OH

HO

O

OH

OH

Delphinidin

Modification

GT

OH

HO

O

OH

OH

OH

OH

OH

O

HO

HO

O

OH

Delphinidin 3-glucoside

Citosol

OH

OH

OH

Leucodelphinidin

OH

OH

OH

LDOX/ANS

OH

OH

OH

LDOX/ANS

OH

HO

O

OH

HO

Anthocyanidins

HO

O

OH

Cyanidin

GT

OH

OH

GT

OH

HO

O

HO

O

Anthocyanins
OH

OH

O

HO

HO

O

OH

Pelargonidin 3-glucoside

OH

OH

O

HO

HO

OH

O

OH

Cyanidin 3-glucoside

Transport

GST

Vacuole

Figure 7.4  Steps involved in anthocyanin biosynthetic pathway in Passiflora edulis. Modification of 
anthocyanidins takes place through attachment either with glycosyl, acyl, or methyl groups. In 
P. edulis UF3GT is responsible for the glycosylation of anthocyanidins. After modification, anthocyanins 
are stored in vacuoles. Abbreviations used. CHS: chalcone sintase; CHI: chalcone isomerase; 
F3H: flavanone 3‐hydroxylase; F3′H: flavanone 3′‐hydroxylase; F3′5′H: flavanone 3′5′‐hydroxylase; 
DFR: dihydroflavonol 4‐reductase; LDOX/ANS: leucoanthocyanidin dioxygenase/anthocyanidin 
synthase; GT: glucosyltransferase; GST: glutathione S‐transferase (Azizzam & Dornelas, 2011).
(Used with permission.)

168

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

7.4  Anthocyanins Transport to Vacuoles

Anthocyanin transport within cells from endoplasmic reticulum to vacuolar membrane 
is  suggested  to  occur  in  two  ways,  that  is,  ligandin  transport  or  vesicular  transport 
(Zhao & Dixon, 2010). They are either transported through ligandin transport which is 
dependent  upon  glutathione  transferase  (GST)‐like  proteins.  These  proteins  are 
required for vacuolar sequestration of pigments in maize, Arabidopsis (AtTT19) and in 
petunia.  Multidrug  resistance  transport  proteins  (MRP)  transporters  or  glutathione 
pump (GS‐X) act as carrier proteins or ligandin (Koes et al., 2005) on tonoplast mem-
brane. They are directly involved in vacuolar transport of anthocyanin. In Arabidopsis, 
GSX (TT19) localized on cell membrane and tonoplast can directly bind to glycosylated 
anthocyanin and aglycones.

In other type of transport, that is, vesicular transport, anthocyanins are reported to 
accumulate in vesicle like anthocyanoplast. They are transported to tonoplast mem-
brane through autophagy (Pourcel et al., 2010). Anthocyanins transport in grapes, takes 
place through GST like proteins as well as through two multi drug and toxic compound 
extrusion‐type transporters (anthoMATEs) (Maria et al., 2012). MATE transporters are 
also involved in anthocyanin transport in some other plants (Figure 7.5).

7.5  Anthocyanins Role is Dependent Upon Their Location 
and Accumulation

Anthocyanins accumulation takes place in the vacuoles of epidermal cells in organs 
where they are involved in providing defense against temperature, UV radiations and 
predators. Their accumulation in different organs is indicative of their multiple role, 
sometimes even within the same organ. Young leaves of many plants accumulate antho-
cyanins  due  to  their  photosensitivity  against  UV,  however,  their  accumulation  in  a 
senescing leaf indicates their defensive role against UV and predators (Figure 7.6). Old 
leaves are precious for plants and help in withdrawing nutrients to new leaves before 
their senescence occurs (Figures 7.7 & 7.8). In flowers, they act as visual signals to 
attract pollinators. Accumulation of anthocyanins in stem is also related with protec-
tion, nutrient deficiency, and stress condition.

In next section, main role of anthocyanins in different organs of plants is discussed.

7.5.1  Accumulation are Defensive Pigments in Vegetative Organs
Role  of  anthocyanins  and  their  accumulation  in  leaves  and  stem  of  many  species 
depends upon their age and it also varies from plant to plant. Anthocyanin formation in 
many  plants  is  also  indicator  of  nutrients  deficiency  because  nitrogen,  sulphur  and 
phosphorus deficiencies also cause plants to form anthocyanins. However, anthocyanin 
are accumulated in young stems in order to provide protection against cold and osmotic 
stress.  Light  also  induces  anthocyanin  production  in  vegetative  organs  of  plants, 
 particularly in seedlings, and in young shoots. In transgenic petunia, high light induces 
vegetative anthocyanin production.

In the stem of Kalanchoe brasiliensis, anthocyanins accumulate in sub‐epidermal and 
cortical region, however, in leaves and petioles they may accumulate in peripheral cells, 
whereas  in  K.  pinnata  their  accumulation  is  seen  throughout  the  cortical  region. 

(a)

(b)

1

Anthocyanin
biosynthesis

2

Modi(cid:17)cation

3

Transported in

vacuole

Cytosol

4

Accumulation in

vacuole

Anthocyanin
biosynthesis

Modi(cid:17)cation

1

2

3

Accumulation

 in

anthocyanoplasts

4

Transport 

&

accumulation in

vacuole

Cytosol

Figure 7.5  (a‐b) Possible mechanisms for anthocyanin transport and accumulation in vacuole (a) Anthocyanin transport and 
accumulation may take place either through glutathione pumps, (GSX pumps), ATP‐binding cassettes or through MATE transporters 
(colors), (b) They may be transported through anthocyanoplast formation and then accumulation in vacuoles through autophagy.

170

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(a)

(b)

Figure 7.6  (a‐b) (a) Developing leaves of Ficus elatica are red and enclosed in sheath and possess 
anthocyanins which are strong antioxidants, (b) Young anthocyanic leaves of Plumeria rubra.

(b)

(d)

(a)

(c)

(e)

Figure 7.7  (a‐d) Accumulation of anthocyanins in senescing leaves: (a) Triadica sebifera leaves in 
autumn, (b & c) Leaves of Hibiscus rosa‐sinensis accumulate anthocyanins in their mid‐ribs venation, 
(d & e) Accumulation in leaves of Syzygium cumini.

(a)

(b)

Anthocyanins: Accumulation in Plants and Role in Industries  171

Figure 7.8  (a‐b) Anthocyanin synthesis and distribution in many angiosperm leaves is dependent 
upon environmental stimuli and on their metabolic stage and indicative of their multiple roles: (a) Old 
leaves of Heterophragma adenophyllum, (b) Anthocyanic senescing leaves of crape myrtle.

In Euphorbia pulcherrima, genes encoding anthocyanins biosynthesis are expressed in 
petiole, stem, bracts, filament and cyathia which suggest sensitivity of these organs to 
certain abiotic or biotic conditions. In the transverse section of petiole and stem, their 
accumulation is seen in epidermal and sub‐epidermal cells (Figure 7.9).

7.5.2  Accumulation and Role in Leaves
Leaves  of  many  plants  synthesize  anthocyanins  in  response  to  abiotic  stress  during 
senescence  and  also  during  leaf  expansion.  They  are  involved  in  protection  against 
UV‐B  radiation,  extreme  temperature,  abiotic  stress,  nutrient  deficiency,  and  also 
formed in response to wound. Development of anthocyanins in leaves also protects 
them from insects and pathogens which cause damage to their tissues (Costa‐Arbuluet 
et al., 2001). Anthocyanins accumulation may take place in entire leaf blade of some 
leaves, sometimes only in leaf margins or in whole lamina excluding the area of vascular 
tissues or sometimes only around vascular regions which indicates their multiple roles 
related to their location (Figure 7.10).

(a)

(c)

Petiole

(b)

Xylem

(d)

Phloem

Anthocyanin

accumulation in epidermis

(e)

Longitudinal view

Anthocyanic
vacuole

Phloem

Xylem Cortical region

Epidermal cells

Figure 7.9  (a‐e) Genes for anthocyanins are also expressed in petioles and pedicels which might be an indication of their sensitivity 
against UV‐radiation: (a) Petiole of Euphorbia pulcherrima appears pink in color due to accumulation of anthocyanins. Note the 
appearance of pink color in petiole, where genes for anthocyanins are expressed, (b & c) T.S. of petiole showing anthocyanin 
accumulation in epidermal and sub‐epidermal cells, (d) longitudinal section of epidermal cells of petiole showing anthocyanin 
accumulation, (e) Three‐dimensional view of petiole of E. pulcherrima.  (See insert for color representation of the figure.)

(a)

(b)

Palisade mesophyll
Spongy mesophyll
Xylem
Phloem
Bundle sheath

B
V

.

Anthocyanin accumulation in adaxial (upper) epidermis

Anthocyanin accumulation in abaxial (lower) epidermis

(c)

(d)

(e)

Anthocyanin accumulation in palisade mesophyll

Anthocyanin accumulation

cells surrounding V.B

Anthocyanin accumulation in both

adaxial (upper) and abaxial (lower) epidermis

Figure 7.10  (a‐e) Anthocyanin accumulation in different tissues of leaves is indicative of their different role: (a) Anthocyanin 
accumulation in adaxial (upper) epidermis of young leaves indicates their role against UV‐light and photoradiation, (b) In leaves 
growing in shady areas, their accumulation takes place in abaxial (lower) epidermis and in spongy mesophyll where they may act as 
attenuator to protect spongy mesophyll, (c) In autumn, anthocyanins accumulate in vacuoles of palisade mesophyll, (d) In some 
leaves, epidermal cells close to mid‐vein accumulate anthocyanins earlier than distant epidermal cells, (e) In mature leaves, 
anthocyanin accumulate in cells of both adaxial and abaxial epidermis and may serve as uniform screen for mesophyll against UV.

174

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

In juvenile leaves of Corylus avellana, they provide protection to photosynthetic 
apparatus with excessive fluxes of photosynthetically active radiations (Solovchenko 
& Chivkunova et al., 2011). In leaves growing under high light intensity, anthocya-
nins accumulation takes place in vacuoles of adaxial (upper) cells and palisade meso-
phyll cells, in contrast to understory plants where they are accumulated in lower 
(abaxial) epidermis and in spongy mesophyll. Some recent research has suggested 
that their role in abaxial epidermis is to attenuate the internal scattering of green 
light in order to protect photosynthetic mesophyll during sun flecks and sun patches 
which have longer duration. Young stressed leaves of Acer platanoides accumulate 
anthocyanins only in their adaxial epidermis, however, in Corylus avellana leaves, 
their accumulation takes place both in adaxial and abaxial epidermis. Mature leaves 
have uniform distribution of anthocyanins within their abaxial and adaxial epider-
mal cells, constituting a more uniform UV screen for mesophyll cells. In common 
hazel leaves, anthocyanins accumulate within vacuoles of both upper and lower epi-
dermal cells to absorb up to 95% of visible radiations entering the leaf blade. Rate of 
electron flow in chloroplasts electron transport chain is also closely related to antho-
cyanin content.

7.5.3  Anthocyanins are Involved in Senescence of Leaves
Anthocyanin synthesis takes place in many leaves from their precursors during their 
senescence. Senescing leaves of many temperate deciduous plants turn bright red in 
color in autumn due to anthocyanin formation (Figure 7.11). Anthocyanins accumu-
lation in some senescing leaves takes place before chlorophyll breaks down which is 
one of the mechanism to protect chloroplasts from excess sunlight (Feild et al., 2001). 
Leaves of Quercus alba synthesize anthocyanins in spring, Saxifraga machiauxii syn-
thesize  in  summer,  however  in  winter  in  Galax  urceolata.  Their  accumulation  in 
senescing leaves is also a mechanism to allow leaves to absorb or translocate more 
nitrogen back in the woody tissues so it can be used during next growing season. 
In  autumn,  leaves  of A.  platanoides  and Cornus  alba  accumulate  anthocyanins  in 
vacuoles of palisade mesophyll and in spongy mesophyll.

(a)

(b)

Figure 7.11  (a‐b) Anthocyanin gene expression varies within an organ in some plants: (a) In young 
succulent leaves of Kalanchoe tetraphylla, member of family Crassulaceae commonly known as desert 
cabbage, genes encoding anthocyanins are initially expressed on apex of leaves, (b) or they may 
expressed throughout leaves giving them striking red appearance.

Anthocyanins: Accumulation in Plants and Role in Industries  175

7.5.4  Anthocyanins as Defensive Pigments Against Insects
Many flavonoids and anthocyanins act as feeding deterrent for many insects as in roots 
of Lotus sp., Trifolium sp., buds of Gossypium sp., seed coats of Vigna sp., roots bark of 
Ulex  sp.,  leaves  of  Triticum  spp,  Glycine  max,  Oryza  sativa,  Lotus  sp.  and  leaf  bud 
 petioles of Arachis.

Anthocyanins give conspicuous coloration to different organs, in order to serve parry 
predators in poisonous fruits, seeds and thorns. There is sufficient evidence about their 
role in mimicry of dead or senescence foliage of thorns and spines of ants, aphids and 
caterpillars. Anthocyanins also help in camouflaging of seeds against soil background. 
Old leaves are most expensive for plants in term of their nutrients reservoir, so antho-
cyanins also divert attention of many predators from old leaves. They are also involved 
in  undermining  of  herbivorous  insect  crypsis  due  to  variagation  produced  by  them 
within leaves of plants (Lev‐Yadun, 2006).

Anthocyanins accumulation in vacuoles of epidermal appendages, that is, hairs 
and trichomes also contributes in screening of solar radiations (Figure 7.12). Many 
phenolic compounds like kaemphrol, luteolin, apigenin and quercetin are responsi-
ble for absorbing UV radiations. Agave has colorful stripes, that is, brown, grey, red, 
white,  and  black  that  run  along  its  margins  and  provide  protection  against 
herbivores.

(b)

(a)

(c)

Figure 7.12  (a‐c) Thorns and spines of some plants accumulate anthocyanins as a defensive 
mechanism against stress: (a) Euphorbia splendens, (b) R. indica, (c) Anthocyanic thorns of Citrus sp.

176

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

7.5.5  Anthocyanins Protect Plants Against UV Light
They usually give red color in leaves but they can give pink, blue, orange, brown and 
even  black  color  depending  upon  their  chemical  structure  like  their  concentration, 
vacuolar pH and interaction with other pigments. Anthocyanins exist in the epidermal 
cells of almost all leaves and stems where their role is crucial in protecting cells from 
excessive UV damage. Leaves of many plants have another efficient UV‐B screening 
compounds, hydroxycinnamates within the vacuoles of mesophyll cells. Leaves with 
anthocyanins usually absorb more light in green and yellow wavelengths. Their role is 
well‐established  in  photoprotection  in  young  leaves  of  three  unrelated  species  Acer 
rubrum, Cercis canadensis and Liquidambar styraciflua where they persist until leaves 
become mature. Anthocyanins might also absorb excessive quanta of light that might 
otherwise strike chloroplasts especially and protect young photosynthetic apparatus 
from high intensities of light. They absorb light in UV‐B region where they allow visible 
wavelengths to pass directly to the cells.

7.5.6  Role in Scavenging Reactive Molecular O2
Colorless cytosolic anthocyanins act to scavenge reactive oxygen species (ROS) which 
are generated by chloroplast and mitochondria. Their role in scavenging reactive  oxygen 
is very important in juvenile leaves and in leaves of shaded tropical rainforests. They 
have capacity up to four times greater than ascorbic acid and vitamin E. Anthocyanins 
can scavenge molecular species of active, oxygen, hydrogen peroxide, singlet oxygen, 
superoxide, hydroxyl and peroxyl radicals. They have potential to protect cell mem-
branes from the effects of oxidative damage that otherwise could damage DNA,  proteins 
and  membrane  lipids.  In  maize,  their  presence  minimizes  the  role  of  antioxidants. 
In  Begonia pavinina and in Triolina hirsuta, anthocyanins shade chlorophyll b and 
prevent photoinhibition, so photosynthesis of red leaves is higher in these plants than 
in green leaves.

7.5.7  Anthocyanins are Crucial for Pollination and Seed Dispersal in many Eudicots
Anthocyanin biosynthesis and accumulation takes place in vacuoles of cells of filaments 
and style of many flowers is indicative of their sensitivity to abiotic stress, tempera-
ture and light. They may accumulate in stigma and style of ovary to attract pollinators 
and may have defensive role. In flowers, flavones and flavonols are commonly existing 
anthocyanins that absorb light at shorter wavelength than anthocyanins, one of the 
major reason that makes them invisible to human eye. Although anthocyanins are 
found within vacuoles of epidermal cells of almost all floral organs but still they are 
least studied as compared to other plant organs. Presence of anthocyanin in almost 
different parts of every flower indicate their role in pollination to attract pollinators, 
in UV screening, photoinhibition, protection of nectar against robbing, and also in 
giving  signals  to  pollinators  about  hidden  nectar  by  forming  different  patterns  of 
 nectar guides.

They may accumulate in epidermal and sub‐epidermal cells of sepals, petals, anther 
filaments, and also very consistently present in epidermal cells of stigma and ovary wall 
(Figure 7.13). Within cells of petals, they may accumulate in different areas, depending 
upon their pH level. They may give different shades within a single flower or petal 

(a)

(b)

Anthocyanins: Accumulation in Plants and Role in Industries  177

Figure 7.13  (a‐b) Anthocyanins are important pigments in pollination and are synthesized in petals 
of more than 80% of eudicots to serve as visual signals to attract pollinators: (a‐b) show anthocyanins 
of different eudicots, however, in flowers, they mostly exist as mixture of complex compounds 
attached with sugars, metals and other compounds which determine their shades in flowers. Cyanidin 
and derivatives mostly give mauve color to petals, delphinidin derivative give blue, pelargonidin 
orange and petunidin and malvidin derivatives give blue to purple shades. Flower petals of eudicots 
showing different shades of anthocyanins (a) Acroclinium roseum (b) Hibiscus moscheutos

Figure 7.14  Forest pansies showing accumulation of different shades of anthocyanins.

(Figures 7.14 & 7.15). Their presence within flowers is also an indication of their defen-
sive role in response to temperature as anthocyanins in some plants become dark with 
low temperature giving dark color to petals.

Anthocyanin biosynthesis pathways are well‐studied biochemically and genetically in 
many species like Petunia hybrida, Matthiola, Dianthus, Eustoma, Gerbera. Zea mays, 
Antirrhinum majus (Schwinn et al., 2006) and Ipoemea (Morita et al., 2006).

178

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Figure 7.15  Stamen and filaments also accumulate anthocyanins in Euphorbia pulcherrima.

7.5.8  Accumulation in Fruits
Main anthocyanins in fruits are agylcones, delphinidins, cyanidin, petunidin, pelargo-
nidin, peonidin and malvidin with different sugar moieties and acylation patterns. In 
fruits, anthocyanins are indicator of ripeness and act as sunscreen to protect cells from 
light damage by absorbing UV and blue‐green light. They also attract birds, and animals 
that feed on fruits and involved in fruit dispersal. Due to their role in photoprotection, 
they  can  protect  and  repair  genomic  DNA.  Anthocyanins  with  other  flavonols  also 
accumulate in vacuoles of epidermal cells of many fruits like in apple skin. They provide 
protection to apple fruit against UV and excessive irradiation. They also exist in vacu-
oles of parenchyma cells apple pulp but in lower quantity as compared with skin cells.
They are rich in skin epidermal cells and mesocarps of many berries like strawberry, 
blueberry,  raspberry,  black  currant,  cranberry,  non‐edible  berries,  and  other  fruits 
like cherries, purple and black grapes, olives, plum, peaches, jambul, pomegranates, 
watermelons, eggplants, cabbage, kiwi, pineapples, tangeries and also in mangoes and 
bananas.

Many fruits rich in anthocyanins are potential target of research due to their anti‐ 
carcinogenic properties. Fruits rich in anthocyanins have anti‐inflammatory effects and 
they lower risk of Alzeheimer’s disease, arteriosclerosis and osteoporosis. Edible fig and 
bark,  that  is,  Ficus  carica  possess  15  anthocyanin  pigments,  most  common  being 
 cyanidin and aglycone and other pelargonidin derivatives.

7.6 

Industrial Applications of Anthocyanins

Anthocyanins are widely used in many food and beverage industries due to their shades 
which they give to food products and also due to their nutritive value. Their use in 
pharmaceuticals is expected to increase in future due to their possible role as anti‐ 
carcinogenic, anti‐obesity and anti‐osteoporosis functions which are being explored 
further. Many efforts are being done to increase their use in nutraceuticals products. 
Due to their anti‐aging and anti‐carcinogenic properties, many cosmetic industries are 
working to increase their applications in skin care products and mineral foundations. 
They are also used as spy agents to detect the shelf‐life of food supplements containing 
cranberry extracts (Figure 7.16).

Anthocyanin
industrial uses

HO

O+
A C

OH

R

B

OH

R߰
O-Sugar

Use in

food industry

Beverage
 industry

Cosmetic
 industry

Nutraceutical

products

Trends in

Biotechnology

Floriculture

Food color

Confectionaries

Portisins

Wine making

Use as

dye-sensitized

 solar cells

Dyeing of
fabrics in

textile industry

Increasing anthocyanic

content in
edible plants
like tomatoes
due to their

nutritional value

Genetic modi(cid:30)cation of
anthocyanin pathways
to produce novel colors
of (cid:31)owers e.g formation
of transgenic blue roses

from pansies

 

s
e
y
d
d
o
o
f
 
s
a
 

 

d
e
s
u
 
e
b
o
t
 
s
t
n
a
l
p

 
e
r
u
t
u
F

Facial whitening

Anti-aging

cream

cream

FLOWER

Prickly Pear

Cardio-protective

supplement

ACAIBERRY

50ml / 1.7 Oz

Bone & skin

health

Introduction of genes

for anthocyanin in
non-anthocyanic
plants to increase

their use in
food industry
and (cid:31)oriculture

Development of

microencapsulation
techniques to increase

their absorption in

human body

Blue genes from pansies

Formation of
novel color

Figure 7.16  A scheme showing major applications of anthocyanins in food, beverage, textile, floriculture, cosmetic, perfume and 
biotechnological industries along with their possible future uses.

180

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Billberry whole food supplement anthocyanin chewing tablets are used for improv-
ing eyesight. Anthocyanin vision smart supreme capsules and billberry extract are 
also  commercially  available  as  eye  supplements.  Medox  is  a  natural  anthocyanin‐
based product introduced by Medox USA. It contains extract from billberries and 
black currants and used to reduce oxidative stress. It also strengthens the immune 
system. It is also used as cardioprotective supplement. Medox is claimed to contain 
intact  anthocyanins  which  are  usually  destroyed  during  industrial  extraction. 
Betaimune and grape seed forte by Blackmores are also commercial anthocyanin‐
based antioxidants. Tonics like ‘Mistify’ contain anthocyanins from berries like blue-
berries, acai berries, cranberries, raspberries and grapes. They also reduce oxidative 
stress which can cause damage to DNA.

Due to their presence in many fruits and vegetables, anthocyanins are important part 
of human diet and well‐known for their anti‐inflammatory, anti‐microbial and their 
anticarinogenic properties. They are also helpful in prevention of cardiovascular dis-
eases (Levantesi et al., 2013), obesity control (Erlund et al., 2008), controlling diabetes 
and also in improving vision and cataracts. Their absorption takes place in stomach and 
in small intestine.

Anthocyanins are also used in many food products due to their color and healthy 
benefits. They also provide stabilization of food products like jams and many confec-
tionaries.  Although  extract  from  variety  of  plants  including  beefsteak  plant,  indigo 
plant, purple corn, red cabbage, violet sweet potato, persimmon, cranberry, elderber-
ries, dwarf elderberry, paprika, black currants, miracle fruit, hollyhock petals, morning 
glory, grapes, willow, rose, poppy, grape pulp, onion skin are being evaluated for their 
potential  to  be  used  as  dyes  in  food  industries  but  few  plants  are  reported  to  have 
 promising  applications  in  food  industry  due  to  their  stabilization  including  grapes 
anthocyanin,  annatto  and  paprika  pigments  in  confectionary  products.  Red  colored 
extract from miracle fruit is reported to be safe and suitable to be used in carbonated 
drinks. In Michigan, almost 85% of sweet cherry product is brined for making mara-
schino cherries.

Idea of using anthocyanin‐derived pigments in beverage industry is also flourishing 
as they are more stable than anthocyanin precursors, that is, anthocyanin‐pyruvic 
acid  adducts  are  produced  through  reaction  of  anthocyanins  with  pyruvic  acid. 
A relatively new class of proanthocyanidins is found in Port wine and therefore named 
as protisins. They can be synthesized in laboratory by reaction of anthocyanin‐pyru-
vic acid adduct and flavonols in presence of acetaldehyde. A unique feature of portisin 
is their ability to give blue hues even under acidic conditions as blue color is only 
produced as a result of high pH which is rare to obtain as a result of single pigment. 
They are stable and only little amount of portisins can add desired color to food. 
Anthocyanins  from  miracle  fruit  Synsepalum  dulcificum  are  stable  and  purified 
through ion exchange method. They are used for giving orange‐red color to carbon-
ated beverages with short shelf‐life.

Food industry is constantly searching for new food colors in making funky drinks that 
are attractive for young consumers in and in dairy products with unusual colors as 
 commercial success of food industries is dependent on food appearance. Many antho-
cyanin‐derived products are being synthesized in laboratories with stable pH, unique 
hues and increased stability towards SO2 discoloration with healthy attributes in order 
to make food functional. Extract of Hibiscus sabdariffa is used as a flavor ingredient at 

Anthocyanins: Accumulation in Plants and Role in Industries  181

an  average  level  of  0.02%  in  many  alcoholic  and  non‐alcoholic  drinks,  frozen  dairy 
 desserts, candies, gelatins and puddings. Fresh roselle is used in jams, juices, wines, and 
jellies with a cranberrylike flavor. Skin extract of grapes and powder is also used to add 
color to alcoholic and non‐alcoholic drinks. Pistacia lentiscus is also used as food color-
ant due to its anthocyanic pigment (Longo et al., 2007). Petals of hollyhock Alcea spp. 
are also used to add color to confectionary, fruit berry jam and jellies as a substitute of 
NaNO3 in sausages because they are thermostable and do not change the organoleptic 
properties of food. They can be eaten raw and used in salads and used for making 
 candied flowers. Herbal tea is made from fresh petals. Main anthocyanin pigments are 
cyanidin‐3‐glucosides, delphinidin‐3‐glucosides, and malvidin‐3,5, diglucosides.

Microencapsulation is being used as a strategy to address the issues regarding the 
stabilisation of anthocyanins which are used as food colors. Choice of encapsulating 
agent is a very important factor which determines the applicability of microparticles 
in food.

Anthocyanins and betalains are also being used for making dye‐sensitized solar cells 
due to their ability to harvest solar energy in electrical energy (Calogero et al., 2012). 
These dye‐sensitized cells contain natural pigments which are extracted from grape, 
mulberry, blackberry, eggplant, red Silican orange and Silican prickly pear have shown 
best solar efficiency of 2.06%. Use of anthocyanin‐based sensitizers as dye‐sensitized 
solar cells is environment friendly and cheaper. TiO2‐based solar cells from cabbage and 
blue peas are also being synthesized as photosensitizers (Gokilamani et al., 2013).

They are being used in many skin care products due to their anti‐aging properties. 
One of the recently discovered role of anthocyanins is in neuro‐protection. Consuming 
anthocyanins rich diet can delay aging process and protects against neurodegeneration 
(Tsuda, 2012). They are used as cosmetic colorants in many products. Opti berry extract 
made from extract of six berries (wild blueberry, bilberry, cranberry, elderberry, rasp-
berry, and strawberry) is anti‐angiogenic, antioxidant and anti‐carcinogenic due to its 
high oxygen‐radical absorbing capacity and low cytotoxicity. It is also reported to have 
inhibitory effects on H2O2 and vascular endothelial growth factor, expression by human 
keratinocytes (Bagchi et al., 2004). Acai berry by DAYCELL cosmetics contains antho-
cyanins in higher amounts with antiaging properties.

Role of anthocyanins is being explored to be used as natural textile dyes because they 
are environment friendly, biodegradable, and cheap. It has not been successful so far, 
due to their poor affinity with fabric but some efforts are proved to be fruitful as antho-
cyanins extracted from grape pomace are reported to have potential for dyeing of tex-
tiles (Bechtold, 2007). Liriope platyphylla fruit is proposed recently to be a source of 
textile dye for silk due to anthocyanins, however dye color and rate of dyeing is low 
which can be improved by using metal mordants (Wang et al., 2014).

7.7  Future Perspectives

Use of anthocyanins and their derivatives in food color need to increase in the future 
because they are safer than synthetic dyes. Their use is replacing many synthetic colors 
due  to  their  possible  carcinogenic  effects  and  restrictions  by  European  Union  and 
United Sates. However, in order to increase use of anthocyanins as food colors, stability 
of these pigments and their availability within living tissues need to be addressed. Many 

182

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

technologies like microencapsulation are being developed to increase their stability in 
food matrices. Therefore there is a need to improve microencapsulation techniques 
which  allow  protection  of  anthocyanins  until  they  are  consumed  and  taken  up  by 
 gastrointestinal tract where anthocyanin release is actually required.

Further, there is a need to develop anthocyanin production technology in order to 
increase their use as food‐coloring agents. Food industry is working on increasing fla-
vonoid content in edible crops through genetic improvement due to their antioxidants 
and health promoting effects (Boudet, 2007). Flavonoid content of tomatoes is being 
increased through transformation with Arabidopsis.

Metabolic engineering of anthocyanin pathways is in progress to increase their applica-
tions in floriculture. Many genes encoding anthocyanin biosynthesis are cloned in order to 
enhance their ornamental value or to alter their color, however it requires adequate knowl-
edge of biosynthetic pathways and substrate specificity of relevant enzymes. Anthocyanins 
isolation and quantification is also being done in many species with the help of techniques 
like high‐performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), high‐speed countercurrent chro-
matography (HSCCC), mass spectrometry, nuclear magnetic resonance, capillary electro-
phoresis (CE) and through visible‐near‐infrared spectrometry (Vis‐NIR).

Although therapeutic and cosmetic properties of anthocyanins in different industries 
are well studied and proven, their use in textile is still limited due to their poor affinity 
with fabrics. They cannot be sustained during washing and their use in textile is still 
challenging. Currently, the concept of using anthocyanic color in food industry which 
differs from its flavor is increasing but it is still a challenge; therefore, new compounds 
to be used are being explored. Recently, some research is focusing on chemical transfor-
mations of anthocyanins which can form a unique anthocyanic hues.

References

Aizzam, L.C.B. & Dornelas, M.C. (2011). ‘A Genomic Approach to Study Anthocyanin 

Synthesis and Flower Pigmentation in Passionflowers’, Journal of Nucleic Acids, 371517.

Bechtold, T., Ali, A.M., & Mussak, R. (2007). ‘Anthocyanin dyes extracted from grape 

pomace for the purpose of textile dyeing’, Journal of the Science of Food & Agriculture 
vol. 87, pp. 2589–95. doi: 10.1002/jsfa.3013.

Bagchi, D., Sen, C.K., Bagchi, M., & Atalay, M. (2004). ‘Anti‐angiogenic, antioxidant, and 

anti‐carcinogenic properties of a novel anthocyanin‐rich berry extract formula’, 
Biochemistry (Mosc), 69, pp. 75–80. 1 p preceding 75.

Boudet, AM. (2000). ‘Evolution and current status of research in phenolic compounds’, 

Phytochemistry, 68, pp. 2722–2735.

Calogero, G., Yum, J.H., Sinopoli, A., Marco, G.D., Gratzel, M., & Nazeeruddin, M.K. 

(2012). ‘Anthocyanins and betalains as light‐harvesting pigments for dye‐sensitized solar 
cells’, Solar energy, 86, pp.1563–1575.

Costa‐Arbulú, C., Gianoli, E., Gonzales, W., & Niemeyer, H.M. (2001). ‘Feeding by the 

aphid Sipha flava produces a reddish spot on leaves of Sorghum halepense: an induced 
defense’? Journal of Chemical Ecology, 27, pp. 273–283.

Erlund, I., Koli, R., Alfthan, G., & Marniemi, J. (2008). ‘Favorable effects of berry 

consumption on platelet function, blood pressure, and HDL cholesterol’, The American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 87, pp. 323–331.

Anthocyanins: Accumulation in Plants and Role in Industries  183

Field, T.S., Lee, D.W., & Holbrook, N.M. (2001). ‘Why leaves turn red in autumn. The role 

of anthocyanins in senescing leaves of red‐osier dogwood’, Plant Physiology, 127, 
pp. 566–574.

Gokilamani, N., Muthukumarasamy, N., Thambidurai, M., Ranjitha, A., & Velauthapillai, 

D. (2013). ‘Utilization of natural anthocyanin pigments as photosensitizers for dye‐
sensitized solar cells’, Journal of Sol‐Gel Science and Technology, 66, pp. 212–219.

Koes, R., Verweij, W., & Quattrocchio, F. (2005). ‘Flavonoids: a colorful model for the 

regulation and evolution of biochemical pathways’, Trends in Plant Science, 10, 
pp. 236–242.

Levantesi, G., Marfisi, R., Mozaffarian, D., Franzosi, M.G., Maggioni, A., Nicolosi, G.L., 

Schweiger, C., Silletta, M., Tavazzi, L., Tognoni, G., & Marchioli, R. (2013). ‘Wine 
consumption and risk of cardiovascular events after myocardial infarction: results from 
the GISSI‐Prevenzione trial’, International Journal of Cardiology, 163, pp. 282–287.
Longo, L., Scardino, A., & Vasapollo, G. (2007). “Identification and quantification of 
anthocyanins in the berries of Pistacia lentiscus L., Phillyrea latifolia L. and Rubia 
peregrina L.,” Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 8, pp. 360–364.
Lev‐Yadun, S. (2006). Defensive coloration in plants: a review of current ideas about 

anti‐herbivore coloration strategies. In: Teixeira da Silva, J.A. (ed.), Floriculture, 
Ornamental and Plant Biotechnology: Advances and Topical Issues, Volume IV. Global 
Science Books, London, pp. 292–299.

Mars, K.A., Alfenito, M.R., Lloyd, A.M., & Walbot, V. (1995). ‘A glutathione S‐transferase 

involved in vacuolar transfer encoded by the maize gene Bronze‐2’, Nature, 375, pp. 
397–400.

María, L., Furriery, F., Rius, S.P., & Casati, P. (2012). ‘Flavonoids: biosynthesis, biological 
functions, and biotechnological applications’, Frontiers in Plant Science, 3. doi: 10.3389/
fpls.2012.00222.

Morita, Y., Saitoh, M., Hoshino, A., Nitasaka, E., & Iida, S. (2006). ’Isolation of cDNAs for 
R2R3‐MYB, bHLH and WDR transcriptional regulators and identification of c and ca 
mutations conferring white flowers in the Japanese morning glory,” Plant and Cell 
Physiology, 47, pp. 457–470.

Pourcel, L., Irani, N.G., Lu, Y., Riedl, K., Schwartz, S., & Grotewold, E. (2010). ‘The 

formation of anthocyanic vacuolar inclusions in Arabidopsis thaliana and implications 
for the sequestration of anthocyanin pigments’, Molecular Plant, 3, pp. 78–90.

Schwinn, K., Venail, J., Yshang, Y., Mackay, S., Alm, V., Butelli E., Oyama, R., Bailey, P., 

Davies, K., & Martin, C. (2006). ‘A small family of MYB‐regulatory genes controls floral 
pigmentation intensity and patterning in the Genus antirrhinum’,  Plant Cell, 18, pp. 
831–851.

Solovchenko, A.E., & Chivkunova, O.B. (2011). ‘Physiological role of anthocyanin 

accumulation in common hazel juvenile leaves’, Russian Journal of Plant Physiology, 58, 
pp. 674–680.

Tsuda, T. (2012). ‘Dietary anthocyanin‐rich plants: biochemical basis and recent 
progress in health benefits studies’, Molecular Nutrition & Food Research, 56, 
pp. 159–170.

Wang, H., Li, P., & Zhou, W. (2014). ‘Dyeing of Silk with Anthocyanins Dyes Extract from 

Liriope platyphylla Fruits’, Journal of Textiles, Article ID: 587497, 9 pages.

Zhao, J., & Dixon, R.A. (2010). The ‘ins’ and ‘outs’ of flavonoid transport’,Trends in Plant 

Science, 15, pp. 72–80.

184

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Further Reading

Andersen, O.M. & Jordheim, M. (2006). The anthocyanins. In: Anderson, Ø.M. and 

Markham, K.R. (Eds.), Flavonoids: Chemistry, Biochemistry, and Applications, CRC 
Press, Boca Raton, pp. 471–553.

Archetti, M. & Leather, S.R. (2005). ‘A test of the coevolution theory of autumn colours: 
colour preference of Rhopalosiphum padi on Prunus padus,’ Oikos, 110, pp. 339–343.

Beggs, C.J. & Wellmann, E. (1994). Photocontrol of flavonoid biosynthesis. In 

Photomorphogenesis in Plants, 2nd ed, Kendrick R.E., Kronenberg G.H.M., eds 
(Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers), pp. 733–751.

Close, D.C. & Beadle, C.L. (2003). ‘The ecophysiology of foliar anthocyanin’, The Botanical 

Review, 69, pp. 149–161.

Chalker‐Scott, L. & Scott, J.D. (2004). ‘Elevated ultraviolet‐B radiation induces cross‐

protection to cold in leaves of Rhododendron under field conditions’ Photochemistry 
Photobiology, 79, pp. 199–204.

Farrant, J.M. (2000). ‘A comparison of mechanism of desiccation tolerance among three 

angiosperms resurrection plant species’, Plant Ecology, 159, pp. 29–39.

Gitelson, A.A., Merzylak, M.N., & Chivkunova, O.B. (2001). ‘Optical properties and non 

destructive estimation of anthocyanin content in plant leaves’, Phytochemistry & 
Photobiology, 74, pp. 38–45.

Grace, S.C. & Logan, B.A. (2000). ‘Energy dissipation and radical scavenging by the plant 

phenylpropanoid pathway’, Philosophical Transections of Royal Society B, 355, 
pp.1499–1510.

Goodman, C.D., Casati, P., & Walbot, V. (2004). ‘A multidrug resistance‐ associated protein 

involved in anthocyanin transport in Zea mays’,  Plant Cell, 16, pp. 1812–1826.

Guidi, L., Alpi, A., & Perata, P. (2008). ‘Arabidopsis thaliana MYB75 PAP1 transcription 
factor induces anthocyanin production in transgenic tomato plant’, Functional Plant 
Biology, 35, pp. 606–618.

Hansen‐Krone, I.J., Braekkan, S.K., Enga, K.F., Wilsgaard, T., & Hansen, J.B. (2011). 
‘Alcohol consumption, types of alcoholic beverages and risk of venous thrombo‐
embolism—the Tromso Study’, Thrombosis Haemostasis, 106, pp. 272–278.

Helariutta, Y., Elomaa, P., Kotilainen, M., Seppänen, P., & Teeri, T.H. (1993). ‘Cloning of 

cDNA coding for dihydroflavonol‐4‐reductase (DFR) and characterization of dfr 
expression in the corollas of Gerbera hybrida var. Regina (Compositae),’ Plant Molecular 
Biology, 22, pp. 183–193.

Holton, A.T. & Cornish, E.C. (1995). ‘Genetics and Biochemistry of Anthocyanin 

Biosynthesis’, The Plant Cell, 7, pp. 1071–1083.

Hughes, N.M., Carpenter, K.L., Keidel, T.S., Miller, C.N., Waters, M.N., & Smith, W.K. 
(2014). ‘Photosynthetic costs and benefits of abaxial versus adaxial anthocyanins in 
Colocasia esculenta,’ Mojito’, Planta, 240, pp. 971–981.

Konczak, I. & Zhang, W. (2004). ‘Anthocyanins_ more than nature’s colours’, Journal of 

Biomedicine & Biotechnology, 5, pp. 239–240.

Lee, D.W. & Collins, T.M. (2001). ‘Phylogenetic and ontogenetic influences on the 

distribution of anthocyanins and betacyanins in leaves of tropical plants’, International 
Journal of Plant Sciences, 162, pp. 1141–1153.

Lee, W.K. & Lee, H.J. (2006). ‘Theroles of polyphenolsin cancer chemoprevention’, 

BioFactors, 26, pp. 105–121.

Anthocyanins: Accumulation in Plants and Role in Industries  185

Lev‐Yadun, S. (2001). ‘Aposematic (warning) coloration associated with thorns in higher 

plants’, Journal of the Theoretical Biology, 210, pp. 385–388.

Matile, P. (2000). ‘Biochemistry of Indian summer: physiology of autumn leaf coloration’, 

Experimental Gerontology, 35, pp. 145–158.

Nick, A.W., Lewis, D.H., Zhang, H., Irving, L.J., Jameson, P.E., & Davies, K.M. (2009). 

‘Light‐induced vegetative anthocyanin pigmentation in Petunia’,  Journal of Experimental 
Botany, 60, pp. 2191–2202.

Nikiforova, V.J., Gakiere, B., Kempa, S., Adamik, M., Willmitzer, L., Hesse, H., & Hoefgen, 

R. (2004). ‘Towards dissecting nutrient metabolism in plants: a systems biology case 
study on sulphur metabolism’, Journal of Experimental Botany, 55, pp.1861–1870.

Ougham, H.J., Morris, P., & Thomas, H. (2005). ‘The colors of autumn leaves as symptoms 

of cellular recycling and defenses against environmental stresses’, Current Topics in 
Developmental Biology, 66, pp. 135–160.

Saracino, A., D’Alessandro, C.M., & Borghetti, M. (2004). ‘Seed colour and post‐fire bird 

predation in a Mediterranean pine forest’, Acta Oecologia, 26, pp. 191–196.

Stewart, A.J., Chapman, W., Jenkins, G.I., Graham, I., Martin, T., & Crozier, A. (2001). ‘The 
effect of nitrogen and phosphorus deficiency on flavonol accumulation in plant tissues’, 
Plant Cell & Environment, 24, pp. 1189–1197.

Steyn, W.J., Wand, S.J.E., Holcroft, D.M., & Jacobs, G. (2002). ‘Anthocyanins in vegetative 

tissues: a proposed unified function in photoprotection’, New Phytologist, 155, 
pp. 349–361.

Spelt, C., Quattrocchio, F., Mol, J.N.M., & Koes, R. (2000). ‘Anthocyanin1 of Petunia 

encodes a basic helix‐loop‐helix protein that directly activates transcription of structural 
anthocyanin genes’, Plant Cell, 12, pp. 1619–163.

Strandberg, T.E., Strandberg, A.Y., & Salomaa, V.V. (2007). ‘Alcoholic beverage preference, 
29‐year mortality, and quality of life in men in old age’, Journal of Gerontology Series A: 
Biological Science & Medical Science, 62, pp. 213–218.

Stone, C., Chisholm, L., & Coops, N. (2001). ‘Spectral reflectance characteristics of 

eucalyptus foliage damaged by insects’, Australian Journal of Botany, 49, pp. 687–698.

Sun, Y., Li, H., & Huang, J.R. (2012). ‘Arabidopsis TT19 functions as a carrier to transport 

anthocyanin from the cytosol to tonoplasts’, Molecular Plant, 5, pp. 387–400.

186

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Problems Chapter 7

1 

In the table given below, fill in the empty spaces in column B by providing the infor-
mation about the possible role of anthocyanins with reference to their accumulation 
in column A. Give an example of plants in relation to their role and site of accumula-
tion in column C (by making slides of different parts of plants which accumulate 
anthocyanins).

Column A

Column B

Column C

Tissues in which anthocyanins accumulate

Possible functions

Example of plants

  i.   Vacuoles of adaxial epidermal  

cells of leaves

  ii.  Epidermal cells of petals
 iii.  Prickles of roses
 iv.  Epidermal peel of berries
  v.  Vacuoles of palisade mesophyll
 vi.  Filaments of anther
 vii.  Stigma of pistil

‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐-

‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐-
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐-
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

2 

Identify the possible role of anthocyanin in the following leaves and berries. In (a) 
you observe different shades of pink, red, yellow and purple. What do you think is 
the reason that gives berries and branches different shades of pigments? Also explain 
the type of anthocyanins accumulated? Leaves in (b) & (c) accumulate anthocyanins 
on the margins of their lamina. What is the significance of anthocyanin accumula-
tion in the epidermal cells of leaf lamina?

Anthocyanins: Accumulation in Plants and Role in Industries  187

(b)

(a)

(c)

3  Anthocyanin formation is a genetically controlled feature of plants. Some plants 
always synthesize anthocyanins at certain stage of their lives, particularly in their 
petals.  Their  formation  in  the  epidermal  cells  of  petals  is  a  consistent  feature. 
However,  in  many  leaves,  their  formation  indicates  abiotic  stress,  nutrient  defi-
ciency, anti‐herbivory defense or sensitivity of photosynthetic apparatus towards 
UV radiation. Keeping their different roles in the leaves, draw diagrams indicating 
anthocyanin accumulation in different parts of leaves with reference to their possi-
ble roles.

4  Explain  the  significance  of  anthocyanin  accumulation  in  stem  and  petioles  of 

 different angiosperms.

5  What is the possible role of anthocyanin accumulation in stigma and filament of 

angiosperm flowers?

6  How is anthocyanin formation in Arabidopsis different from maize?

188

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

  7  Anthocyanin  containing  food  supplements  are  widely  being  introduced  in  the 
 market. Some of these are eye supplements. Explain the different possible ways 
through which anthocyanins can improve eye health.

  8  Find out any five skin care products that you use in everyday life which contains 

anthocyanic extracts from different fruits.

  9  Why anthocyanin formation pathways are being genetically engineered? What are 

important ornamental plants in which anthocyanins are being altered?

10  Anthocyanin containing dye sensitized cells are capable of harvesting solar energy 
into electrical energy. Explain the role of some plants which are being used due to 
their anthocyanin content in formation of dye sensitized cells.

11  How anthocyanic pathways can be genetically engineered to increase their applica-

tions in food industries.

12  Suppose you are hired by a cosmetic industry to work on the following funded 

projects:

i.  Development of a hair dye containing plant‐based “red” pigment with perma-
nent dye‐retaining properties (applications of hair dye should prevent forma-
tion of grey hairs.)

ii.  Formation of a skin cosmetic product which prevents skin cancer

 

Explain how would you meet the following challenges? What would be your plants 
of choice be, and why you would select these plants? What techniques would you  
use, starting from the extraction of plant pigment to the formation of products?

189

8

Carotenoids: Introduction, Classification and 
Industrial Uses

8.1  Carotenoids are Vital for Leaves as Light Absorbing 
Pigments and for Flowers to Attract Their Pollinators

One  of  the  essential  feature  of  sexual  reproduction  in  angiosperms  is  pollination 
through which pollen‐carrying genome of the male flower is transferred to the female 
flower of same species. Pollination carried out by animals is dependent on beautiful 
shades of flowers. Many insects which are not color‐blind are attracted towards bright 
color of flowers. As mentioned in the last chapter that anthocyanins give blue, purple, 
pink and red shades to flowers and many vegetative organs. However, yellow, orange, 
or red shades are due to accumulation of other type of flavonoids which are fat‐soluble. 
These pigments are known as carotenoids which represent a major group of plant 
p igments  in  angiosperms.  They  are  synthesized  by  majority  of  plants  within  their 
plastids including chloroplasts and chromoplasts and also by microorganisms includ­
ing bacteria, algae and fungi. Over 750 carotenoids are reported so far to occur natu­
rally  and  their  number  is  expected  to  rise  in  future.  Chemically,  carotenoids  are 
flavonoids with 40 carbon atoms having C5 eight isoprene units which are joined in 
head and tail patterns. Formation of carotenoids in many plants is under transcriptional 
regulation.

Carotenoids are also present in leaves of plants due to their role as light‐absorbing 
accessory pigments in thylakoid membranes of chloroplasts. They are important part 
of  antenna  pigments  in  light  harvesting  complex  of  photosystems  (see  Chapter  6) 
where they help in photoprotection by preventing harmful wavelength of light to enter 
the plant tissues. In addition to chloroplast, they accumulate in chromoplast of many 
leaves and floral organs and give them red, yellow and orange colors. Yellow color of 
pollen  is  mostly  due  to  carotenoids  which  is  important  in  fertilization  as  mutants 
d eficient in chalcone synthase (which is required for flavonoid biosynthesis) are unable 
to fertilize.

In flowers, in addition to attract pollinators and to provide protection against pests, 
carotenoids are also involved in photoprotection. During their breakdown, they release 
aroma in order to attract or to repel insects. Stigma of Crocus sativus emit beta‐cyclocitral 
and  safranal  due  to  enzymatic  cleavage  of  beta‐carotene  and  zeaxanthin  (Angela  & 
Ahrazem, 2010). Osmanthus fragrans also releases beta‐ionine from cleavage of alpha 
and beta‐carotenes. They also release geranyl acetone and beta‐ionine in flowers which 
help in pollen and seed dispersal. Carotenoids also protect genetic content of pollens 

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products, First Edition. Aisha Saleem Khan. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.190

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

and provide vitamin A to bees. Pollens of corn and other grasses contain high content 
of inositol and corn pollen is also rich in vitamin B3 and C.

In fruits, their presence is an indication of ripening of fruits. Carotenoids are respon­
sible for red color of carrot (Daucus carota), yellow color of banana (Musa paradisica), 
mango (Mangifera indica), pepper (Capsicum annuum) and orange (Citrus spp.) and 
red color of tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) and also found in many dark green leafy 
vegetables.

Carotenoids are localized on membranes of mitochondria, chloroplast, and endo­
plasmic reticulum. They are important anti‐oxidants and capable of quenching single 
oxygen in a manner similar to tocopherol. They serve as precursors of phytohormones 
including  ABA  and  strigolactone  (Cazzonelli,  2011).  Carotenoids‐derived  signaling 
molecules  blumenol  and  mycorradicin  enhance  fungal  rhizosphere  formation  to 
develop fungal symbiosis through arbuscular mycorrhiza.

Many herbicides inhibit carotenoid biosynthesis in plants due to their role against 
photoprotection.  Therefore,  plants  which  cannot  protect  themselves  against  high 
intensities of heat are killed. Carotenoids also act as precursors of many important plant 
hormones  that  regulate  plant  growth  and  development  and  help  in  communicating 
plants with their environment (Figure 8.1).

Carortenoids are required as a part of human diet due to their nutritional value. They 
are  metabolized  to  vitamin  A  within  humans.  There  is  convincing  evidence  which 
reports their role as anti‐oxidants, anti‐obesity, anti‐aging, and cardioprotective mole­
cules as well as in maintaining bone health. Some of them are known to suppress tumor 
activity and are important anti‐carcinogens. Carotenoid content of many edible fruits 
and vegetables is being increased through techniques in genetic biofortification to meet 
vitamin A deficiency through diet.

Biosynthesis of carotenoids, accumulation in different organs of plants, their role in 
photosynthesis,  anti‐carcinogenic  properties,  role  in  pharmaceutical,  nutraceutical 
and cosmetic industries and genetically engineered novel carotenoids would also be 
described in this section.

8.2  Oxygenated and De‐oxygenated Carotenoids are 
Major Carotenoids in Angiosperms

Carotenoids  fall  in  two  main  categories,  that  is,  oxygenated  and  non‐oxygenated. 
Carotenes are pure hydrogen and carbon containing compounds and include alpha‐
carotenes, beta‐carotenes, and lycopenes. Another type of carotenoids are xantho-
phylls which differ from carotenes due the to presence of OH as a functional group. 
Oxygen containing carotenoids are lutein, zeaxanthin, fucoxanthin and antaxanthin 
(Figure 8.2). Carotenoids like alpha and beta carotenes and beta‐cryptoxanthin are 
precursors of vitamin A and retinol in the human body (Carrillo‐Lopez et al., 2010). 
Carotenoid composition of almost every plants is same and most common carote­
noids  include  lutein  (45%  of  total),  ß‐carotene  (25–30%),  violaxanthin  (10–15%), 
and  neoxanthin  (10–15%).  One  of  the  most  common  xanthophyll  is  lutein  which 
gives yellow color to leaves by acting as an accessory pigment and also absorbs light 
in UV region.

Carotenoids like  & -carotene,

xanthophyll & zeaxanthin accumulates

in pollens.

More than 100 different carotenoids
accumulates in Citrus.spp, which are

indicator of fruit ripening. They
comprise of -cryptoxanthin,

violaxanthin, lutein & zeaxanthin.

Carotenoids like violaxanthin give
yellow color to chloroplast membrane.
 

Figure 8.1  An overview of carotenoid function in plants.

Luteins are antenna pigments in chloroplast
and helps in transfer of energy to chlorophyll.

Classi(cid:26)cation of carotenoids

Carotenes (without oxygen)

CH3

CH3

CH3

H3C

H3C

CH3

CH3 CH3

Xanthophylls (oxygenated carotenoids)

H3C

OH

CH3
CH3

CH3

CH3

CH3

HO

CH3

CH3 CH3

H3C

CH3

 & -Carotene

Lycopene

Lutein

Zeaxanthin

Astaxanthin

Cryptoxanthin

Apocarotenoids

Carrots, Tomatoes, Spinach,

Lettuce, Peas, Mandarin,

Apricot,

Papaya, Watermelon, Kiwi,

Canataloupe

Carrots,

Grapefruit,

Paprika,
Chillies

Mostly found

in leafy

vegetables,
gives yellow

color to

many †owers

Neoxanthin

Capsanthin

&

Capsorubin

Antheraxanthin

Ghazaniaxanthin

Auroaxanthin

Violaxanthin

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
f
i
s
s
a
l
C

s
d
i
o
n
e
t
o
r
a
c
 

g
n
i
n
i
a
t
n
o
c
 
s
e
c
r
u
o
s
 
t
n
a
l
p
 
f
o

 
s
e
l
p
m
a
x
E

Figure 8.2  Major groups of carotenoids and their distribution within plants.

Carotenoids: Introduction, Classification and Industrial Uses

193

8.3  Carotenoid Biosynthesis is Under the Control 
of Transcriptional Regulation

Angiosperms share common pathways for carotenoids biosynthesis which takes place 
within their plastids. In many fruits and vegetables, carotenoid biosynthesis is initially 
controlled by biosynthetic gene transcription. Carotenoid biosynthesis takes place by 
nuclear‐encoded  multi  enzyme  complexes  which  are  encoded  in  nucleus  and  are 
located in plastids. Proteins precursors for carotenoid biosynthesis are processed post‐
translationally in plastids and genes involved in carotenoids synthesis are regulated at 
transcriptional  level  (Cloutault  et  al.,  2008).  Many  enzymes  which  are  involved  in 
carotenoid biosynthesis are identified and targeted to stroma of plastids as demon­
strated through binding to fluorescent reporter (GFP), immunochemistry, and prot­
eomic approaches.

In plastids, carotenoids are mainly synthesized from isoprenoid isopentenyl pyroph­
osphate, that is, IPP and DMAPP (dimethylallyl diphosphate) through methylerythri­
tol‐4‐phosphate (MEP). Pyruvate and glyceraldehye‐3‐phosphate serve as precursors of 
carotenoids in plastids. During early stages of carotenoid synthesis, DMAPP and three 
molecules of IPP combine through sequential and linear addition to form a 20‐carbon 
compound, that is, geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate (GGPP) which forms a 40‐C com­
pound phytoene by combining with another molecule of GGPP through head‐to‐head 
condensation which is catalyzed by phytoene synthase (PSY). Formation of phytoene is 
a flux‐controlling step in carotenoids biosynthesis. Phytoene further forms pro‐l ycopene 
through  enzyme  carotenoid  isomerase  in  non‐photosynthetic  tissues.  Lycopene  is 
formed from phytoene through desaturation reactions which introduce double bonds 
in phytoene, catalyzed by phytoene desaturases and carotene desaturases. The branch­
ing point in carotenoid biosynthesis is represented by cyclases which undergo cyclisa­
tion of linear lycopene molecule to beta‐carotenes with different rings. ß‐carotene is 
formed by cyclization of lycopene by lycopene cyclase. Another enzyme, hydroxylase 
forms  zeaxanthin  from  ß‐carotene.  Figure  8.3  represent  main  steps  in  carotenoid 
b iosynthesis in many crops in which PSY produces the first C40 carotene, phytoene 
while acting on GGPP. Lycopene is then produced from phytoene in many desaturation 
and  isomerization  reactions  which  yields  the  α‐carotene  and  β‐carotene  branches 
d uring  cyclization  (Yuan  et  al.,  2015).  Figure  8.4  show  steps  involved  in  carotenoid 
b iosynthesis  plastids  of  in  tomatoes  (Ronen  et  al.,  2000).  Formation  of  crocin  from 
zeaxanthin in flower of C. sativus is shown in figure 8.5.

Many structural genes involved in carotenoids biosynthesis are isolated from differ­
ent plants including geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate synthase (GGPS) for which three 
cDNA and one genomic gene is isolated from A. thaliana.

8.4  Carotenoids are Localized in Plastids in Form 
of Crystals and Plastoglobuli

Carotenoids  are  synthesized  and  located  in  chromoplast  which  is  often  derived 
from chloroplast and shows structural diversity. Sometimes more than one type of 
chromoplasts  are  present  in  same  organelle.  Conversion  of  chloroplast  to 

194

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

MEP pathway
IPP IPI DMAPP

Carotenes

GGPPS

GGPP
PSY

15-cis-Phytoene

PDS

RIN, PAP2.2, OR
SGR1, PIF1

9,15,9’-tri-cis--Carotene

Z-ISO

9,9’-di-cis--Carotene

ZDS

7,9,7’,9’-tetra-cis-Lycopene

CRTISO

All-trans-Lycopene

LCYE

-Carotene
LCYB

LCYB
-Carotene
LCYB
-Carotene
CYP97A
CHYB
Zeinoxanthin -Cryptoxanthin -Cryptoxanthin
CHYB
CYP97C

-Carotene

CYP97C

CYP97A

Lutein

?
Lutein epoxide

Capsanthin

CCS

Zeaxanthin
ZEP
VDE

Antheraxanthin

Apocarotenoids

CCD -Ionone

stringolactone

CCD

-Citraurin

Capsorubin

CCS

Xanthophyll

ZEP
VDE
Violaxanthin
NXS
Nioxanthin

NCEDABA

Figure 8.3  Carotenoid pathway in horticultural crops. Isopentenyl pyrophosphate (IPP) and DMAPP 
(dimethylallyl diphosphate) through methylerythritol‐4‐phosphate (MEP) serve as precursors for 
carotenoid biosynthesis. They form geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate (GGPP) which is a 20‐C compound 
which combines with another molecule of GGPP and forms a 40‐C compound phytoene by phytoene 
synthase (PSY). Formation of phytoene is followed by lycopene which yields the α‐carotene and 
β‐carotene branches. Carotenoids are degraded by CCDs or NCEDs to produce apocarotenoids. 
Abbreviations: IPP, isopentenyl diphosphate; DMAPP, dimethylallyl diphosphate; GGPP, geranylgeranyl 
diphosphate; IPI, isopentenyl diphosphate isomerase; GGPPS, GGPP synthase; PSY, phytoene synthase; 
PDS, phytoene desaturase; Z‐ISO, ζ‐carotene isomerase; ZDS, ζ‐carotene desaturase; CRTISO, 
carotenoid isomerase; LCYE, lycopene ε‐cyclase; LCYB, lycopene β‐cyclase; CHYB, β‐carotene 
hydroxylase; CYP97C, cytochrome P450‐type monooxygenase 97C; ZEP, zeaxanthin epoxidase; VDE, 
violaxanthin de‐epoxidase; CCS, capsanthin‐capsorubin synthase; NXS, neoxanthin synthase; CCD, 
carotenoid cleavage dioxygenase; NCED, 9‐cis‐epoxycarotenoid dioxygenase. Enzymes and 
regulators are not bolded. Solid arrows indicate biosynthesis and dashed arrows indicate degradation 
PSY regulators are colored in blue. Dotted rectangles separate different groups of carotenoids. 
(Yuan et al., 2015). (Used with permission of Nature Publishing Group.)

Carotenoids: Introduction, Classification and Industrial Uses

195

Chloroplasts only

Chromoplasts only

Chloroplasts +Chromoplasts

Not determined

GGDP

Psy2

Psy1

Phytoene

Pds

-Carotene
Zds

CrtL-e

Lycopene

-Carotene

CrtL-b

-Carotene

CrtR-b

(CrtR-e)

Lutein

HO

HO

CrtL-b

-Carotene

CrtL-b

B

B

-Carotene
CrtR-b1

CrtR-b2

Zeaxanthin

Vde1

Zep1

O

Violaxanthin

Ccs

O

OH

Capsorubin

OH

OH

O

OH

O

Figure 8.4  A comparison of carotenoid biosynthesis pathway in plastids (chloroplasts and 
chromoplasts) of tomato indicated by different arrows. Formation of capsorubin takes place in 
chromoplasts, while zeaxanthin is formed in chloroplasts. Abbreviations used: CrtL‐b, lycopene 
β‐cyclase; CrtL‐e, lycopene ɛ‐cyclase;CrtR‐b, β‐ring hydroxylase, CrtR‐e, ɛ‐ring hydroxylase; GGDP, 
geranylgeranyl diphosphate; Ggps, geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase; Pds, phytoene desaturase; 
Psy, phytoene synthase; Vde, violaxanthin deepoxidase; Zds, ζ‐carotene desaturase; Zep, zeaxanthin 
epoxidase (Ronen et al., 2000). (Copyright, National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A, used with 
permission.)

196

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(a)

(b)

7

8

HO

OH

8’

7’

Zeaxanthin

CCD

3-OH--apo-8’-Carotenal
7

8

HO

CCD

3-OH--Cyclocitral

Crocetin dialdehyde

O

O

HO

UGT

Picrocrocin

R1O

Safranal

O

O

O

OH

O

R2O

ALDH

Crocetin

UGTs

Crocin

O

O

O

OH

O

R2O

O

O

O

OH

OR1

Figure 8.5  (a) Crocus sativus flower showing saffron apocarotenoid pathway. Arrowheads are three 
stigmas (b) Zeaxanthin is cleaved at the 7,8 and 7′,8′ positions by a CCD activity. The C20 cleavage 
product, crocetin dialdehyde, is converted to crocetin by an aldehyde dehydrogenase, and then to 
crocins by at least two UDPG‐glucosyltransferases. The C10 product, 3‐OH‐β‐cyclocitral, is converted 
to picrocrocin by an UDPG‐glucosyltransferase, and then to safranal. Abbreviations used: CCD; 
Carotenoid Cleavage Dioxygenase (Frusciante et al., 2014). (Reused with permission from Nature 
Publishing Group.)

chromoplast  involves  degradation  of  photosynthetic  apparatus,  which  synthesize 
carotenoids at same time. Carotenoid‐containing structures which are found in ripe 
or senescent chromoplasts are plastoglobuli. They are round lipid droplets of almost 
100–100 nm in diameter, which may occur either singly or in groups in the stroma 
of chromoplasts.

Carotenoids: Introduction, Classification and Industrial Uses

197

Plants form different structures of chromoplasts usually in form of lipid bodies or in 
crystalline form to make them visible for their pollinators. Carotenoids may form crys­
tals in chromoplasts if their concentration increases in plastoglobuli. Large crystals of 
beta‐carotenes  exist  in  carrot  roots  and  in  narcissus  flowers.  Crystals  of  lycopene 
are also found in tomatoes fruits. In fruits of Capsicum annuum, they exist as chiral 
carotenoid superstructures are composed of xanthophyll esters.

8.5  Carotenoids Accumulation Takes Place 
in Chromoplasts of Autumn Leaves of Eudicots

Leaves of many angiosperms turn yellow during autumn to protect themselves from 
insects and pathogens (Figure 8.6). In mountain birch, carotenoids accumulation in 
leaves is associated with less pest damage. It is also reported that Prunus padus tree 
with  y ellow‐red  leaves,  are  colonized  by  less  aphids.  Although  anthocyanins  give 
red color to autumn leaves, yellow color is due to carotenoids. At a higher concentra­
tion, k etocarotenoids may also give red color to young cycad leaves and some conifers.

8.6  Carotenoids Pigments in Flowers and Pollens

In flowers, they are found in chromoplasts of sepals, pollens, anthers, filaments, and 
petals Carotenoids accumulation not only takes place in plastids of petals, but they also 
are also found in yellow stamens and stigma of many flowers. Carotenoids give many 
pollens their bright yellow color (Figure 8.7). Carotenoids alongwith flavonoids give 
yellow color to petals. Pollination and seed dispersal is more efficient when it is done by 
specific pollinators. Yellow and orange shades of pigments are attractive for many birds 
as pipevine swallowtail butterflies prefer yellow color and Indian red admirals prefer 
both yellow and blue color.

Flowers are capable of synthesizing carotenoids through beta‐beta and beta‐E branches 
of carotenoids, although many prefer one branch over the other (Frusciante et al., 2014).
More commonly found carotenoids in flower petals are xanthophylls which give yellow 
shades to flowers along with their epoxides. Flowers which are orange in color contain 
carotenes  as  their  main  carotenoids  is  mainly  alpha  and  beta‐  carotenes  (Figure  8.8). 
Yellow color of marigold, chrysanthemum and daffodils is due to the accumulation of high 
amount of lutein. Epoxy‐carotenoids, xanthophylls, flavoxanthins, chrysanthemaxanthin 
and gazanioxanthin are found in many species of Asteraceae including Gerbera jasomonii, 
Hypochoeris radicata, and Senecio scandens. Many cultivars of Ghazania are being pro­
duced through techniques in genetic engineering to enhance their ornamental value to 
be  used  in  floriculture.  In  Oncidium  orchid,  violaxanthin  and  neoxanthin  are  main 
carotenoids in flowers. Some flowers also give red to orange shades due to their carot­
enoids as red color of red Saja lily and orange tiger lily, is due to capsanthin and capsoru­
bin. The intense red color of Adonis is due to ketocarotenoid astaxanthin.

In  pollens,  commonly  occurring  carotenoids  include  alpha  and  beta‐carotenes, 
l ycopene, xanthophyll and zeaxanthin. They are formed during pollen development in 
chromoplasts of tapetal cells or exist as oil in exine and in cytoplasm. Some hypothesis 
proposed that carotenoids are required for sexual compatibility as many sterile lines do 

198

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 8.6  (a‐d) (a) Carotenoids with flavonoids are autumn pigments of leaves. Carotenoids 
like lutein are commonly found in autumn leaves, (b) Lagerstroemia indica, (c) Bombax ceiba, 
(d) Lutein (yellow color) in autumn leaf of Plumeria acuminata showing chlorophyll degradation 
(green area).

Carotenoids: Introduction, Classification and Industrial Uses

199

(a)

(c)

(e)

(b)

(d)

(f)

Figure 8.7  (a‐f) Carotenoids like carotenes, lycopene, xanthophyll and zeaxanthin accumulate in 
pollens of many flowers which appear yellow in color: (a) Carotenoids synthesis and accumulation 
takes place in chromoplasts of both ray and disc florets of crown daisy, (b) and also in pollens and 
stigma giving them yellow color, (c) Dahlia sp., (d) Begonia sp., (e) Solanum melongena, (f) and in 
Cassia fistula which accumulates carotenoids in their pollens and petals.

not synthesize carotenoids. Growth of pollen tube can be stimulated in vitro by adding 
carotenes to cultural media which indicates that carotenoids might act as co‐factors 
during pollen tube growth. Formation of carotenoid in orchids is related with increase 
in sexual reproduction.

8.7  Lutein are Important Antenna and Photoprotective 
Pigments in Thylakoids of Chloroplasts

Luteins serve many photoprotective functions in leaves during photosynthesis. They 
include protection against excess light incidence through thermal dissipation, absorb­
ing energy in broad range of blue spectrum (400–500 nm) and in transferring the energy 

200

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(b)

(a)

(c)

Figure 8.8  (a‐c) Carotenoids accumulation takes place within chromoplasts of petals along with their 
epoxides. Orange colors of petals is mostly due to carotenes while xanthophylls usually give yellow 
color to petals: (a) Marigold, (b) Oxalis sp., (c) Petals of flowers like Delonix regia are composed of 29 
carotenoids

of photons to chlorophyll ‘a’ molecules (Schmid 2008). Lutein are bound with many 
proteins and pigments on thylakoid membrane. Antenna proteins and pigments like 
chlorophyll ‘a’ and chlorophyll ‘b’ and lutein make important part of light harvesting 
complex (Dall’Osto et al., 2011). They also help in stabilization of chloroplast mem­
brane. Violaxanthins and other carotenoids give yellow colour to chloroplast envelope 
membrane. Their presence is revealed in many leaves and other organs of plants when 
chlorophyll  degradation  takes  place  in  autumn.  Leucoplasts  also  are  composed  of 
n egligible  amount  of  carotene  pigments  but  to  human  eye  they  appear  colorless. 
Luteins  also  play  role  in  correct  assembly  of  photosystems  and  provide  protection 
against photo‐oxidative damage by quenching singlet oxygen which is produced from 
chlorophyll triplet.

8.8  Capsaicin is a Carotenoid Derivative Which Causes 
Hotness of Capsicum spp.

Capsaicin, zingiberone and piperine are responsible for pungent, heat and flavours and 
give sensation to exposed skin tissues. Zingerone (C11H14O) is biosynthesized in under­
ground  stem  of  ginger  plant  (Zingiber  officinale).  Capsaicin  is  synthesized  within 
p lacental cells of Capsicum spp., whereas the main source of piperine is Piper nigrum 
(black pepper). It is interesting that all of them are composed of carbon double‐bonded 
with oxygen (carbonyl group), attached with a nitrogenous ring.

Carotenoids: Introduction, Classification and Industrial Uses

201

(a)

Ovary wall

(c)

(d)

(f)

(b)

L-Phenylalanine

L-Valine +

Iso-Butyryl-COA

Malonyl-COA

Ferulic Acid

Vanillin

Vanillylamine

CAPSAICIN

Fertilized Ovules

(e)

CAPSAICIN

Figure 8.9  (a‐f) Capsaicin causes chilliness of chillies. It is a carotenoid derivative and biosynthesized 
in interlocular septum and placental tissues of Capsicum annuum and C. frutescens (chillies): (a‐b) T.S. 
of C. annuum fruit showing site of capsaicin synthesis, (c‐d) L.S.of C. frutescens fruit, (e) Capsaicin 
biosynthesis in C. frutescens, (f) Steps in capsaicin biosynthesis from L‐phenylalanine.

A major source of capsaicin is chili peppers, that is, Capsicum annum and C. frutes-
cens. Red color of chili is due to capsanthin and capsorubin. All bell peppers, sweet 
peppers, pimentos, banana peppers, parprika, and cayenne peppers contain capsaicin 
which is synthesized within interlocular septum of chili peppers and in placental tissue 
surrounding seeds. Highest amount of capsaicin is present in the white pith of the inner 
wall  where  seeds  are  attached.  Immunological  studies  have  shown  that  capsaicin 
s ynthase  is  localized  to  peripheral  cells  of  placental  tissues  of  Capsicum  fruits 
(Figure 8.9). An increase in level of capsaicin synthase and capsaicin is reported during 
fruit development.

Capsaicin, dihydrocapsaicin, nordihydrocapsaicin are primary capsaicinoids which 
accumulate excessively in glands on placenta of fruits. L‐phenylalanine serves as a pre­
cursor for capsaicin synthesis, forming ferulic acid. Ferulic acid is further converted 
into  vanillin.  L‐valine  indirectly  adds  amino  group  to  vanillin  converting  it  to 
v anillylamine,  whereas  reacting  with  isobutyryl‐CoA.  Malonyl‐CoA  is  formed  from 
isobutyryl‐CoA which forms vanillylamine, an immediate precursor of capsaicin.

Chili fruits are composed of more than 30 pigments within their fruits. They include 
chlorophyll ‘a’, chlorophyll ‘b’, yellow‐orange lutein, zeaxanthin, violaxanthin, anther­
axanthin,  ß‐cryptoxanthin  and  ß‐carotene.  Some  red  pigments  are  only  found  in 
red  chili  like,  capsanthin,  capsorubin,  and  cryptocapsin.  Red  chili  are  composed  of 
95% provitamin A in green pods and almost 93% of ß‐carotene in mature red pods. 
Amount of carotenes and provitamin A increases in chili when the pods matures.

202

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Capsaicin  biosynthesis  is  enhanced  in  suspension  and  immobilized  cultures  of 
c hinese chili (Kehie et al., 2014). Capsaicin is used in pharmaceutical industry as counter‐
irritant  balm  for  external  applications  and  as  active  ingredient  in  Heet  and  Sloan’s 
o intment to alleviate pain. There is some evidence which supports the hypothesis that 
capsaicin  possess  anti‐carcinogenic  activities  (Mori  et  al.,  2006).  Capsaicin  creams 
reduce pain associated with arthritis. Capsaicin is also known to act as insecticides and 
spraying 1/25 ounce of capsaicin sprayed on onion plants reduced the maggot eggs by 
75%, whereas pepper dust repels ants.

8.9  Carotenoid Accumulation in Epidermal Cells of Many 
Fruits is Due to Conversion of Chloroplast Into Chromoplasts

Accumulation of carotenoids takes place in plastids of many fruits which indicates their 
ripening (Figure 8.10). Yellow and red color of many edible fruits is due to different type 
of carotenoids which accumulate mostly in their exocarp. Over 100 different carotenoids 
are found in Citrus spp. in their flavedo and fruit sac. Citrus spp. including mandarin, 
orange, clementine are rich source of beta‐cryptoxanthin, violaxanthin, lutein and zeax­
anthin.  Grapefruits  contain  phytoene,  phyotfluene,  ζ‐carotene  and  beta‐carotene. 
However, citron, lemon and lime contain low level of carotenoids (Kato, 2012). Yellow‐
fleshed  papaya  contains  beta‐carotenes,  beta‐cryptoxanthin  and  ζ‐carotenoids.  Red‐
fleshed papaya contains high level of lycopene (Schweiggert et al., 2011). Red flesh of 
watermelons is rich in lycopene, however, yellow‐fleshed watermelon contains violax­
anthin and neoxanthin as main carotenoids pigments. Orange‐fleshed melons usually 
contain lycopene and phytoene.

Plants  like  apricot,  cantaloupe,  pumpkin  and  sweet  potato  are  rich  sources  of 
alpha and beta carotenes. They accumulate these pigments during later stages of fruit 
development.  Tomatoes,  watermelon,  pink  grapes  contain  lycopene,  beta‐carotenes, 

Figure 8.10  Carotenoid accumulation takes place during fruit ripening in muskmelon when 
chloroplasts are converted into chromoplasts giving fruits their characteristic yellow color.

Carotenoids: Introduction, Classification and Industrial Uses

203

phytofluene  and  phytoene.  However,  spinach  is  a  rich  source  of  many  carotenoids 
including  alpha  and  beta‐carotene,  lutein  and  zeaxanthin.  Mangoes,  papaya,  peach, 
orange and prunes, squash, red palm oil contain beta‐cryptoxanthin, lutein, zeaxanthin, 
alpha and beta ‐carotenes. Corn, alfalfa, marigold flowers, wolfberries are rich sources 
of zeaxanthin. Crocetin is found in Crocus sativus.

8.10  Transcriptional Regulation of Carotenoids in Fruits

In  angiosperms,  transcriptional  regulation  of  genes  is  required  during  ripening  of 
fruits. In tomatoes, an increase in amount of lycopene results in formation of red color 
which is due to enhanced transcription of upstream genes. They include phytoene syn­
thase (PSY), phytoene desaturase (PDS) and carotenoid isomerase (CRISTO). However, 
some genes like lycopene β‐cyclase (LYCB), lycopene ε‐cyclase (LYCE) and β‐carotene 
hydroxylase (CHYB) are down‐regulated (Lois et al., 2000). In Delta or Beta mutants of 
tomatoes, increase in transcription of LYCE or LCYB results in lycopene conversion 
in  δ‐carotene  or  β‐carotene  (Ronen  et  al.,  2000).  Similarly  upregulation  of  genes 
cause  capsanthin  accumulation  in  pepper  fruit  which  causes  change  in  fruit  color 
from green to red.

The low level of carotenoids accumulation in some fruits is due to the low level of 
transcriptional genes. In lemon, low level of carotenoids in juice sac is due to the low­
est transcriptional level of genes involved in carotenoids biosynthesis during different 
stages of fruit ripening. Accumulation of the low level of carotenoids in white‐fleshed 
papaya  is  also  due  to  the  low  level  of  transcriptional  genes.  High  expression  of 
upstream carotenogenic genes in mandarins and orange and low expression of some 
downstream genes is related with high accumulation of beta‐cryptoxanthin and vio­
laxanthin. Mutation in LYCB2 genes of papaya can cause less amount of lycopene 
due to reduced gene expression and forms red and yellow‐fleshed papaya. In orange 
carrot, loss of function of carotene hydroxylase CYP97A3 gene causes an increase in 
alpha‐carotene  content  (Zhang  et  al.,  2015).  However,  in  some  plants  carotenoid 
accumulation is not related with gene expression. Some work is still in progress to 
understand relation between transcriptional regulation of genes and development of 
fruit colors.

8.11  Application in Food, Pharmaceutical, Cosmetic, 
Textile and Nutracuetical Industries

Carotenoids find numerous applications in many industries including food industries. 
They are used as food color, feed for animals, supplements for vitamin A in nutraceuti­
cal industries, anti‐oxidants in dietary food and as anti‐aging compounds in cosmetic 
industries. Beta‐carotenes are commonly used as colorants for human food. Due to 
their ornamental value, many species of asteraceae synthesizing carotenoids are used in 
floriculture industries. Biochemical pathways involved in carotenoid biosynthesis are 
being  genetically  modified  in  order  to  produce  flowers  with  enhanced  carotenoids. 
Zeaxanthin  is  commonly  used  as  colorant  in  food  and  cosmetic  industries.  It  also 
reduces risk of cancer (Nishino et al., 2002).

204

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Food  and  pharmaceutical  industries  are  exploring  potential  of  edible  carotenoids 
p roducing plants to be used as food colors which is safer for human health. Under EU 
legislation, plant carotenoids can only be derived from carrots which is a natural source 
of beta‐carotene. In the U.S. and in EU, only lycopenes of tomatoes can be used as food 
colors. Annatto (bixin), paprika extract (capsanthin and capsorubin), saffron, alfalfa and 
marigold extract (lutein) are also considered to be safer and non toxic to use as coloring 
agent in food industry. Tomato and carrot extract are also used to color confectionary 
products,  beverages  and  also  used  in  cosmetic  industries.  Saffron  carotenoids  are 
becoming popular due to their anti‐oxidant properties. Saffron produces color during 
carotenoids  degradation  when  zeaxanthin  are  converted  to  crocin  and  crocetin. 
However, flavour is due to oxidation of zeaxanthin.

Economic value of many fruits, vegetables and flowers is being increased by enhanc­
ing  their  carotenoids‐derived  color.  Carotenoid  synthesizing  pathways  are  being 
m odified to increase their uses in different industries (Fraser & Bramley, 2004; Botella‐
Pavia & Rodriguez‐Concepcion, 2006). ß‐carotene and astaxanthin are widely used in 
food  and  feed  industries.  Astaxanthin,  lutein  and  zeaxanthin  are  used  to  enhance 
y ellow pigmentation of egg and poultry to color the animal tissue or to color animals 
products  like  milk,  eggs,  butter  and  cheese.  According  to  Natural  Food  Color 
Association, world demand for natural pigment is increasing 10% annually. Price for 
2000 kg of pure anthocyanin is 1250 U.S dollars, however, saffron is the costliest price 
(U.S. dollar/2000 kg).

Humans need carotenoids for synthesis of retinal, retinol (vitamin A) and retinoid 
acids. Lutein and xanthophylls are known as macular pigments due to their accumula­
tion in macula of eyes where they act as strong anti‐oxidants by scavenging free radicals 
and protect the macula from light‐induced damage and age‐related macular degenera-
tion (AMD). They absorb UV and blue light and protect eye lens from oxidative damage 
(Krinsky  et  al.,  2003).  Therefore,  in  order  to  increase  concentration  of  macular 
p igments, carotenoids‐rich food supplements should be used to reduce risk of AMD 
(Goodrow et al., 2006) and cataract.

ß‐carotene serves as a precursor for the synthesis of visual pigments like rhodopsin. 
It cannot be synthesized by humans, and acts as provitamin A, making a crucial part of 
human diet. Carotenoids are also used to supplement vitamin A deficiency and for 
treatment of photosensitive diseases, however, they should be used with caution as 
beta‐carotene supplements can increase risk of lung cancer in heavy smokers. Some 
role of beta‐carotenes is also suggested as a sunscreen agent. Beta‐cryptoxanthin also 
exhibits mild vitamin A activity. Dietary cryptoxanthin reduces the risk of cancer and 
rheumatoid arthritis. Rice in Asia are deficit of ß‐carotene, so many people in Asia 
suffer  from  provitamin  A  deficiency.  Transgenic  rice  golden  rice  comprise  of  this 
essential vitamin through introducing the genes of ß‐carotene into the endosperm of 
rice grains.

Major carotenoids synthesized by nutraceutical industries include lycopene, beta‐
carotene,  canthaxanthin,  astaxanthin  and  zeaxanthin.  CarotenAll  contains  alpha 
and  beta‐carotene  extracted  from  plum  fruit  and  used  as  dietary  supplement 
for vision, cardioprotective health and also for prostate health. Lutein softgel sup­
plements  claim  to  be  composed  of  vegetables  carotenoids  and  maintain  macula 
health. Country life carotenoid complex supplements contain a mixture of algal and 

Carotenoids: Introduction, Classification and Industrial Uses

205

plant‐based  carotenoids  which  provide  antioxidants  support.  PhytofLORAL  is 
another natural d ietary supplement made from phytoene and phytofluene of non‐
GMO tomatoes which protects skin from photodamage and aging. Doctor’s Best 
Lutein is another s upplement for eyes which is made from lutein and zeaxanthin of 
marigold extracts.

Herbicide resistant transgenic tobacco plants are generated through metabolic engi­
neering of carotenoid biosynthetic pathways by taking gene of bacterium Erwinia ure-
dovora, and fusing it with pea Rubisco, and then expressing in tobacco plants. Transgenic 
tobacco plants showed resistance to norflurazon. In order to generate keto‐carotenoids 
in  higher  plants,  combination  of  ketolated  and  hydroxylated  carotenoids  genes  are 
transformed in tomato and in tobacco (Ralley et al., 2004). Nicotiana glauca, which 
produces yellow flowers due to carotenoids is first genetically modified plant producing 
four‐ketoxanthin (adinoxanthin) which is transformed with genes from cyanobacterial 
ketolase. It resulted in accumulation of keto carotenoids in transformed Nicotiana spp. 
with an increase in total carotenoids in nectaries. Carotenoids and their role in plants, 
is further investigated with the help of Arabidopsis mutants, leading to identification of 
several biosynthetic genes (Figure 8.11).

Carotenoids like beta‐carotene, lycopene and lutein provide protection against long‐
term  exposure  to  sunlight.  Therefore,  due  to  their  photoprotective  properties,  they 
have gained importance in cosmetic industries. Yellow petals of sunflower are used as 
coloring agent in cosmetic products.

8.12  Future Challenges

Many approaches for metabolic engineering of carotenoids are in progress which involve 
identification of genes involved in carotenoids biosynthesis and their overexpression in 
plants in order to produce carotenoid rich food, and for producing carotenoid pigments 
of  industrial  interest.  Many  techniques  in  genetic  biofortification  are  focussing  to 
increase endogenous carotenoid contents of carotene‐containing vegetables and fruits. 
Isolation  and  utilization  of  fruit‐specific  promoters,  light‐positive  and  light‐negative 
regulators  can  produce  new  varieties  of  plants  with  increased  carotenoid  contents 
and vitamin A. Although efforts are being done to overproduce beta‐carotenes in pota­
toes, tomatoes, canola, flax and maize (Diretto et al., 2007; Aluru et al., 2008) but they 
are not sufficient so a lot of research need to be conducted regarding the introduction 
of carotene‐rich food and for introducing the carotenoid‐based natural dyes in market 
after the restriction of use of synthetic dyes, by European Union and United Sates. As 
lycopene of tomato is major food colors, food industries need to develop techniques 
for extraction of carotenoid pigments which are not only safe to use but can also fulfill 
 dietary  requirement  of  vitamins  and  nutrients.  Plants  which  are  potential  source  of 
extraction carotenoid include saffron, alfalfa and marigold extract.

However,  using  carotenoids  and  other  pigments  as  natural  dyes  offers  some 
c hallenges as depending upon extraction method pigment content is less defined, 
and pH of food also interferes with shade and stability to light, heat and preserva­
tives and due to their solubility in oil, they require chemical modifications which 
may be costly.

Applications of carotenoids in industries

Food

products

Agriculture &
plant breeding

programs

Nutraceutical & pharmaceutical

Floriculture

Food color

Feed additives

 for poultry

Dietary

carotenoids

Eye health

Cardiovascular

health

Carrot

Tomato Marigold

Development of tobacco
resistant plant through

altering carotenoid

biosynthesis pathways

Development of transgenic 
tomatoes to increase their
nutritional value by altering

-genes

 (beta genes in tomatoes)

Ornamental hybrids containing

carotenoid pigments

Overproduction of -carotenes
to meet vitamin A de(cid:31)ciency

in potatoes, corn & (cid:30)ax
through regulation of fruit

speci(cid:31)c regulators

Transcriptional regulation of
carotenoids in fruits to enhance

their color & increase their

demand in market

Ronen et al. 2000 (used with permission from National Academy of Science, U.S.A)

Figure 8.11  Major applications of carotenoids in industries. (See insert for color representation of the figure.)

References

Carotenoids: Introduction, Classification and Industrial Uses

207

Aluru, M., Xu, Y., Guo, R., Wang, Z., Li, S., White, W., & Rodermel, S. (2008). ‘Generation 

of transgenic maize with enhanced provitamin A content’, Journal of Experimental 
Biology, 59, pp. 3551–3562.

Angela, L.G. & Ahrazem, R.O. (2010). ‘Understanding carotenoid metabolism in saffron 

stigmas: unravelling aroma and colour formation’, Functional Plant Science & 
Biotechnology, 4, pp. 56–63.

Botella‐Pavia, P. & Rodriguez‐Concepcion, M. (2006). ‘Carortenoids biotechnology in 
plants for nutritionally improved foods’, Physiologia Plantarum, 126, pp. 369–381.

Cazzonelli, C.I. (2011). ‘Carotenoids in nature: insights from plants and beyond’, Functional 

Plant Biology, 38, pp. 833–847.

Carrillo‐Lopez, A., Yahia, E.M., & Ramirez‐Padilla, G.K. (2010). ‘Bioconversion of 

Carotenoids in Five Fruits and Vegetables to Vitamin A Measured by Retinol 
Accumulation in Rat Livers’, American Journal of Agricultural & Biological Sciences, 5, 
pp. 215–221.

Clotault, I., Peltier, D., Berruyer, R., Thomas, M., Briard, M., & Geoffriau, E. (2008). 

‘Expression of carotenoid biosynthesis genes during carrot root development’, Journal of 
Experimental Botany, 59, pp. 3563–3573.

Dall’Osto, L., Fiore, A., Cazzaniga, S., Giuliano, G., & Bassi, R. (2007). ‘Different roles of 
alpha‐ and beta‐branch xanthophylls in photosystem assembly and photoprotection’, 
The Journal of Biological Chemistry, 282, pp. 35056–35068.

Diretto, G., Al‐Babili, S., Tabaza, R., Papacchioli, V., Beyer, P., & Guiliano, G. (2007). 

‘Metabolic engineering of potato carotenoid content through tuber‐specific 
overexpression of bacterial minipathway’, PloS One, 2, p. e350.

Fraser, P.D. & Bramley, P.M. (2004). ‘The biosynthesis and nutritional uses of carotenoids: 

Progress in Lipid Research’, 43, pp. 228–265.

Frusciante, S., Diretto, G., Bruno, M., Ferrante, P., Pietrella, M., Prado‐Cabrero, A., 

Rubio‐Moraga, A., Beyer, P., Gomez‐Gomez, L., Al‐Babili, S., & Giuliano, G. (2014). 
‘Novel carotenoid cleavage dioxygenase catalyzes the first dedicated step in saffron 
crocin biosynthesis’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111, 
pp. 12246–12251.

Goodrow, E.F., Wilson, T.A., Houde, S.C., Viswanathan, R., Scollin, P.A., Handelman, G., & 

Nicolosi, R.J. (2006). ‘Consumption of one egg per day increases serum lutein and 
zeaxanthin concentrations in older adults without altering serum lipid and lipoprotein 
cholesterol concentrations’, Journal of Nutrition, 136, pp. 2519–2524.

Kehie, M., Kumaria, S., & Tandon, P. (2014). ‘Manipulation of culture strategies to 
enhance capsaicin biosynthesis in suspension and immobilized cell cultures of 
Capsicum chinenseJacq.cv.Naga King Chili’, Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering, 37, 
pp. 1055–1063.

Kato, M. (2012). ‘Mechanism of carotenoid accumulation in citrus fruit’, Journal of the 

Japanese Society for Horticultural Science, 81, pp. 219–233.

Krinsky, N.I., Landrum, J.T., & Bone, R.A. (2003). ‘Biologic mechanism of the protective 

role of lutein and zeaxanthin in eye’, Annual Review of Nutrition, 23, pp. 171–201.

Lois, L.M., Rodríguez‐Concepción, M., Gallego, F., Campos, N., & Boronat, A. (2000). 

‘Carotenoid biosynthesis during tomato fruit development: regulatory role of  
1‐deoxy‐D‐xylulose 5‐phosphate synthase’, Plant Journal, 22, pp. 503–513.

208

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Mori, A., Lehmann, S., O’Kelly, J., Kumagai, T., Desmond, J.C., Pervan, M., Mc Bride, W.H., 
Kizaki, M., & Koeffler, H.P. (2006). ‘Capsaicin, a component of red peppers, inhibits the 
growth of androgen‐independent, p53 mutant prostate cancer cells’, Cancer Research, 
66, pp. 3222–3229.

Nishino, H., Murakosh, M., Ii, T., Takemura, M., Kuchide, M., Kanazawa, M., Mou, X.Y., 

Wada, S., Masuda, M., Ohsaka, M., Yogosawa, S., Satomi, Y., & Jinno, K. (2002). 
‘Carortenoids in cancer chemoprevention’, Cancer Metastasis Review, 21, pp. 257–264.

Ralley, L., Enfissi, E.M., Misawa, N., Schuch, W., Bramley P.M., & Fraser, P.D. (2004). 

‘Metabolic engineering of ketocarotenoid formation in higher plants,’ Plant Journal, 39, 
pp. 477–486.

Ronen, G., Carmel‐Goren, L., Zamir, D., & Hirschberg, J. (2000). ‘An alternative pathway to 
beta‐carotene formation in plant chromoplasts discovered by map‐based cloning of beta 
and old‐gold color mutations in tomato’, Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences, 
97, pp. 11102–11107.

Schmid, V.H. (2008). ‘Light‐harvesting complexes of vascular plants’, Cellular & Molecular 

Life Sciences, 65, pp. 3619–3639.

Schweiggert, R.M., Steingass, C.B., Heller, A., Esquivel, P., & Carle, R. (2011). 

‘Characterization of chromoplasts and carotenoids of red‐ and yellow‐fleshed papaya 
(Carica papaya L.)’, Planta, 234, pp.1031–1044.

Yuan, H., Zhang, J., Nageswaren, D., & Li, L. (2015). ‘Carotenoid metabolism and regulation 

in horticultural crops’, Horticulture Research, 2, p.15036. 10.1038/hortres.2015.36.

Zhang, J., Yuan, H., Fei, Z., Pogson, B.J., Zhang, L., & Li, L. (2015). ‘Molecular 

characterization and transcriptome analysis of orange head Chinese cabbage 
(Brassica rapa L. ssp. Pekinensis)’, Planta, 241, pp. 1381–1394.

Further Reading

Baldermann, S., Kato, M., Kurosawa, M., Kurobayashi, Y., Fujita, A., Fleischmann, P., & 

Watanabe, N. (2010). ‘Functional characterization of a carotenoid cleavage dioxygenase 
1 and its relation to the carotenoid accumulation and volatile emission during the 
floral development of Osmanthus fragrans Lour’, Journal of Experimental Botany, 
61, pp. 2967–2977.

Bertram, J.S. (1999). ‘Carotenoids and gene regulation’, Nutrition Reviews, 57, pp.182–191.
Blas, A.L., Ming, R., Liu, Z., Veatch, O.J., Paull, R.E., Moore P.H., & Yu, Q. (2010). 
‘Cloning of the papaya chromoplast‐specific lycopene beta‐cyclase, CpCYC‐b, 
controlling fruit flesh color reveals conserved microsynteny and a recombination hot 
spot’, Plant Physiology, 152, pp. 2013–2022.

Britton, G. (1993). Carotenoids in chloroplasts pigment‐protein complexes. In: Sundqvist, 
C. & Ryberg, M., (eds). Pigment‐protein complexes in plastids: synthesis and assembly, 
(San Diego: Academic Press, pp. 447–483.

Cunningham, F.X. & Gantt, E. (2011). ‘Elucidation of the pathway to astaxanthin in the 

flowers of Adonis aestivalis’, Plant Cell, 23, pp. 3055–3069.

Davuluri, G.R., Van Tuinen, A., Mustilli, A.C., Manfredonia, A., Newman, R., Burgess, D., 
Brummell, D.A., King, D.M., Palys, S.K., Uhlig, J., Pennings, J.M., & Bowler, C. (2004). 
‘Manipulation of DET1 expression in tomato results in photomorphoenic phenotypes 
caused by post‐transcriptional gene silencing’, The Plant Journal, 40, pp. 344–354.

Carotenoids: Introduction, Classification and Industrial Uses

209

Ferro, M., Brugiere, S., Salvi, D., Seigneurin‐Berny, D., Court, M., Moyet, L., Ramus, C., 
Miras, S., Mellal, M., Le Gall, S., Kieffer‐Jaquinod, S., Bruley, C., Garin, J., Joyard, J., 
Masselon, C., & Rolland, N. (2010). ‘AT_CHLORO, a comprehensive chloroplast 
proteome database with subplastidial localization and curated information on envelope 
proteins’, Molecular & Cell Proteomics, 9, pp. 1063–1084.

Gerjets, T., Sandman, M., Zhu, C., & Sandman, G. (2007). ‘Metabolic engineering of 
ketocarotenoid biosynthesis in leaves and flowers of tobacco species’ Biotechnology 
Journal, 2, pp. 1263–1269.

Howitt, C.A. & Pogson, B.J. (2006). ‘Carotenoid accumulation and function in seeds and 

non‐green tissues’, Plant Cell & Environment, 29, pp. 435‐ 445.

Ito, K., Nakazato, T., Yamato, K., Miyakawa, Y., Yamada T., Hozumi, N., Segawa K., Ikeda 
Y., & Kizaki, M. (2004). ‘Induction of apoptosis in leukemic cells by homovanillic acid 
derivative, capsaicin, through oxidative stress: implication of phosphorylation of p53 at 
Ser‐15 residue by reactive oxygen species’, Cancer Research, 64, 1071–1078.

Jaswir, I., Noviendri, D., Hasrini, R.F., & Octavianti, F. (2011). ‘Carotenoids: Sources, 

medicinal properties and their application in food and nutraceutical industry’, Journal of 
Medicinal Plants Research, 5, pp. 7119–7131.

Jacques, P.F. (1999). ‘The potential preventive effects of vitamins for cataract and age‐

related macular degeneration’, International Journal for Vitamin and Nutrition Research, 
69, pp. 198–205.

Jeknic, Z., Morre, J.T., Jeknic, S., Jevremovic, S., Subotic, A., & Chen, T.H. (2012). 

‘Cloning and functional characterization of a gene for capsanthin‐capsorubin synthase 
from tiger lily (lilium lancifolium thunb. ‘splendens’)’, Plant Cell Physiology, 53, 
pp. 1899–1912.

Johnson, E.J. (2002). ‘The role of carotenoids in human health’, Nutrition in Clinical Care, 

Joyard, J., Ferro, M., Masselon, C., Seigneurin‐Berny, D., Salvi, D., Garin, J., & Rolland, N. 

(2009). ‘Chloroplast proteomics and the compartmentation of plastidial isoprenoid 
biosynthetic pathways’, Molecular Plant, 2, pp. 1154–1180.

Kapoor, V.P. (2005). ‘Herbal Cosmetic for Skin and Hair Care’, Natural Product Radiance, 4, 

5, pp. 56–65.

pp. 306–314.

Kim, J., Smith, J.J., Tian, L., & Dellapenna, D. (2009). ‘The evolution and function of 

carotenoid hydroxylases in Arabidopsis’, Plant Cell Physiology, 50, pp. 463–479.

Li, Z., Wakao, S., Fischer, B.B., & Niyogi, K.K. (2009). ‘Sensing and responding to excess 

light’, Annual Review of Plant Biology, 60, pp. 239–260.

Lyle, B.J., Mares‐Perlman, J.A., Klein, B.E., Klein, R., & Greger, J.L. (1999). ‘Antioxidants 

intake and risk of incident age‐related nuclear cataracts in Beaver Dam Eye Study’, 
American Journal of Epidemiology, 149, pp. 801–809.

Mares‐Perlman, J.A., Millen, A.E., Ficek, T.L., & Hankinson, S.E. (2002). ‘The body of 
evidence to support a protective role for lutein and zeaxanthin in delaying chronic 
diseases Overview’, Journal of Nutrition, 132, pp. 518S–524S.

Markwell, J., Bruce, B.D., & Keegstra, K. (1992). ‘Isolation of a carotenoid‐containing 

sub‐membrane particle from the chloroplastic envelope outer membrane of pea (Pisum 
sativum)’, Journal of Biological Chemistry, 267, pp. 13933–13937.

Melendez‐Martinez, A.J., Vicario, I.M., & Heredia, F.J. (2004). ‘Nutritional importance 

of carotenoid pigments’, Archivos Latinoamericanos de Nutricion, 54, pp. 149–154 
(In Spanish).

210

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Rodriguez‐Villalon, A., Gas, E., & Rodriguez‐Concepcion, M. (2009). ‘Phytoene synthase 

activity controls the biosynthesis of carotenoids and the supply of their metabolic 
precursors in dark‐grown Arabidopsis seedlings’, Plant Journal, 60, pp. 424–435.

Rodriguez‐Uribe, L., Guzman, I., Rajapakse, W., Richins, R.D., & O’Connell, M.A. (2012). 
‘Carotenoid accumulation in orange‐pigmented Capsicum annuum fruit, regulated at 
multiple levels’, Journal of Experimental Botany, 63, pp. 517–526.

Peng, G., Wang, C., Song, S., Fu, X., Azam, M., Grierson, D., & Xu, C. (2013). ‘The role of 
1‐deoxy‐D‐xylulose‐5‐phosphate synthase and phytoene synthase gene family in citrus 
carotenoid accumulation’, Plant Physiology & Biochemistry, 71, pp. 67–76.

Paredes‐Lopez, O. (1999). Molecular Biotechnology for Plant Food Production, CRC Press.
Pattison, D.J., Harrison, R.A., & Symmons, D.P.M. (2004). ‘Role of diet in susceptibility to 

rheumatoid arthritis: a systemic review’, Journal of Rheumatology, 31, pp. 1310–1319.
Prasad, B.C.N., Kumar,V., Gururaj, H.B., Parimalan, R., Giridhar, P., & Ravishankar, G.A. 
(2006). ‘Characterization of capsaicin synthase and identification of its gene (csy1) for 
pungency factor capsaicin in pepper (Capsicum sp.)’, Proceedings of National Academy of 
Sciences, 103, pp. 13315–13320.

Surh, Y.J. (2002). ‘More than spice: capsaicin in hot chili peppers makes tumor cells commit 

suicide’, Journal of National Cancer Institute, 94, pp. 1263–1265.

Tanaka, Y, Sasaki, N., & Ohyima, A. (2008). ‘Biosynthesis of plants pigments: anthocyanins, 

betalains and carotenoids’, Plant Journal, 54, pp. 733–749.

Telfer, A. (2005). ‘Too much light? How beta‐carotene protects the photosystem II reaction 

centre’, Photochemical & Photobiological Sciences, 4, pp. 950–956.

Walter, M.H. & Strack, D. (2011). ‘Carotenoids and their cleavage products: biosynthesis 

and functions’, Natural Product Research, 28, pp. 663–692.

Walter, M.H., Floss, D.S., & Strack, D. (2010). ‘Apocarotenoids: hormones, mycorrhizal 

metabolites and aroma volatiles’, Planta, 232, pp. 1–17.

Xie, X., Yoneyama, K., & Yoneyama, K. (2010). ‘The strigolactone story’, Annual Review of 

Phytopathology, 48, pp. 93–117.

Carotenoids: Introduction, Classification and Industrial Uses

211

Problems Chapter 8

1 

In the table given below, fill in the empty spaces by explaining the possible role of 
carotenoids with reference to their location in plant cell or organs.

Location

Function

Chloroplasts
Epidermal peel of fruits
Chromoplasts of petals
Tapetal cells of pollen

‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

2  Plastids are site of synthesis of carotenoids which are accumulated in oil bodies or 
in  chromoplasts.  However  in  chlorplasts  they  are  bind  with  photosynthetic 
p igments. They have different roles in chromoplasts and in chloroplasts. Compare 
and contrast their role in both plastids with the help of diagrams.

3  Luteins are present in light‐harvesting complex of thylakoid membrane of chloro­
plast. They bind many molecules of chlorophyll ‘a’ and ‘b‘. What is the significance 
of this arrangement in capturing of photons of light? Explain your answer with the 
help of diagrams.

4  What is the significance of carotenoid formation and accumulation in chromoplasts 

of fruits?

5 

leutein

Identify the types of carotenoids accumulated in the following flowers:
A  carortenes
B 
C  xanthophylls
D  lycopenes
E  zeaxanthins
F  chrysanthemaxanthin
G  gazanioxanthin

212

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(b)

(a)

(c)

(d)

6  Give examples of carotenoids and their plants from which they are extracted to 

be used as:

i.  dyes for food color
ii.  feed for poultry
iii.  eye supplements in nutraceuticals
iv.  dyeing of textile
v.  anti‐oxidants
vi.  anti‐aging skin care products
vii.  with possible anti‐cancerous effects
viii.  ornamental plants in floriculture

7  Explain transcriptional regulation of carotenoids in tomatoes.

8  How carotenoid accumulation in pollens is important in pollination?

9  Give an account of carotenoids role in leaves, fruits and flowers of Citrus spp.

10  Give some examples of plant‐based carotenoids used as eye supplements.

213

9

Alkaloids Biosynthesis, Translocation 
and Industrial Products

9.1  Alkaloids are Nitrogen‐Containing Natural Products 
Which Provide Defense Against Herbivores

Along with many morphological adaptations which angiosperms have evolved over a 
period of time, metabolic pathways are also evolved in a way to provide them chemical 
defense against their predators. Alkaloids formation is a unique chemical and ecological 
defensive mechanism of flowering plants which allows them to impart bitter taste to the 
plant  organs  where  they  are  synthesized.  Herbivores  cannot  consume  plants  which 
s ynthesize alkaloids due to their bitter taste. Alkaloids also act as insect repellents and 
as insecticidal compounds. Therefore, efforts are being made to make transgenic plants 
which are resistant to pests and herbivores by incorporating genes of alkaloid biosyn-
thesis. Alkaloids are also toxic for plants cells, therefore plants tend to accumulate them 
in vacuoles. Insects like Danaus butterflies use alkaloids as pheromones and for improv-
ing their sexual behavior. Aphids not only ingest alkaloids but also function as alkaloid 
vectors, distributing them to environment. Alkaloids defense is different from defense 
through volatile terpenoids, as in latter case, plants release signals in the air to keep 
pathogens away from them.

Alkaloids are unique natural products of plants due to the presence of nitrogen and 
their alkaline pH. More than 12,000 alkaloids are known till date to be synthesized in 
cytosol of leaves, stems, roots, flowers and fruits of many plants (Figure 9.1). However, 
their synthesis is also reported in fungi and in some animals. They are not toxic when 
they are stored, however, they become toxic due to change in pH of cell. In the nomen-
clature, any name ending with ‘ine’ represents an alkaloid. Some alkaloids are colored 
like berberine (yellow) and sanguinarine (orange). Alkaloids are important medicinal 
compounds like ajamaline, morphine, quinine, vincristine and vinblastine are important 
alkaloids which are used in many pharmaceuticals products in minute concentration 
because they act as poisonous compounds at higher concentration.

Caffeine  and  theobromine  are  important  alkaloids  which  are  widely  used  in  many 
c offee, tea and chocolate industries, whereas tobacco industries rely on nicotine which 
is another natural insecticidal alkaloid synthesized in almost all parts of tobacco plants. 
Nicotine is a potent insecticide and highly toxic to humans. Caffeine is one of the world’s 
largely used alkaloid consumed in form of coffee and tea. In past, coffeehouses have 
been served as a place for interchange of ideas and for public opinion. World’s largest 
tea,  coffee  and  chocolates  producing  industries  are  Starbucks,  Nescafe,  Lipton  and 

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products, First Edition. Aisha Saleem Khan. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.214

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(a)

(c)

(b)

Figure 9.1  (a‐c) (a) Opium (Papaver sp). is an important source of morphine which is an effective pain 
killer, (b) Nicotine is synthesized by Nicotiana tabacum, (c) Calotropis procera is known to possess many 
alkaloids like calotropin, calotaxein and uskerin which have potential to stimulate cardiovascular 
system.

Cadbury. Now use of green teas which contain less amount of caffeine is also becoming 
popular, therefore they are being produced from variety of plants due to their weight‐
reducing properties. Beneficial value of green tea is attributed to its catechins which 
also help in prevention of many metabolic syndromes (Thielecke & Boschmann, 2009).
Caffeine released by seed coats of many plants is also known to act as an allelochemical 
by  inhibiting  germination  of  other  seeds.  An  interesting  hypothesis  proposed  that 
c affeine can increase reward memory of bee pollinators (Wright et al., 2013). Bees can 
relate floral smell almost three times higher in nectar of flower of Coffea and Citrus 
species at a concentration of less than 0.3 mM.

9.1.1  An Account of Historical Uses of Alkaloids
Alkaloids have been used in different regions of world throughout history in different 
ways which are also representative of different cultures and traditions. They are known to 
humans since 4000 years ago as poisonous and medicinal compounds and also due to 
their use in teas and as potions in witchcraft. However, their isolation as pure compounds 
started in 1800s and techniques for determining their structures developed in 1900s. 
Assyrian clay tablets almost 4000 years old revealed use of 250 alkaloid‐containing plants 

Alkaloids Biosynthesis, Translocation and Industrial Products

215

including Atropa belladona, Mandrogora officinarum and Papaver somniferum. Emperor 
Shen Nung described use of 350 drugs in 3000 B.C (Wink, 1998). Later in India, Ayurveda 
mentioned use of traditional medicine about 900 B.C. A drink soma was prepared while 
praying during moonlight possibly from Datura metel, Cannabis sativa, Sarcostemma 
acidum, S. brevistigma or from mushroom. It was used to enhance courage, strength and 
sexuality. Use of Datura spp. was mentioned in Ayurveda as a remedy for mental illness, 
fever, tumors, and as aphrodisiac.

Hecate, goddess of witchcraft had botanical garden on island of Colchis, which is 
composed of alkaloid‐containing plants Akoniton, Diktamnon, Mandragores, Mekon, 
Thyron  and  Colchicum  spp.  Historical  evidence  indicated  that  Daughter  of  Hecate, 
Circe, offered Ulysses with wine containing tropane alkaloids from solanaceae plants 
but Ulysses defended hallucinogenic effects by using Moly which is an antidote. It is also 
speculated  that  Ulysses  used  bulbs  of  lilies  which  contained  alkaloid  galanthamine 
which is also used to treat Alzheimer’s disease. Aztecs used alkaloids drugs for halluci-
nation, divination and magic‐religious purposes. In modern Mexico, shamans, witch 
doctors, herbalists and healers still exist. Aphrodisiacs with extracts of Hyoscyamus, 
Atropa and Datura was also famous. Decoction of alkaloids like atropine and many 
others from family solanaceae from A. belladona were used in flying ointments.

Alkaloid poisoning was a common practice in many African and South American 
tribes as curare was used as an arrow poison for many years. It contained alkaloids 
including tubocurarine, curarine, quinine and protocurarine from Strychnos toxifera, 
S. usambarensis, Chondrodendron tomentosum and Aconitum spp. S. usambarensis is 
widely distributed throughout tropical Africa for making curare. This plant is known to 
possess antiplasmodial activity due to alkaloid isostrychnopentamine.

Genus Strychnos contains more than 190 species which produce more than 300 a lkaloids. 
Alkaloids poisons were prepared directly through squeezing of plant extract. It was applied 
either  through  wooden  tips  of  arrows,  or  through  boiling  arrows  in  water  containing 
ground‐up plants or through addition of glutinous sap. In Africa and Asia, people used 
cardiac poisons, whereas South American preferred muscle‐poisoning p oisons. Socrates, 
the Greek philosopher was poisoned with hemlock infusion commonly known as poison 
hemlock, that is, Conium maculatum which contains coniine, N‐methylconiine, conhydrine 
and pseudoconhydrine. Plants alkaloids which have been known to involve in execution 
cases in history are aconitine, atropine, colchicine, mescaline, morphine, and strychnine.

9.1.2  Many Alkaloids are Psychoactive Compounds 
and Act as Neurotransmitters
Alkaloids may possess abilities to alter the mental state of human mind and therefore 
known as psychoactive. Clinical applications of alkaloids are due to their activity to 
maintain normal function of tissues and ganglic interactions. However, at lower doses 
they act as medicines, pain reliever, or stimulants. In higher doses, they cause toxicity. 
Therefore, they need to be used with care as alkaloids like sparteine acts as a stimulant 
in small doses while at higher doses it can paralyze autonomic ganglia.

Some alkaloids may bring human mind in a fake imaginary state and are known to 
induce hallucinogenic affects, like peyote and marijuana. Peyotes have been used over 
3000 years in many religious ceremonies. They are source of psychoactive compound 
mescaline  which  possesses  hallucinogenic  properties.  Alkaloids  like  caffeine  and 

216

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

cocaine act as stimulants because they excite and enhance mental alertness, reduce 
fatigue and hunger. Caffeine can release neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine, dopa-
mine,  noradrenaline,  gamma‐aminobutyric  acid,  and  serotonin,  which  effects  mood 
(Zhang, 2001) and also helps in developing concentration. Many psychoactive alkaloid‐
containing  drugs  act  as  neurotransmitters.  Papaveraceae  and  Solanaceae  are  well‐
known sources of psychoactive compounds. Morphine is the main component of opium 
poppies (Papaver somniferum) which is synthesized in unripe capsules. Heroin is an 
addictive synthetic derivative of morphine. Cocaine is also a potent stimulator which is 
isolated from Erythroxylon coca, coca plant.

9.2  Alkaloids are Synthesized in Cytosol and Accumulated 
in Vacuoles as They are Toxic for Plant Cells

Alkaloids are biosynthesized in the cytosol of parenchmya cells of young leaves, fruits, 
seeds, roots or bark. However, organelles like ER, plastids, mitochondria, and vacuoles 
are also reported to be involved in alkaloid biosynthesis.

9.2.1  Monoterpenoids Indole Alkaloids (MIA) Derivatives are Synthesized 
From Tryptophan
Alkaloids are classified into three main types according to their precursors molecules 
i. purine alkaloids which are biosynthesized from adenine and guanine, for example, 
caffeine ii. tropane alkaloids synthesized from tyrosine and iii. monoterpenoids indole 
alkaloids (MIA) which are derived from tryptophan.

Almost 2500 MIA are reported in large number of plant species (Zeigler & Facchini, 
2008). MIA accumulation takes place in leaf epidermis, where they might act as UV 
filter to protect internal tissues. Some of them have anti‐carcinogenic activities. Iridoids 
are present in families like Verbenaceae, Scrophulariaceae, Rubiaceae, Bignoniaceae, 
Lamiaceae and Oleaceae.

MIA synthesis in Catharanthus roseus takes place within internal phloem associated 
parenchyma, epidermal cells, and laticifers, indicating that these metabolites are shut-
tled within the cells (Zhu et al., 2015). C. roseus synthesizes vinblastine and vincristine 
along with 80 alkaloids (Figure 9.2). Vinblastine and vincristine can bind to microtu-
bules of spindle fibers and reduce mitosis at metaphase. They inhibit DNA synthesis 
and protein metabolism and are known to possess immunosupressive activities. They 
are also used in treatment of Hodgkin’s disease, as anti‐cancer compounds, and can 
treat many pulmonary and cerebral disorders.

9.2.2  Tropane Alkaloids are Tyrosine Derivatives
Almost more than 200 tropane alkaloids have been reported so far in many plant 
families (Queiroz et al., 2009). Most popular are atropine, cocaine and scopolamine. 
Tropane alkaloids are present in many plant families like Brassicaceae, Convolvulaceae, 
Erythroxylaceae,  Solanaceae,  Proteaceae  and  Rhizophoraceae.  Many  molecular 
t echniques  have  provided  information  on  evolution  of  tropane  synthesis  pathways. 
Structural genes which are involved in tropane biosynthesis are characterized in many 
members of Solanaceae. Almost 25 alkaloids are reported in convolvulaceae, among 
which convolvulin is a dominant alkaloid of family. Calystegia sepium, a member of 

OH

OH

MEP pathway

G10H

HO

H

HOOC

CH3

H

O

OGlc

HO

H

CH3OOC

OH

CH3

H

OGlc

CHO

H

CH3OOC

H

O

O

10–Hydroxy geraniol

Loganic acid

Loganin

Secologanin

Shikimate pathway

Geraniol
COO–

OH

Chorismate

O

COO–

N

N
H

H

H
H3COOC

CH3

H

O

N

H

N
H

H
H3COOC

N

H

Indole

CH3

O

COO–

NH2

TDC

NH2

N

H

Tryptamine

N

N
H

H

H
H3COOC

CH3

O

SGD

N
H

H

H
H3COOC

STR

NH

OGlc

O

N

H

Tryptophan

OH

N–

H

N
H

H
H3COOC

Ajmalicine

Cathenamine

4,21–Dehydrogeissoschizine

Epicathenamine

Strictosidine

Figure 9.2  Biosynthesis of vinblastine in C. roseus through MEP and shikimate pathways. Secologanin is synthesized from geraniol 
through MEP or through tryptamine in shikimate pathway. It is then converted into strictosidine which later forms ajmaline, which is 
another medicinally important alkaloid. During ajmaline formation from strictosidine, stemmadenine is formed. It forms 
catharanthine which is then converted into anhydrovinblastine, vinblastine and finally, forms vincristine. Solid arrows show confirmed 
enzymatic conversions, whereas the broken arrows indicate unknown enzymatic conversions Abbreviations used: G10H: geraniol 
10‐hydroxylase; TDC: Tryptophan decarboxylase; STR: strictosidine synthase; SGD: Strictosidine β‐D‐glucosidase; T16H: 16‐
hydroxylase; OMT:  
O‐methyltransferase; NMT: N‐methyltransferase; D4H: Desacetoxyvindoline 4‐hydroxylase; DAT: Deacetylvindoline‐4‐O‐
acetyltransferase; AVLBS: Anhydrovinblastine synthase (Zhu et al., 2015).

N

H

CH2OH

N
H

H3COOC

Stemmadenine

N

H

N
H

NNN

COOCH3

Tabersonine

N

N
H

COOCH3
Catharanthine

CH2CH3

N

N
H

H
COOCH3

CH3O

N

OH

H3CO

N

H3C H

OCOCH3

COOCH3

3߰,4߰–Anhydrovinblastine

OH

N

H

COOCH3

N
H

N

OH

N

H

OH

DAT

D4H

NMT

16–OMT TI6H

OCOCH3

N

H
CH3
Vindoline

COOCH3

AVLBS

OH

N

H
COOCH3

N
H

N

OH

H3CO

N
H3C

H

OCOCH3

COOCH3

Vinblastine

H3CO

N
OHC

H

OCOCH3

COOCH3

Vincristine

Figure 9.2 (Cont’d)

Alkaloids Biosynthesis, Translocation and Industrial Products

219

convolvulaceae, is composed of another sub‐class of tropane alkaloid, that is, calyste-
gines in its roots. There is some evidence of scopolamine synthesis in Solanaceae in 
Heisteria olivae which grows over 1000 m in Andean islands. Root hairs of Solanaceae 
are reported to be potential site of tropane synthesis.

9.3  Purine Nucleotides Serve as Precursors 
of Caffeine Synthesis

Purine alkaloids are found in more than 60 sub‐tropical plants. More than 10 species of 
Coffea and Theobroma contain purine alkaloids which synthesize caffeine and theobro-
mine (Figure 9.3). Theobromine is an immediate precursor of caffeine. Young leaves of 
coffee plants which are not fully expanded are actively involved in caffeine biosynthesis. 
Caffeine and theobromine are exclusively synthesized in green chlorophyll containing 
buds, leaves and shoots of coffee and tea seedlings but not in their roots and cotyledons 
(Figure 9.4). However, theobromine and caffeine biosynthesis occurs in cotyledons of 
cacao fruits. In Camillea spp, RNA in situ hybridization showed that caffeine‐synthase 
(CS) genes are expressed mainly in palisade parenchyma and epicuticle of tea leaves 
(Figure 9.5). Genes for CS have been cloned from tea leaves. CS of coffee is reported to 
have higher activity for theobromine than tea CS.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 9.3  (a‐c) (a) Tea fields in Thailand, (b) A close view of Camillea sp. (c) Flower of C. transnokoensis.

(a)

(c)

C. arabica

(b)

T.S of stem

Site of caffeine 

synthesis

T.S of leaf

(d)

Adenosine

Theobromine

Caffeine synthase

Caffeine

Palisade mesophyll

(e)

Adenosine

Theobromine

Caffeine synthase

Caffeine

Spongy mesophyll

Figure 9.4  (a‐e) Caffeine biosynthesis takes place in exposed parts of Coffea arabica in response to their predators which cannot 
consume them due to bitter taste of caffeine: (a) C. arabica, (b) Caffeine synthesis also takes place in of stem of coffee plant (T.S. of 
stem), (c) T.S. of leaf showing palisade and spongy mesophyll in which caffeine is synthesized, (d & e) Steps in caffeine biosynthesis in 
palisade and spongy mesophyll from adenosine as precursor. Caffeine synthase is main enzyme which converts theobromine in 
caffeine.

(d)

Camellia sinensis leaf

(a)

(b)

(c)

Adenosine 

GMP 

AMP 

Guanosine 

TMP 

XMP 

Xanthosine 

7-methylxanthine 

7-methylxanthine 

Theobromine 

Caffeine 

Sepals and petals synthesis caffeine 

L. S of (cid:31)ower

Figure 9.5  (a‐d) Caffeine biosynthesis in Camellia sinensis (tea) leaves and flowers (a) Leaf, (b) T.S. of C. sinensis leaf, (c) L. S. of flower, 
(d) Cell of young leaf showing main steps in caffeine formation from adenosine.

222

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Caffeine‐biosynthetic pathways in coffee plant involves three distinct N‐methyltrans-
ferases, xanthosine methyltransferases (XMT), 7‐N‐methylxanthine methyltransferase, 
(MXMT: theobromine synthases) and 3,7‐dimethylxanthine methyltransferase (DXMT; 
caffeine  synthase).  cDNA  isolation  of  CaXMT1,  CaMXMT1,  Ca  MXMT2,  and 
CADMXT1, respectively, showed that caffeine is indeed synthesized in vitro by combi-
nation of their gene products (Ogita et al., 2004). First N‐methyltransferase was cloned 
from tea leaves and was designated as caffeine synthase 1 (TCS 1).

Genes  encoding  enzymes  for  caffeine  biosynthesis  are  successfully  isolated  from 
plants of coffee family by PCR and library screening methods (Uefuji et al., 2003). Seven 
cDNA have been characterized from coffee plants, one for methylxanthosine methyl-
transferase (XMT/XRS), three for 7‐methyl xanthine methyltransferase or theobromine 
synthase  (MXMT/CTS)  and  three  for  3–7  dimethylxanthine  methyltransferase  or 
c affeine synthase (DXMT/CCS).

In order to reduce caffeine content in caffeine producing plants and to introduce 
c affeine biosynthetic pathways in non‐caffeine producing crops for making them resist-
ance  against  pests,  caffeine  biosynthesis  is  being  regulated  through  suppressing  the 
expression  of  CaMXMT1  by  double‐stranded  RNA  interference  (RNAi  method), 
somatic embryogenesis of C. arabica and C. canephora and through Agrobacterium‐
mediated transformation techniques. The RNAi transgenic lines of embryonic tissue 
derived  from  C.  arabica  and  transgenic  plantlets  of  C.  canephora  showed  a  clear 
r eduction in transcripts for CaMXMT1 in comparison with control. Embryonic tissue 
and plantlets showed reduction of theobromine and caffeine (30–50%) in transgenic 
decaffeinated coffee plants.

9.4  History of Discovery of Caffeine

There is evidence of use of caffeine containing plants for chewing purposes since stone 
age. Until the beginning of ninteenth century, coffee and tea were recognized as drugs. 
Around  700,000 B.C.  in  Paleolithic  times,  caffeine  yielding  plants  were  discovered. 
In seventeenth century, physician William Harvey (1578–1657) used coffee due to its 
medical benefits. The first written evidence of coffee is reported in tenth century in 
Arabian manuscript. Arabian people made a drink from crushing and fermentation of 
coffee beans and prepared the non‐alcoholic wine called qahwa. It is still consumed in 
Arabian countries due to its taste, health benefits and as a part of Arabian culture.

Earliest record of coffee drinking came from Rhazes Arabian physician of tenth cen-
tury. A European myths explains that Kaldi’s (goatherd) goats showed unusual behavior 
of dancing when they consumed leaves of a wild bush. Kaldi later tasted berries of wild 
bush and found effects as stimulating as goats. These evidences indicated that Kaldi 
introduced wild bush, coffee to native people. Some historical evidences also showed 
that coffee may have originated in Ethiopia and then it was introduced in North East 
Africa and then into Arabica.

Coffee became a popular drink and replaced wine in Southern Europe and beer in 
North. Historical evidences report that in 1700, there were over 2,000 coffee houses in 
London which became meeting point of merchants. Coffee trees were cultivated in 
Haiti in 1973. Later, In Brazil, coffee trees were cultivated and a railway was developed 
from a coffee growing region to major part. However, as a monoculture, coffee affected 

Alkaloids Biosynthesis, Translocation and Industrial Products

223

the  environment  of  Brazil.  Many  native  animals  were  destroyed  due  to  caffeine 
c onsumption and it also affected soil quality.

9.4.1  Caffeine Is a Popular Stimulant Alkaloid in Coffee and Teas
Caffeine is a popular alkaloid used worldwide, more commonly in form of tea and cof-
fee. Almost 60 plant species are known to synthesize caffeine naturally as a part of their 
defense system. However, Coffea spp, Camillea spp. and Cola spp. are main source of 
drinks like coffee, tea and cola. Red Bull is composed of 80 mg of caffeine per serving. 
Consuming high amount of caffeine may cause caffeine addiction which may cause 
nervousness, anxiety, insomnia and headache.

Although caffeine is extracted from leaves of Camillea species and from seeds of 
Coffea species which are commercially known as coffee beans but in plants like Paulina 
cupana it is synthesized in cotyledons, testa, arils and septa of guarana seeds.

Cola nuts of Cola acuminata and C. nitida also contain caffeine. They are ever‐green 
forest trees which resemble chestnut trees and attain height of almost 60 feet. They are 
native to Tropical West Africa but also cultivated in South America and then trans-
ported to India and China. Their nuts are brown in color. They are dried in sun to make 
medicines and soft drinks. Cola nuts also contain kolatin, a glycoside. They are associ-
ated with marriage proposals in Nigeria where red nut represents a refusal. Oaths are 
sworn on cola nuts and some times they are buried with dead.

Gotu cola is a swamp plant which is native to China. It is commonly known as Indian 
pennywort. It is used as herb and also known to prolong life. Gotu cola is used to cure 
cancer, leprosy and skin disorders. P. cupana and P. yoco are native to Amazon basin. 
They are also source of caffeine. In South America, a stimulating drink is made by roast-
ing and brewing of guarana seeds which some times is composed of more caffeine than 
coffee. Capsules of guarana seeds are sold under the name of ZING in the U.S. Catha 
edulis known as khat. It is an ever‐green shrub which is popular in Yemen. It produces 
white flowers and leaves which have stimulating effects due to cathinon which is used 
by  truck  drivers  in  Kenya.  Corynanthe  yohimbe  is  an  African  tree  which  produces 
yohimbine in its bark and gives it aphrodisiac properties.

Industrial Steps in Coffee Making Determines Their Aroma and Taste

9.4.2 
Although many plants are known to produce caffeine but world’s 75% production of 
caffeine  comes  from  C.  arabica.  It  is  an  ever‐green  shrub  with  shiny  leaves  and 
belongs to family Rubiaceae. It can survive for upto 35 years. It produces white flow-
ers which develop into a red berry bearing produce grayish coffee beans. Coffee plant 
requires tropical and subtropical climate for growth. Flowering starts within two to 
three years.

C. canephora is also cultivated for coffee production in many countries of Africa, Asia 
and Madagascar. C. liberica is also cultivated commercially for coffee formation in Asia. 
Contrary to common belief, dark roast of coffee beans is composed of less amount of 
caffeine than lighter roast. In addition to coffee and tea, yerba mate is largest source of 
caffeine around the world, due to alkaloid methylxanthine.

In Brazil and in tropical Africa, dry method is used for separation of coffee beans from 
fruit pulp during which berries are dried in sunlight. However, in humid areas wet method 
is  preferred  in  which  pulp  is  made  through  crushing  of  cherries.  It  is  followed  by 

224

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

separation of seed flesh and skin. Remnant of flesh fruit is freed from skin through fer-
mentation, or through mechanical treatment or with alkali or pectinase. Seeds are then 
washed,  dried,  hulled  and  polished,  then  sorted  for  storage  according  to  their  size 
and color.

Roasting  of  coffee  beans  is  a  prerequisite  step  during  brew  making  from  beans. 
Temperature and time of roasting determines aroma, taste and flavor of commercially 
available coffees. Light roast is preferred in North America. It is sweeter and done at 
temperature of 212–218°C, whereas dark roasting is done at 240°C and it gives bitter-
ness to coffee beans. Starch conversion in sugar takes place at temperature of 207°C, 
whereas at lower temperature sugar caramelization turns beans into brown color and at 
higher temperature (238°C) carbonization takes place during which sugar burns and 
leave behind carbon darkening beans. Aroma of coffee is due to its essential oil coffecol 
released  during  roasting.  Expensive  and  fine‐quality  coffee  is  grown  in  Yemen,  an 
exporter of mocha.

9.4.3  Supercritical CO2 Method is Efficient for Producing Decaffeinated Coffee
CO2 is used in its supercritical form to remove caffeine selectively from coffee. Pre‐
soaked coffee beans are placed at the top of high‐pressure extraction vessel which is 
filled with supercritical CO2. As beans move down to vessel, caffeine and water diffuse 
out of coffee beans which take up to five hours. The advantage of using supercritical 
CO2 method is that CO2 in its supercritical state can enter the beans as a gas and can 
also dissolve caffeine as liquid. Then caffeine‐rich CO2 and water are passed in another 
vessel which is followed by extraction of liquid caffeine. CO2 is re‐pressurized and re‐
used. Decaffeinated beans are sent to coffee industries, whereas caffeine is extracted 
from CO2 for use in soft drinks and for other pharmaceutical uses. More than 90% 
of caffeine is extracted from coffee beans through this method, however, methylene 
chloride and ethyl acetate are also used for removing caffeine but they are not as e fficient 
as supercritical CO2 method (Figure 9.6).

9.4.4  Teas are Representative of Culture, Tradition and Civilization
During the seventeenth century, when coffee was introduced to Europe from Turkey, 
Dutch traders brought tea home from China. Tea is also one of the world’s popular 
drinks which contains significant amount of caffeine, theobromine and theophylline. 
Aroma of boiling tea is due to its essential oil theol, however, other essential oils and 
tannins also determine aroma and taste of tea.

Different countries define teas according to their culture, civilization and taste, so 
there is no single definition of tea. Although only few species are source of coffee and 
tea but there is a lot of diversity in term of taste and flavors which is due to different 
steps involved in preparation, extraction, roasting and also due to difference in quality 
of plant species.

Today tea is produced from many plants among which C. sinensis is the most popular 
plant. It is a small tree which grows in climate ranging from Mediterranean to tropical 
between 2,600 feet. It requires areas of high rainfall. Layering is a common technique 
of tea cultivation in which a branch is bent and buried until it roots, however, it is a 
expensive method.

Water + Beans

ScCO2+Caffeine

Water

Caffeine

High Pressure
extraction vessel

Caffeine dissolves in water

 in absorption vessel

Water

ScCO2

Caffeine

Commercial use of caffeine

Decaffeinated Beans

Cosmetic products

Pharmaceutical products

Soda Drink

(Slimming products, perfumes, creams)

(Pain killers)

(Mountain Dew, Sprite, Coke)

Instant coffee

Cappuccino

Mocha

Espresso

Figure 9.6  Steps in industrial manufacture of decaffeinated coffee through supercritical CO2 method and uses of beans in beverage 
products. (See insert for color representation of the figure).

226

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

9.4.5  Black, Green and Oolong Teas
Many teas like black, green oolong, English teas are available in market and are repre-
sentative  of  culture.  Black  and  english  tea  is  preferred  in  many  western  countries, 
whereas oolong tea is popular in China. Green tea is popular in Japan while indian tea 
is  black.  However,  all  kind  of  teas  can  be  formed  from  one  genus,  and  as  already 
m entioned  differences  in  taste,  color  and  color  exist  depending  upon  steps  of  their 
preparation.  Almost  70%  of  UK  individuals  drink  coffee,  whereas  86%  drink  tea. 
On average, each person consumes almost three and a half cups of coffee or tea per day.
Black tea is produced through the drying out of withered leaves, and then crushing 
through  roller.  Crushed  leaves  are  further  oxidized  and  fermented.  Black  tea  when 
infused for few minutes comprise of almost 40–100 mg of caffeine but when time of 
infusion  increases,  amount  of  caffeine  becomes  less.  Green  tea  is  manufactured 
through steaming of freshly picked leaves. It has less caffeine than black tea. Oolong tea 
is prepared in almost similar way, and therefore share almost same flavor of black and 
green tea (Figure 9.7). However, it is fermented relatively for a shorter period of time 
which gives it light brown color. Teas are composed of many tannins and polyphenols 
which act as anti‐carcinogens and interfere with enzymes which can cause cancer.

Steaming

Drying

Tea

Plucking

Steaming
at 95°C 

Rolling
at 75°C 

Drying
at 90°C 

Withering

Shaking

Rolling

Partial 

fermentation

Full 

fermentation

Drying

Firing

White tea

Green tea

Oolong tea

Black tea

Green
Tea

Lemon
Tea

Figure 9.7  Main steps in making of Green, English and Black tea.

Alkaloids Biosynthesis, Translocation and Industrial Products

227

9.5  Theobromine is an Alkaloid Widely Used 
in Chocolates and Teas

Caffeine was introduced to Europe in the form of chocolates. Archaeological evidence 
indicated that cocoa beans were first source of caffeine in the New World. Cacao beans 
are also source of theobromine which is found in seeds pods of cacao tree and is main 
alkaloid in making chocolates. The cacao tree Theobroma cacao produces flowers and 
fruits  throughout  year.  Leaves  are  evergreen  and  fruits  develop  from  tree  trunk. 
Ripening of fruit pod takes five to six months which contain 20 to 50 almond‐like seeds 
or beans surrounded by sweet thin pulp. Criollo, Forastero and Trinitario are major 
varieties of T. cacao cultivated commercially. Criollo is most expensive and is rarely 
used. It comprises less than 1% of the worldwide cacao market.

Cacao beans are high‐energy food which are also helpful in reducing weight (Wolfe, 
2010). Their health and nutritive value is due to antioxidants including polyphenols, 
catechins,  and  epicatechin,  magnesium,  iron,  chromium,  manganese,  zinc,  copper, 
v itamin  C  and  omega‐6  fatty  acid.  In  addition  they  also  contain  phenylethylamine, 
anandamide, tryptophan, serotonin, soluble fiber, methylxanthines (caffeine and theo-
bromine) and cardiovascular cleansing compounds, that is, N‐caffeoyldopamine and 
N‐coumaroyldopamine. Chocolates, contain anandamine, which binds with receptor in 
brain as the phenolic compound. Anandamide is only found in cacao which acts as 
endorphin.  When  it  is  released,  we  feel  great.  In  order  to  get  the  maximum  health 
b enefits of cacao, it is recommend that one should get raw cacao products which can be 
either blended in some beverage or sprinkled over some desserts.

Cacao beans were used by Mexico, as early as 1500 B.C. Columbus presented coffee 
beans  to  King  Ferdinand  of  Spain  after  returning  from  his  fourth  voyage.  In  1528, 
Hernan  Cortez,  referred  to  cacao  by  Aztec  description  drinks  of  god.  He  described 
‘cacao as divine drink which reduces fatigue and a cup of cacao beans gives energy to 
walk a whole day without any food’. (Wolfe, 2010). Cacao beans were very popular in 
Mayans and Aztecs. They used beans instead of gold as money. Aztecs called cacao 
beans as cacao yollotl eztli meaning heart blood due to its healthy effects on cardiovas-
cular system. The Aztec Emperor Montezeuma drunk 50 jars of spiced drink Chocolatl 
which is composed of cacao beans due to its aphrodisiac properties (Beckett, 2007). 
Upto sixteenth century, chocolate was used only by rich people. Its use spread eventu-
ally from royal court of Spain to France, Italy, Holland and then to the rest of Europe 
where  it  was  combined  with  cane  sugar,  whereas  native  Americans  preferred  bitter 
chocolates. Addition of sugar to cacao alters its healing and nutritive properties. In 1867, 
Swiss chemist Henri Nestle’ produced powdered milk through evaporation which lead 
to formation of the Nestle’ business which is one of the largest food corporation in 
world. Later on, Daniel Peter used powdered milk in chocolate and in 1879 the first milk 
chocolate bar was produced.

9.5.1  Chocolate Formation: From Cacao Beans to Markets
Post harvest process of chocolate formation involves drying and fermentation on farms. 
During these steps, cacao flavour precursors are formed in cotyledons. Microorganisms 
breakdown pulp surrounding the beans during fermentation process which may last 
upto 10 days. Anaerobic yeasts, lactic acid bacteria and acetic acid bacteria ferment 

228

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

fruit pulp during different stages of fermentation causing death of beans. After fermen-
tation and drying, beans are shipped to remote areas and further process of chocolates 
formation varies according to industries and chocolate type. However, most of the steps 
followed are same which involve initial roasting of beans through steam (at 135°C) for 
developing the chocolate flavours. Roasted beans are sent to mill which separates the 
kernel (nib) from shells through sieve. A dark‐brown liquor is made from nibs in rolling 
process. Excessive cacao butter is removed from liquor through large press. In milk 
chocolates, milk and sugar are added to liquor, whereas in the case of plain bars extra 
cacao butter replaces the milk. Next, evaporator removes moisture from liquor and 
converts it into crumbs which are sent to a spinning roller for making them smooth. 
During a process, conching, bitterness of paste is removed and flavors are added. In 
tempering, which is a cooling process, chocolates bar is given its final finish which is 
followed by flowing of chocolates in moulds, wrapping and packing for distribution to 
market (Figure 9.8).

9.6  Clinical Applications of Alkaloids are Due to Their 
Mode of Action

A common property of medicinally important alkaloids is to act as neurotransmitters. 
Alkaloids like aconitine, ajmaline, sanguinarine and sparteine, act by influencing Na+ 
channels and interacting with receptors. Aconitine regulates activity of Na+ channels 
and receptor activity by first causing their influx across membranes, and later it blocks 
the enzymatic activity of nerve receptor. Ajmaline also targets Na+ channels and blocks 
them which results in decrease in heart rate. However, it can also maintain arrhythmic 
defects. Sanguinarine inhibits both esterase activity and interferes with Na+ channels 
activity. Alkaloids like atropine, hyoscine and hyoscyamine are known to regulate mes-
caric cholinergic receptor activity (Aniszewski, 2007). Nicotine, galanthamine, eserine 
and tubocurarine influence acetylcholine esterase activities.

Drugs like Periblastine and Velban contain vinblastine, whereas vincristine is used in 
Norcristine and in Pericristine. Berberine inhibits esterases and DNA and RNA poly-
merases. Due to its activity to inhibit HIV‐1 reverse transcriptase activity, it can also be 
used in treatment of AIDS. Currently, it is used in treatment of eye infections and in 
hepatitis. Caffeine, cathine, theobromine and theophylline have stimulating effects.

Caffeine is also known to inhibit phosphodiesterase activity. It also increases cAMP 
activity which has a competitive effect on central adenosine receptor and can increase 
analgesic  activity.  Caffeine  is  used  in  more  than  300  different  drugs.  Analgen  and 
Panex contain caffeine, whereas Amorphan and Recatol contain cathine. Atrofed and 
Seominal  are  theobromine‐derived  drugs.  Theophylline  is  used  in  over  200  drugs, 
commonly used are theochron and euphyllin. Quinidex and Quinalan contain quini-
dine, whereas quinine is used in Adaquin and Biquinate. Caffeine tablets are also avail-
able in market to give mental alertness. They are lipid and water‐soluble and can cross 
the plasma membrane of neurons. Caffeine is a powerful bronchodilator in asthma 
patients and provides possible protection against advanced pulmonary effect of smok-
ing. It is effective as therapy for neonatal apnea and treatment of atopic dermatitis. 
Caffeine can also help in removing of symptoms of attention deficit disorder (ADD). 
It decreases blood flow to brain and therefore used in treatment of migraine headaches 

(a) 

(b) 

(d) 

Cacao seeds

Drying of cacao seeds on 

reed mat

(c) 

Fermentation

Cacao tree

Rolling of beans

Winnowing

Roasting

Collection and transportation of

(e) 

cacao seeds

(f) 

Mixing with milk

& sugar 

Re(cid:4)ning

Conching

Tempering and molding

Chocolate bars

Figure 9.8  (a‐f) Chocolate formation: From cacao beans (Theobroma cacao) to chocolate. Main steps include: (a) Drying 
of beans, (b) Fermentation, (c) Roasting at 135°C, (d) Rolling of beans to form a brown liquor, (e) Conching removes 
bitterness of paste, (f) Tempering gives final shape to chocolate bar.

230

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

and known to increase effectiveness of analgesics like aspirin. Caffeine is also known 
to  reduce  risk  of  Parkinson’s  disease  in  coffee  drinkers.  However,  a  fatal  dose  of 
c affeine can be harmful at about 10 grams by average‐sized adults and coffee is also 
known  to  contain  suspected  carcinogens  like  creosote,  pymdine,  and  some  tars 
p roducing during roasting.

9.7  Development of Physiologically Functional Food 
Containing Alkaloids as Food Vaccines

Research is being conducted by many agricultural and food industries to modify alka-
loid contents in many plants. Alkaloid rich (bitter) and alkaloid poor (sweeter) varieties 
are being developed through breeding and hybridization techniques to meet different 
objectives. Alkaloid content is being removed in many crops to provide food for forag-
ing and feed. Efforts are being made to introduce genes for caffeine synthase in non‐
c affeine producing transgenic plants with increased insecticidal properties. The idea of 
using alkaloids as physiological functional food and as natural plant‐based vaccines is 
also increasing. One of the current objectives of agricultural industries is to introduce 
alkaloids  in  edible  plants  in  plants  which  do  not  synthesize  alkaloids  which  act  as 
food  vaccines.  However,  this  need  to  be  done  carefully  as  alkaloids  are  safe  in  low 
c oncentrations, whereas at higher concentration they may pose harmful effects. Idea of 
producing food vaccines is likely to develop in future for treatment of diseases like 
cancer and AIDS.

9.7.1  Development of Transgenic Caffeine Resistant Plants
While some research is focussing to increase caffeine content in some pathogen‐sen-
sitive crops in order to increase their resistance against pathogens, biotechnologist are 
also  working  to  develop  transgenic  plants  with  low  caffeine  or  without  caffeine. 
Therefore, two types of transgenic plants are synthesized using gene sequence of N‐
methyltransferases  (involved  in  caffeine  biosynthesis),  that  is,  decaffeinated  plants 
and caffeine‐synthesizing plants. Transgenic plants with modified caffeine contents 
are synthesized through introducing antisense or double‐stranded RNA interference 
(RNAi)  constructs  for  caffeine  synthase  genes  into  coffee  or  tea  (Mohanpuria 
et al., 2011).

Introduction of caffeine biosynthesis in non‐caffeine producing plants is achieved 
through multi‐gene transfer system, which involves cDNA for all three N‐methyltrans-
ferases  of  coffee  plants  (Uefuji  et  al.,  2003).  These  transgenic  caffeine‐producing 
tobacco plants and caffeine‐producing chrysanthemum plants are more resistant to 
herbivores, fungal and bacterial pests and aphids due to presence of caffeine which acts 
as  acts  as  internal  pesticide.  Caffeine‐producing  transgenic  plants  are  synthesized 
using tobacco to repel insect pests and to provide resistance against viral and bacterial 
infections (Figure 9.9).

In beverage industries, decaffeinated drinks are manufactured through supercritical 
fluid expression with CO2 which not only reduces the caffeine content but produces 
products  with  desired  fragrance  and  taste.  However,  through  molecular  breeding 
approach aromatic coffee can be produced with reduced caffeine content.

Alkaloids Biosynthesis, Translocation and Industrial Products

231

Isolation of genes encoding
biosynthesis from Coffea sp. 
and incorporation in plasmid 

(b)

(a)

A. tumefaciens

(c)

Coffee plant

tobacco cutworm

Tobacco plant

Transgenic tobacco plant

Figure 9.9  (a‐c) Steps in development of pesticide resistant transgenic tobacco (N. tabacum) plant 
against tobacco cut worms by encoding genes of caffeine synthesis from Coffea sp. (a) Isolation of 
gene encoding N‐methyltransferases for caffeine biosynthesis is followed by in vitro formation of 
recombinant enzyme. A plasmid is constructed with multigenes in pB1221 (containing genes of 
interest of cDNA Coffea clones, CaMxMT1, CaXMT1 and CADXMT1) (b) Transformation of N. tobacum 
with Agrobacterium tumefaciens containing genes for caffeine biosynthesis. RT‐PCR is used to confirm 
expression of genes. Transgenic plantlets grown in chamber and pots and followed by extraction of 
caffeine and theobromine. Transgenic plants are tested for pathogen attack by leaf disc method, 
(c) Transgenic pesticide resistant tobacco plants are no more sensitive to tobacco cut worms.

9.7.2  Use of Caffeine in Cosmetic Products
Caffeine is used in many cosmetic products due to its high biological activity and due to 
its ability to penetrate the skin barrier. It is used in anti‐cellulite products which act as 
topical pharmaceutical and affect the occurrence of fats in women. They prevent exces-
sive accumulation of fats in cells through inhibition of phosphodiesterase activity dur-
ing  lipolysis.  A  significant  reduction  in  thigh  and  hip  circumference  is  reported  in 
women after one month of cellulite treatment. It also protects skin cells against UV 
radiation and delays photo aging (Herman & Herman, 2013). Addition of caffeine to 
sunscreen cosmetics reduces the formation of free radicals in skin cells and protect skin 
against UV‐induced skin cancer (Koo et al., 2007). Recently, caffeine is also reported to 
increase hair growth through microcirculation of blood and through inhibition of 5‐α‐
reductase activity which is responsible for causing baldness. It stimulates rapid growth 
of hairs by increasing capillary vessel microcirculation in skin cells of head and p roviding 
them with nutrients for their growth. Caffeine is also known to be helpful in reducing 
swelling around eye tissues (Figure 9.10).

9.7.3  Alkaloids in Medicinal Products
Atropa  belladona,  also  known  as  deadly  nightshade  is  major  source  of  atropine.  It 
belongs to Nightshade family Solanaceae. Atropine biosynthesis is reported to occur in 
all parts of plant. It contains also other alkaloids like cuscohygrine, hyoscyamine and 
scopolamine.  Drops  extracted  from  plant  are  used  to  dilate  pupil  of  eyes  by  many 
women, however, long exposure can also cause blindness. Five to 10 berries of Atropa 
can kill a person (Figure 9.11). Plant is also used as aphrodisiac and as hallucinogens due 

Main uses of caffeine

Pharmaceutical

products

Cosmetics
products

Agricultural 
Programs 

Caffeine

based

slimming 

creams

Effective 
against skin

cancer

Development of

herbicide & pesticide

resistant varieties
by incorporating 

genes for

caffeine synthesis

in plants like

tobacco

Formation of 

decaffeinated varieties
to make them edible
for forage & cattle

Use caffeine in 
mosquito spray

Forming 

physiologically 

functioned

food

containing alkaloids

as food vaccines

Figure 9.10  Main uses of caffeine in commercial products.

Alkaloids Biosynthesis, Translocation and Industrial Products

233

(a) Atropa belladonna

(b) Flower bud

(c) Flower

Figure 9.11  (a‐c) (a) Atropa belladona is a poisonous plant due to main alkaloid atropine which is 
synthesized almost in all parts of plant. It also contains alkaloids like cuscohygrine, hyoscyamine and 
scopolamine, (b) flower bud, (c) flower.

to presence of different alkaloids. Atropine was used as an arrow poison by Livia, wife 
of Emperor Augustus and Argipinna to kill their contemporaries. Cleopatra applied 
atropine to dilate her pupils for giving an attractive appearance. Decoctions and powder 
of belladona is used for recreational drugs and for pharmaceutical uses in cosmetic 
products.  Many  other  plants  like  Datura  stramonium,  D.  metel,  Mandragora  offici-
narum are also source of atropine. Genus Datura (Thornapple) from nightshade family 
also contains atropine, hyoscyamine and hyoscine.

Aconitine is used in folk medicine as anesthetic and as a remedy against heart disease 
and pulmonary. Aconitum napellus and A. vulparia (devil’s helmet) are main sources of 
aconitine. Aconitine was used as arrow poison in Europe, Asia and Alaska. It is men-
tioned as a deadly poison by Juvenal, Ovid, Plutarch, and Theophrastus (Wink, 1998). 
Aconitine can be resorbed in skin and reduces acetylcholine synaptically. It can activate 
sodium channels causing paralysis and anesthesia. Aconitine poisoning includes mouth 
tingling, after few minutes of taking an over‐dose which is followed by salivation and 
burning pain in throat. Abdominal pain and vomiting starts after 30 minutes, affecting 
cardiac  and  respiratory  systems  which  slow  down.  Pupil  dilation  and  contraction 
occurs. Death occurs within three hours due to heart failure and victim remains con-
scious throughout. If aconitine is taken as a medicine, autopsy shows signs of asphyxia. 

234

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

In 1880, surgeon George Lamson poisoned his nephew with aconitine and jury was guided 
by only fact that Lamson was known to get aconitine. Bronpax, aconitysat, etermol, pec-
tovox, pulmoxeedol, serop famel, vocadys are important aconitine containing pharmaceu-
tical medicinal products used for treatment of rheumatism, neuralgia, and sciatica.

One  of  the  well‐known  tropane  alkaloid  produced  by  Erthroxylum  coca  leaves  is 
cacoaine, known as “Devil’s leaf” in Spanish era. Archaeological evidence indicated use 
of coca leaves at least 8000 years ago in Peruvian house floor. E. coca is a small tree, 
native to Andes mountains and source of cocaine. Chewing of leaves is a common prac-
tice in Adean laborers. Since alkaloids are found as salts within plants, so consumption 
of  coca  leaves  with  lime  converts  cocaine  salt  in  cocaine,  which  is  easily  absorbed 
through mucous membrane in freebasing. Cocaine acts as natural pesticides for tobacco 
hornworm when sprayed on tomato leaves. It is stored as chlorogenic acid complex in 
vacuoles of palisade parenchmya of leaves.

Serturner,  a  German  pharmacist  isolated  morphine  and  codeine  from  opium  poppy 
(Papaver somniferum) in ninteenth century. These alkaloids share some structural simi-
larities but morphine is stronger than codeine. They are synthesized within the parench-
mya cells of fruit capsule of opium. Many other alkaloids which are isolated from opium 
are collectively known as opiates. Morphine is one of the strongest pain killer and addictive 
drug. Codeine is also used to suppress cough. It is similar to heroine but later is more easily 
absorbed by the bloodstream, producing a rapid euphoric by those who become addicted.
Papaver somniferum (opium or poppy) is one of the major source of morphine. Opium 
is native to East Mediterranean region. It was used due to its healing properties by the 
Greeks, Phoenicians Minoans, Egyptians, Babylon’s, and other civilizations of antiquity. 
Alexander the Great, around 330 B.C., took opium to Russia and India from where the 
civilization  slowly  spread  eastwards  and  reached  China.  By  the  eighteenth  century, 
many artists, writers and poets used opium to achieve dreamlike state that was thought to 
enhance creativity. Since it was cheaper than alcohol, it was used by poor as chief intoxi-
cant. Even babies were dosed with opium that contained 10% morphine. Opium contains 
almost 24 alkaloids, morphine is the most dominant part of opium extract, a sticky secre-
tion from poppy flower pod. Pure morphine was isolated from poppy latex in 1890 by a 
German Apothecary, Friedrich Serturner. He named the compound as morphine, after 
Morpheus, god of dreams. Morphine is a narcotic, it can numb the senses or can remove 
the pain. Today morphine and related compounds are effective pain killers, however, pain 
killing property is associated with addiction. Enzymes for morphine formation, that is, 
O‐methyl transferases and O‐acetyl transferases are found in parenchmya cells of vascular 
bundles in stem and capsules of opium as revealed by immunofluorescence analyses using 
antibodies specific for these enzymes. Some research work reports that sieve elements 
of poppy comprise enzymes required for morphine synthesis. However, transport of 
intermediate to laticifers possibly involves transfer of ABC transporters.

All tobacco industries of world rely on alkaloid nicotine which is produced by roots of 
tobacco plants. Nicotine is one of the widely used addictive substance which is produced 
by Nicotiana spp. which are native to America. It is formed in root of tobacco plants and 
carried along xylem sap into roots and leaves of plants. Christopher Columbus, at the 
end of his second voyage, in 1496, brought tobacco back from New World. Tobacco 
used spread rapidly despite several penalties on its possession. Chinese smoked opium 
instead of nicotine because it was banned by the Ming Dynasty, in the middle of the 
seventeenth  century.  Nicotine  and  morphine  are  absorbed  directly  in  bloodstream 
through smoke inhaled into the lungs. Nicotine sulphate is a by‐product of tobacco 

Alkaloids Biosynthesis, Translocation and Industrial Products

235

industry. It is used in the fumigating of greenhouses. So far, no insect is reported to be 
resistant to nicotine due to its toxicity of pyridine and pyrrolidine ring.

Polyamine  putrescine  serves  as  precursor  for  synthesis  of  nicotine  in  roots  of 
N. tobacum. Ornithine or arginine synthesize putrescine, which is further converted 
into N‐methylputrescine by an enzyme N‐methyltransferase (Xu et al., 2004). Putrescine 
can also form spermidine which is later converted into spermine and quinolinic acid, 
and forms nicotine through pyridine nucleotide cycle. N‐methylputrescine synthesizes 
nicotine through the formation of diamine oxidase.

Original source of quinine is bark of Quina Cinchona tree which is native to South 
America. Quinine bark is well‐known due to its anti‐malarial properties. Woodward 
and Doering got the Nobel Prize in 1965 for the discovery of the structure of quinine. 
It is also used in cosmetics due to its astringent, anti‐dandruff and hair‐stimulating 
properties.  However,  the  use  of  quinine  and  quinine  salt  is  restricted  to  shampoos 
and hair lotions. Biquinate, Quinidex and Quinalan are quinine‐containing drugs with 
anti‐malarial properties.

9.7.4  Future Challenges for Agriculture and Cosmetic Industries
Caffeine‐derived  pesticides  need  to  be  developed  in  future  due  to  insecticidal  and 
p esticidal activities of caffeine. In order to produce disease‐resistant plants, genes from 
caffeine and other alkaloid‐producing plants are being inserted in other plants to pro-
duce  transgenic  plants  which  provide  protection  against  disease‐causing  organisms, 
however, these efforts are being practiced only for few plants, and so far no transgenic 
plants with modified caffeine contents are marketed yet, so in future, the research need 
to be focussed on yielding caffeinated disease‐resistant varieties (Figure 9.12). Food 
containing a lkaloids as vaccines can be helpful in the treatment of many diseases.

Ouch! “its hurts” 

Hey! “I am your friend, I am 
going to give you my genes 
through bacteria, the worms
will not eat you anymore.”

“Come and try to 

eat me now!”

Figure 9.12  Cartoon illustration of transgenic pest‐resistant tobacco plant by incorporating genes of 
caffeine synthesis from Coffea. sp.

236

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

There is a need to further explore anti‐aging properties of caffeine and to increase its 
applications in skin care products. Caffeine‐based health perfumes can be introduced 
which may provide protection against bacterial, viral and fungal infections. The concept 
of  slimming  through  caffeine‐containing  anti‐cellulite  products  is  also  progressing. 
Caffeine is known to stimulate hair growth through inhibition of enzyme activity which 
causes baldness, therefore, caffeine‐containing hair dyes, shampoos or hair oils need to 
be  introduced  in  markets  which  allow  caffeine  to  penetrate  in  skin  cells  (not  other 
chemicals) in order to stimulate hair growths. However, more research is required to 
know the appropriate doses and ways of caffeine penetration in skin and to further 
increase its application in cosmetic products.

Safer techniques for administration of alkaloids‐based drugs in human bodies are in 
progress as major limitation with use of vincristine and vinblastine drugs is their cyto-
toxic  effects  on  surrounding  tissues  which  restricts  their  use  in  clinical  treatments. 
Although  efficient  transformation  methods  for  somatic  embryos  of  C.  arabica  and 
C. canephora are established using Agrobacterium EHA101 strain but there is a need 
to  develop  cell  culture  systems  and  tissue  culture  techniques  in  order  to  increase 
p harmaceutical applications of alkaloids particularly in woody trees.

References

Aniszewski, T. (2007). Alkaloids‐Secrets of Life: Alkaloids Chemistry, Biological 

Significance, Applications and Ecological Role, Elsevier Science.

Beckett, S.T. (2007). Industrial Chocolate Manufacture and Use, John Wiley & Sons.
Herman, A. & Herman, A.P. (2013). ‘Caffeine’s Mechanism of Action and Its Cosmetic Use’, 

Skin Pharmacology and Physiology, 26, pp. 8–14.

Koo, S.W., Hirakawa, S., Fujii, S., Kawasumi, M., & Nghiem, P. (2007). ‘Protection from 

photodamage by topical application of caffeine after ultraviolet irradiation’, British 
Journal of Dermatology, 156, pp. 957–964.

Mohanpuria, P., Kumar, V., Ahuja, P.S., & Yadav, S.K. (2011). ‘Producing low‐caffeine tea 

through post‐transcriptional silencing of caffeine synthase mRNA’, Plant Molecular 
Biology, 76, pp. 523–534.

Ogita, S., Uefuji, H., Morimoto, M., & Sano, H. (2004). ‘Application of RNAi to confirm 
theobromine as the major intermediate for caffeine biosynthesis in coffee plants with 
potential for construction of decaffeinated varieties’, Plant Molecular Biology, 54, pp. 931–941.

Queiroz, E.F., Zanolari, B., Marston, A., Guilet, D., Burgener, L., Paulo, M.Q., & 

Hostettmann, K. (2009). ‘Two new tropane alkaloids from the bark of Erythroxylum 
vacciniifolium Mart. (Erythroxylaceae)’, Natural Products Communications, 4, 
pp. 1337–1340.

Thielecke, F. & Boschmann, M. (2009). ‘The potential role of green tea catechins in the 

prevention of the metabolic syndrome ‐ A review’, Phytochemistry, 1, pp. 11–24.

Uefuji, H., Ogita, S., Yamaguchi, Y., Koizumi, N., & Sano, H. (2003). ‘Molecular cloning and 

functional characterization of three distinct N‐ methyltransferases involved in the 
caffeine biosynthetic pathway in coffee plants’, Plant Physiology, 132, pp. 372–380.

Wink, M. (1998). A Short History of Alkaloids. Springer Science + Business Media, LLC.
Wolfe, D. (2010). Superfoods: The Food and Medicine of The Future, North Atlantic Book 

Publishers.

Alkaloids Biosynthesis, Translocation and Industrial Products

237

Wright, G.A., Baker, D.D., Stabler, D., Mustard, J.A., Power, E.F., Borland, A.M., & 

Stevenson, P.C. (2013). ‘Caffeine in floral nectar enhances a pollinator’s memory of 
reward’, Science, 339, pp. 1202–1204.

Xu, B., Sheehan, MJ., & Timko, M.P. (2004). ‘Differential induction of ornithine 

decarboxylase (ODC) gene family members in transgenic tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum 
L. cv. Bright Yellow 2) cell suspensions by methyl‐jasmonate treatment’, Plant Growth 
Regulation, 44, pp. 101–116.

Ziegler, J. & Facchini, P.J. (2008). ‘Alkaloid biosynthesis: Metabolism and trafficking’, 

Annual Reviews of Plant Biology, 59, pp. 735–769.

Zhang, W.Y. (2001). ‘A benefit‐risk assessment of caffeine as an analgesic adjuvant’, 

Drug Safety, 24, pp. 1127–1142.

Zhu, J., Wang, M., Wen, W., & Yu, R. (2015). ‘Biosynthesis and regulation of terpenoid 

indole alkaloids in Catharanthus roseus’, Pharmacognosy Reviews, 9, pp. 24–28.

Further Reading

Ashihara, H., Kato, M., & Chuang‐xing, Y. (1998). ‘Biosynthesis and metabolism of purine 

alka loids in leaves of cocoa tea (Camellia ptilophylla)’, Journal of Plant Research, 111, 
pp. 599–604.

Fujimori, N. & Ashihara, H. (1994). ‘Biosynthesis of theobromine and caffeine in 

developing leaves of Coffea arabica’,  Phytochemistry, 36, pp. 1359–1361.

Kato, M., Mizuno, K., Crozier, A., Fujimura, T., & Ashihara, H. (2000). ‘Caffeine synthase 

gene from tea leaves’, Nature, 406, pp. 956–957.

Kato, M. & Mizuno, K (2004). ‘Caffeine synthase and related methyltransferases in plants’, 

Frontiers in Plant Bioscience, 9, pp. 1833–1842.

Kim, Y.S. & Sano, H. (2008). ‘Pathogen resistance in transgenic tobacco plants producing 

caffeine’, Phytochemistry, 69, pp. 882–888.

Mizuno, K., Okuda, A., Kato, M., Yoneyama, N., Tanaka, H., Ashihara, H., & Fujimura, T. 
(2003). ‘Isolation of a new dual‐functional caffeine synthase gene encoding an enzyme 
for the conversion of 7‐methylxanthine to caffeine from coffee (Coffea arabica L.)’, 
FEBS Letters, 534, pp. 75–81.

Ogawa, M., Herai, Y., Koizumi, N., Kusano, T., & Sano, H. (2001). ‘7‐Methylxanthine 

methyltransferase of coffee plants: gene isolation and enzymatic properties’, Journal of 
Biological Chemistry, 276, pp. 8213–8218.

Smith, A. (2002). ‘Effects of caffeine on human behavior’, Food & Chemical Toxicology, 40, 

pp. 1243–1255.

Van der Heijden, R., Jabos, D., Snoeijer, W., Hallarad, D., & Verpoorte, R. (2004). ‘The 

Catharanthus alkaloids: Pharmacognosy and Biotechnology. Current Medicinal 
Chemistry’, 11, pp. 607–528.

Weinberg, B.A. & Bealer, B.K. (2001). The World of Caffeine: The Science and Culture of 

the World’s Most Popular Drug, Routledge Press.

238

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Problems Chapter 9

1  Select the best answer from options given below.

 

 

 

 

 

 

i.  Alkaloids contribute to the bitter taste of many plants and defensive c ompounds 

of many plants. However, one of the following is not an example of alkaloid:
A  morphine
B  opium
C  cocaine
D  saponin

ii.  Vinblastine is an important drug with anti‐carcinogenic potential and biosyn-

thesized naturally in ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐.
A  Butea monosperma
B  Delonix regia
C  Nicotiana tobaccum
D  Catharanus roseus

iii.  One of the following is a common method for producing decaffeinated coffee at  

an industrial scale.
A  Swiss water decaffination method
B  Dry and wet method
C  Super‐critical CO2 method
D  Ethy acetate method

iv.  Caffeine synthesis can take place in almost all organs of Camillea spp. but it is 

not synthesized in ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐.
A  roots
B  flower buds
C  flowers
D  leaves

v.  One of the critical factors during roasting of coffee beans which determines 

their sweet or bitter taste is ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐.
A  temperature
B  time of roasting
C  plant source of coffe beans
D  all of above

vi.  One of the following alkaloid can inhibit activity of HIV‐1 reverse transcriptase, 

and therefore, it can be used in treatment of AIDS.
A  Atropine
B  Berberidine
C  Ajmaline
D  Galanthamine

Alkaloids Biosynthesis, Translocation and Industrial Products

239

vii.  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐  from  Strychnos  spp  was  employed  by  many  South  American 

tribes as a poison.
A  Curare
B  Strychnine
C  Digitalis
D  Laetrile

2  Give an example of any five alkaloids of medicinal importance with their clinical 

applications.
i.  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
ii.  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
iii.  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
iv.  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
v.  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

3  Explain various steps required in the commercial extraction of caffeine for use in 

soda drinks.

4  How would you relate role of teas according to their cultures and civilization?
5  Differentiate role of caffeine and theobromine in Coffea spp. and Theobroma cacao.
6  Fill in the empty spaces in table below by giving examples of plants which synthesize 

the following alkaloids with their synthesis and their pharmaceutical applications.

Alkaloids

Plants

Synthesis

Pharmaceutical
product with
application

Applications in plant breeding

Aconitine
Ajmaline
Atropine
Berberine
Caffeine
Cathine
Cocaine
Codeine
Galanthamine
Hyoscyamine
Morphine
Nicotine
Papaverine
Quinine

(Continued )

240

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(Continued )

Alkaloids

Plants

Synthesis

Pharmaceutical
product with
application

Applications in plant breeding

Strychnine
Theobromine
Theophylline
Vinblastine
Vincamine
Vincristine

7  How alkaloid‐synthesizing plants can be used to make insecticidal and pesticidal 
transgenic plants? Explain various steps including isolation of N‐methyltransferases 
from coffee plants and formation of transgenic tobacco plants.

8  Explain various steps in biosynthesis of:

A  caffeine in tea leaves
B  vindoline in prewinkle flowers

9  Theobromine is main alkaloid which is used in making of chocolates from beans of 
cacao tree. Go to the chocolate section of your nearest superstore, get chocolates 
(any 10) of your choice. Go through main ingredients and try to find out products 
which are plant‐based. Also make a possible scheme for making chocolate starting 
from the harvesting of cacao beans.

241

10

Nectaries, Carnations and Ornamental Hybrid 
Flowers in Floriculture

10.1 

Introduction

Ability of plants to synthesize carbohydrates and protein‐rich fluid nectar in response 
to their pollinators have fascinated earlier biologists. Floral nectar is synthesized by 
flowers, whereas extra floral nectar (EFN) may be synthesized by any part of plant 
other  than  flower.  Nectar  formation  is  a  primitive  characteristics  of  many  angio­
sperms which dates back to the late Cretaceous. It has been an important character 
in  plant  classification  as  early  branching  lineages  of  angiosperms  were  based  on 
molecular  evidences  including  flowers  which  produced  stigmatic  exudates.  Many 
hypotheses  have  been  proposed  regarding  nectar  formation  by  flowering  plants 
among which the widely accepted one proposes that nectar formation is a reward for 
pollinators. Many angiosperms reward their pollinators with nectar secreted by their 
floral nectaries, however, pollinators like ants are rewarded by nectar secreted by 
EFN.  Wind‐pollinated  flowers  like  grasses  do  not  synthesize  nectar.  Although  in 
many monocots, lower sepal nectarins are common, whereas some families do not 
produce any nectaries and stomatal size is also reduced to minimize nectar secretion. 
Vestigial nectaries also exist in many plants that do not produce any nectar. Jasmonic 
acid is involved in formation of both floral and extrafloral nectar. Biotechnologists 
are  working  on  methods  to  increase  and  modify  nectar  contents  of  commercially 
important plants.

Although angiosperms produce different pigments in their flowers for pollination but 
many efforts are in progress to produce ornamental flowers with novel colors through 
both conventional breeding as well as genetic engineering techniques. It has resulted in 
an increase in interest of consumers and urged floriculturists and biotechnologists to 
produce genetically modified ornamental plants.

Carnations  and  rose  plants  are  more  noticeable  due  to  their  popularity  in  flori­
culture industries. Many other plants are also successfully genetically engineered for 
their use in floriculture industries. Biotechnologists are also working on developing 
disease‐resistant  ornamental  plants  with  medicinal  values.  However,  formation  of 
genetically  modified  GM  medicinal  ornamental  plants  which  retain  their  natural 
f ragrances and can survive longer in vase life is still a major challenge for floriculture 
industries.

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products, First Edition. Aisha Saleem Khan. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.242

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

10.2  Nectaries are Nectar Synthesizing Structures of Plants

Angiosperms show the diversity in localization, structure, chemical composition and 
secretive mechanisms of nectar in relation to their pollinator type. Many families of 
angiosperms contain nectaries in majority of their species, however, they are not p resent 
in Orchidaceae. Pollinators as hummingbirds or insect with long mouth parts prefer 
nectar rich in sucrose. However, insects or birds with short tongues, like bees, bats and 
flies feed on nectar rich in glucose and fructose (Baker et al., 1998). Unique nectar 
composition  is  dependent  upon  the  chemical  composition  of  phloem  sap  which  is 
known to be a major source of nectar carbohydrates. There is evidence of more than 
one mechanisms involved in determination of nectar sugar composition, for example, 
in A. thaliana glucose and fructose ratio may differ in median and lateral nectaries 
within the same flower, however in some flowers nectar concentration may be consistent 
in Eucalyptus.

A nectary is made up of few nectar containing parenchymatous cells. It is located 
close to epidermal region so nectar can be released either through stomatal pores, cuti­
cle or through epidermal cells. Nectaries are usually connected with xylem and phloem 
or both or sometimes have no vascular connections. Size of parenchmya cells within a 
nectary depends upon the quantity of nectar produced. It is also determined by demand 
of pollinator or number of pollinators. Vascular supply to nectaries is sometimes com­
posed of phloem only in plants like Digitalis purpurea and Brassica napus. However, 
extrafloral nectaries are connected with both vascular tissues, that is, xylem and phloem 
(Fahn, 2000). Floral nectaries are present either on the surface of flowers, may accumu­
late at the base of corolla tubes in two to five protuberances or they may be deeply 
embedded. They produce nectar within glands around the ovary. Pitcher plants produce 
EFN in order to attract insect preys. EFN also protect plants from herbivores in many 
angiosperms families (Heil, 2011). Identification of nectar protein nectarin from floral 
nectar of tobacco and EFN of Acacia has recently supported the role of nectarins against 
development of microbial infection and herbivory.

In  cucurbits  and  passiflora,  carbohydrates  accumulate  in  amyloplasts  of  nectar‐
p roducing parenchyma cells usually several days before anthesis. These amyloplasts 
generally do not have stroma as they are fully packed with starch. Many starch granules 
within amyloplasts increase the rate of hydrolysis during nectar formation and secre­
tion. In case of nocturnal pollination, nectar formation and secretion takes place early 
by dusk, and starch stored in chloroplast during the day quickly hydrolyzes at dusk.

10.2.1  Nectar Guides
Angiosperms flowers also produce contrasting patterns on their petals which may exist 
either in form of arrows, circles, dots, stripes, or arrows and are known as nectar guides. 
They serve as a guide to pollinators to their rewards. These contrasting patterns on 
petals of angiosperms were first recognized by Sprengel and further documented by 
Knoll (1922) who conducted experiments by exposing flowers with and without nectars 
guides to their pollinators. Nectar guides by many flowers are formed in response to 
higher pollinators.

In  some  plants,  they  are  visible  to  human  eye  but  mostly  they  are  hidden  like  in 
H. annuus but can be seen by bees and insects in UV. Nectar guide of plants like Linaria 

Nectaries, Carnations and Ornamental Hybrid Flowers in Floriculture

243

genistifolia are visible in form of an orange color on yellow flowers. Generally, nectar 
guides are present in form of radiating lines which point towards the center of the flow­
ers. They are present in form of simple lines in flowers like Geranium or in the form of 
complicated patterns distributed throughout the purple color of petals of Iris sibirica, 
or they may form a zone in Chrysanthemum carinatum inflorescence. They form a 
combination  of  radial  and  concentric  lines  in  plants  like  Veronica  spp.  However  in 
D. purpurea, they exist in form of patterns of blotches.

Generally, regular flowers have regular nectar guides, whereas irregular flowers have 
irregular one. Circular nectar guides are formed by flowers that may have several nectar 
containing areas. Nectar guide in the form of ring allows insect to approach the nectar 
only by running in the circle around it. Nectar guides may exist in form of spots in the 
inflorescence of Daucus carota and are known to attract Musca domestica. They may 
exist in form of black spots on ray florets of Gorteria diffusa.

Nectar guides may occur near the opening of corolla tube in many flowers like hibis­
cus, pansies, nasturtiums, morea groups, blanket flower, garden phlox spp. or in form of 
spots on petals in orchids, petunias and in foxglove. They may form linear patterns in 
petals of many flowers like geranium and hibiscus. In some flowers, like nemophila, 
nectar guides are located a little away form ovary and stamens (Figure 10.1).

Role of nectar guide to guide pollinators is further supported in a research conducted 
on Lapeirousia oregano where removal of white arrows which serve as nectar guides, 
caused reduction in the fruit set. Similarly in another experiment, speed of bumblebees 
was enhanced in artificial flowers by making artificial nectar guide which is composed 
of thin radiating lines (Leonard & Papaj, 2011). Nectar guides in some flowers are pre­
sented through accumulation of anthocyanins in the region which differentiates it from 
the rest of petal. Floral nectaries of Echinacea pupurea are shown in Figure 10.2.

10.2.2  Nectar Secretion and Important Metabolites
Angiosperms  have  adapted  changes  in  chemical  composition  of  their  nectars  in 
response to the choice of their pollinator’s taste which is reflected through diversity in 
chemical  composition  of  nectar.  Some  plants  produce  carbohydrates‐rich  nectar, 
whereas some some produce lipid‐rich and amino‐acid rich nectar. Although amount 
and concentration of nectar varies from species to species in relation to their pollinators 
but generally nectar of many plants usually are composed of glucose, fructose or sucrose. 
Plants may synthesize microliter to thousand of microliter of nectar which is released 
for hours to many days, in order to ensure successful pollination.

Nectar formation and secretion is energetically expensive for plants and due to this 
reason large number of mitochondria are observed at point of nectar secretion (Fahn, 
2000). Sucrose is basic precursor of all carbohydrates found in nectar. It is translocated 
through phloem sap or may be synthesized in nectary. Sometimes monosaccharides 
like maltose or melibiose and oligosaccharides like raffinose and stachynose may also be 
found in nectar. Sorbitol is found in Mediterranean nectar (Petanidou et al., 2006). 
Freshly  secreted  nectar  is  slightly  acidic  with  a  pH  of  around  6.5  but  may  become 
a lkaline as flower ages.

Carbohydrate uploading from phloem and their storage are precursors steps involved 
in nectar formation and secretion with the help of cell wall invertases. Recently, role 
of  gene‐encoding  apoplastic  invertase  is  suggested  for  secretion  of  floral  nectar  in 

244

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(a)

(b)

Lateral nectaries
 Median nectaries

Nectar guides

(c)

Figure 10.1  (a‐c) A comparison of nectar guides of: (a) Nemophila sp., (blue lines) and (b) Arabidopsis 
flowers, (c) Oxalis sp.

A. thaliana (Ruhlmann et al., 2010). Nectar processing takes place in parenchyma cells 
where it is mixed with other molecules and then finally secreted from epidermal region. 
Nectariferous  tissues  contain  many  rough  endoplasmic  reticulum,  dictyosomes  and 
Golgi apparatus. Presence of protein‐rich bodies indicates that many proteins are also 
involved in nectar formation and secretion (Figure 10.3).

In addition to carbohydrates, the nectar of some plant species may be composed of 
other macromolecules like amino acids and lipids, some of them may be non‐essential 
like asparagine and glutamine, however, their amount varies according to the age of flow­
ers. Amino acids give taste to nectar as many insects have sensors that can respond to 
water, sugar or salt within nectar. Ants prefer nectar rich in amino acids. Although lipid‐
rich nectar is energetic for pollinators than sucrose‐containing nectar but it is energeti­
cally expensive for plants. Many plants of family Fabaceae accumulate lipid‐rich nectar.
Antioxidants like ascorbic acids (vitamin C) may also be found in nectar of some 
plants and involved in detoxification free radicals. Nectar of bat‐pollinated flowers like 
Dactylanthus  taylorii  contains  ethyl  and  benzyl  esters  of  hexadecanoic  acids  and 

Nectaries, Carnations and Ornamental Hybrid Flowers in Floriculture

245

Figure 10.2  (a‐f) Scanning electron micrograph of floral nectary of disc floret of Echinacea pupurea 
(Asteraceae): (a) disc floret with floral nectary, (b) floral nectary (n) without style. Arrows show 
modified stomata. Asterisk shows depression of style base, cr (nectary creases) (Scale bar = 0.1mm), 
(c) Immature stomata showing guard cells (gc), (d) Mature stomata with open stomatal pore (sp) and 
cuticular ledge (cl), (e‐f) Pore occlusion of mature stomata (scale bar = 10μm) (Wist & Davies, 2006). 
(Used with permission of Oxford University Press.)

polyunsaturated acids. Some intermediates of citric acid cycle are also found in nectar 
like fumarate, malate, oxaloacetate and succinate.

In  some  plants,  nectar  robbing  is  very  common  during  which  many  visitors  steal 
n ectar. In order to avoid nectar stealing, nectar of many plants is composed of second­
ary metabolites like phenolics, alkaloids, making nectar poisonous for their visitors. 
Phenolic compounds in nectar protect it from robbing by making it toxic and repellent 
to some pollinators. Some phenols have fluorescent properties and serve as a guide to 
pollinators  like  honeybees.  Presence  of  alkaloids  is  also  detected  in  nectar  of  large 
n umber of plants (Alder & Wink, 2001). Terpenoids are reported in nectar of many 
plants to attract pollinators.

10.2.3  Molecular Basis of Nectar Secretion
During  nectary  development,  initially  starch  is  laid  down,  then  starch  formation  is 
turned off and catabolism of starch turned on just one day before anthesis. Glycolysis 

246

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Figure 10.3  Nectar formation and secretion. Nectar formation and secretion involves carbohydrate 
uploading from phloem through enzyme invertase, storage and nectar modification and secretion 
(Heil, 2011). (Used with permission of Elsevier.)

provides  sugar  for  nectar  formation  and  for  antioxidant  production.  Regulation  of 
starch metabolism requires almost eight days within tobacco floral nectary.

Genes encoding ADP‐glucose phosphorylase (AGPase) and starch synthase 3 (SS3) 
are highly expressed during starch biosynthesis during nectar formation. Genes involved 
in degradation of starch are not expressed during this stage. However, prior to anthesis, 
starch anabolic genes are down‐regulated and starch catabolic genes are up‐regulated 
(Ren et al., 2007). A transcriptional factor, MYB305 is also expressed in nectary glands. 
It is involved in expression throughout floral development. MYB305 also regulates pro­
teins like nec1, Nectarin 1, nec 5 and Nectarin 5 which are required for nectary defense. 

Nectaries, Carnations and Ornamental Hybrid Flowers in Floriculture

247

Furthermore, it also provides antimicrobial defense (Liu et al., 2009). In Arabidopsis, 
CRAB CLAW gene is responsible for regulation of floral development (Lee et al., 2005). 
Cell wall invertase (CW INV 4) is also required for nectar production in Arabidopsis.

10.3  Ornamental Transgenic Plants in Floriculture

Ornamental plants with novel colors are being produced since long through traditional 
breeding techniques, hybridization and mutation breeding for use in floriculture which 
is a global industry for introduction of ornamental plants with desired colors and fra­
grance. Recently, techniques in genetic engineering have successfully introduced trans­
genic or genetically modified ornamental plants with novel colors. However, one of the 
main challenges in genetic engineering of ornamental plants is to introduce genes from 
host with complete genetic background which is also commercially important species 
along with over expression of gene of key enzyme. Although biotechnologists are mak­
ing attempts to make ornamental GM crops for many years, but recent identification 
of key enzymes involved in anthocyanin and carotenoid pathways and transcription 
factors  in  anthocyanin  pathways  will  serve  as  important  future  tools  to  produce 
o rnamental transgenic flowers with desired traits. In 1993, gene encoding flavonoid 
3′‐5′‐hydroxylase was isolated which opened doors for producing genetically modified 
varieties  D.  caryophyllus  and  Rosa  x  hybrida  in  market.  However,  many  transgenic 
ornamental plants lack fragrance‐synthesizing pathways so many efforts are being done 
to produce fragrant genetically modified plants.

Petunia, tobacco and torenia are widely used model genetically engineered species for 
modification of flower color as they are relatively easy to handle. First transgenic Petunia 
was produced successfully through manipulation of anthocyanin pathways by express­
ing DFR from maize in which was deficit in F3′5′H and F3′H. Transgenic white Petunia 
plants  are  produced  through  down‐regulation  of  anthocyanin  biosynthetic  genes. 
However, in torenia, transcription of double‐stranded RNA (RNAi) is more successful 
method to down‐regulate a target gene than antisense or sense suppression. Petunia 
possess cytochrome b5 which can transfer electrons to F3′5′H through which it can 
synthesize 3′,5′ hydroxylated flavonoids indicating that increase of electron transfer in 
petunia to F3′5′H can compete with endogenous F3′H activities.

10.3.1  Development of Transgenic Roses
Transgenic roses are very popular cut flowers in floriculture which are developed by 
Florigene Pty. Ltd (Suntory Ltd.) (Dobres, 2011). Roses contain cyanidin or pelargoni­
din having 3,5 diglucoside with pelargonidin‐3‐glucoside. However, many cultivated 
roses (Rosa hybrida) are produced through extensive inter‐specific hybridization from 
wild species including yellow carotenoid‐producing flowers, and orange pelargonidin 
producing  flowers.  Although  many  varieties  of  roses  are  commercially  produced 
but Rosa spp. lack pathways to synthesize delphinidin‐based anthocyanins and there­
fore many efforts are done to develop transgenic blue roses (Figure 10.4). Some of them 
proved to be fruitful but biotechnologists are still not satisfied with the blue shade of 
transgenic roses. In an experiment expression of F3′5′H genes from pansies resulted in 
accumulation of delphinidin in roses forming blue‐hued flowers (Katsumo et al., 2007). 

248

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(a)

(c)

(e)

(b)

(d)

(f)

Figure 10.4  Transgenic cultivars of blue roses containing delphinidin. The rose cultivars WKS77, 
WKS82, WKS100, WKS116, WKS124 and WKS140 transformed with pSPB130 (left, host; right, a 
transformant). A flower of the line exhibiting the most significant color change is shown. (a) WKS77, 
(b) WKS82, (c) WKS100, (d) WKS116, (e) WKS124, (f) WKS140 (Katsumoto et al., 2007). (Used with 
Permission from Oxford University Press.) (See insert for color representation of the figure.)

The  blue  flower  color  is  mostly  due  to  anthocyanin  modification,  vacuolar  pH  and 
metal ion type and concentration.

Japan has produced a number of wild Rosa spp. like R. mutliflora, R. lutea, and R. rugosa 
which have been used to breed R. hybrida. Hybrid roses, that is, Rosa hybrida contain 
unique UDP‐glucose dependent anthocyanidin 5,3‐glucosyltransferase (Otaga et al., 2005).

10.3.2  Ornamental Hybrids in Floriculture
Other important cut flowers which are important in floriculture and grown as popular 
ornamental herbs include many species of Alcea, Chrysanthemum, Cinenaria, Cymbidium, 
Dahlia,  Dianthus,  Freesia,  Gerbera,  Gladiolus,  Hydrangea,  Jasmine,  Lily,  Marigold, 

(a)

Nectaries, Carnations and Ornamental Hybrid Flowers in Floriculture

249

(b)

Figure 10.5  (a‐b) (a) Dianthus barbaratus known as sweet William is an important carnation in 
floriculture, (b) D. caryophyllous (sweet William) is a carnation with possible anti‐HIV potential. 
(See insert for color representation of the figure.)

(a)

(b)

Figure 10.6  (a‐b) Many hybrids of Petunia spp. are cultivated due to their ornamental value. They are 
popular species used in floriculture.

Narcissus, Petunia, Rosa, Tulip Zantedeschia and Zinnia spp (Figures 10.5 through 10.9). 
Recently efforts are made to produce genetically modified flowers of cyclamen, Japanese 
gentian, lotus and toad lily. Genetically modified ornamental plants are widely popular in 
market worldwide as compared with genetically modified food plants as they are attrac­
tive for consumers and do not offer any health risks, however, the process for taking regu­
latory approval of GM products is time‐consuming and need to be streamlined. Every 
genetically  modified  organism  is  subject  to  regulation  be  several  agencies  like  U.S. 
Department of Agriculture (USDA), Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS), 

250

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(a)

(b)

(d)

(c)

Figure 10.7  (a‐h) Many hybrids of Cineraria spp. (Pericallis hybrida) are used as popular 
ornamental crops.

Environmental Protection Agencies (EPA) and Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 
the U.S. They monitor whether GM crops are safer to introduce in market for health and 
are safer for environment but this process create some complications and time consuming 
as well which are barriers for introducing GM ornamental plants in markets.

10.4  Dianthus spp. are Major Carnations in Floriculture

Carnations  make  important  part  of  floriculture  and  international  cut  flower  trade. 
Many carnations like Dianthus spp. from Caryophyllaceae are genetically m odified orna­
mental crops. They include almost 300 species (Jurgans et al., 2003). M ost prominent of 

(e)

(f)

(h)

(b)

(g)

Figure 10.7 (Cont’d)

(a)

(c)

Figure 10.8  (a‐c) Hybrids of Rosa spp. are cultivated and form important spp in floriculture.

252

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(b)

(a)

(c)

Figure 10.9  (a‐c) Modern hybrids of Dahlia spp.

Important species of carnations in floral industry include D. caryophyllus, D. barbatus, 
D.  chinensis,  D.  plumarius  and  D.  superbus.  They  are  native  to  the  Mediterranean 
region. They are developed in a way which allows their long distance transportation due 
to their excellent quality. Some of them have sweet fragrance like clove. They are also 
used to extract essential oil in France and in Netherlands.

Popular  carnation‐growing  countries  are  Spain,  Kenya,  Columbia,  Ceylon,  USA, 
Australia and South Africa. Now many of them are being cultivated in Southeast Asian 
countries including Pakistan. Netherlands is the largest exporter of cut flowers in 2014 
and U.S in 2013. According to FloraHolland which is one the largest flower market in 
world, carnations are the sixteenth important cut flower with a turnover of Є24 million 
as compared with top‐ranked flower roses at Є780 million (FloraHolland, 2014).

them is Dianthus barbaratus commonly known as Sweet William because first cultivar 
was produced by William Sim from 1938 to1939. Wild carnations, that is, D. caryophyllus 
have single flower with five petals, however, modern carnations used in floriculture are 
different from wild carnations. Modern carnations are result of continuous efforts of 
development of genetics and plant breeding techniques since 200 years.

Phytochemical screening showed presence of compounds like arabinose, astragalin, 
barbatoside, kaempferol‐3‐O‐beta‐D‐sophoroside, D‐pinitol and L‐leucine. Saponins 
barbatosides A and B, isolated from Dianthus barbatus cv. “China Doll” are known to 
have analgesic and anti‐inflammatory activities.

Although there exist many types of carnations, most commonly used in floriculture 
are border, annual and perpetual carnations (Figure 10.10). Border carnations represent 
old type of carnations. They have double flowers up to 40 petals. Selective breeding of 
D. caryophyllus produced many hybrids and cultivars. Annual carnations are produced 

(a)

Nectaries, Carnations and Ornamental Hybrid Flowers in Floriculture

253

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 10.10  (a‐d) Modern carnations in floriculture.

through hybridization between D. chinensis and D. caryophyllus. Perpetual flowering 
carnations which are relatively new are derived from crosses between D. chinensis and 
D. caryophyllus. They originated in Europe around 1980. Main cultivars of carnations 
include standards (Sim), sprays (minis) and midis (chinensii). Sim flowers have single 

254

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

flower per stem, minis produce many flowers of small size, whereas stem of midis is 
shorter than standards.

Genome of carnations is very small as compared to other ornamental flowers like A. 
majus, C. morifolium, Ipomoea nil, P. hybrida and R. hybrida. Carnations are ethylene 
sensitive, however transgenic carnations have low ethylene production with delayed 
petal senescence to increase its vase life. Techniques like randomly amplified polymor­
phic DNA (RAPD) are helping to increase vase life of carnations. More than 30,000 
unique sequences involving genes for chlorophyll and carotenoid metabolism, antho­
cyanin and ethylene biosynthesis are identified in carnations.

Carnation industry from 1960 to 1970 suffered a significant decrease due to fungal 
and viral diseases so modern carnations are being generated through techniques in 
plant  tissue  culture,  through  analyzing  of  clones  generated  in  vitro  through  ELISA 
(Loberant & Alon, 1996). These viral‐free cuttings are sent to nurseries where they are 
maintained and used as mother plants after further testing to use them for commercial 
purposes. This method is used for Dianthus carnation and for other agricultural crops 
like phlox, strawberry, sugarcane and gypsophila.

10.4.1  Economic Importance of Carnations
Apart from ornamental purposes, carnations are also grown to relieve stress and for 
aromatherapy. Carnation petals are used as a tonic for skin fragrance and have some 
applications in perfume industry (Lim, 2014). Carnation tea is also prepared which is 
effective for muscular pains and for treating chest congestions in homeopathic reme­
dies. They are used a herbal medicine for coronary and nervous disorders. It is assumed 
that Romans and Spaniards used carnations flowers to add spice to wines, however, 
their use is sometimes confused with cloves. They are also used to garnish food and for 
flavouring of fruits salads, vinegars, butter and lemonade. Their essential oils, that is, 
eugenol  and  beta‐caryophyllene  are  reported  to  have  anti‐bacterial  and  anti‐viral 
a ctivities. However, fragrance is often lost in commercial cultivars.

10.4.2  Genetically Modified Carnations and Ornamental Plants
Agrobacterium‐mediated transformation systems are proved successful for genes trans­
fer in carnations for manipulating flower color and for reduction of ethylene synthesis 
(Auer, 2008).

Wild‐type  carnations  can  produce  anthocyanin  pelargonidin  but  are  incapable  of 
s ynthesizing delphinidin. Blue‐colored carnations are produced by inserting genes for 
delphinidin biosynthesis.
FLORIGENE ®MoondustTM is the first genetically engineered floriculture crop sold 
worldwide. It was produced by selecting white carnations cultivar deficient in the DFR 
gene. Later expression of petunia F3′5′H (under control of promoter region from snap­
dragon CHS gene) and DFR (under control of constitutive promoter genes) produced 
carnation with accumulation of delphinidin‐based anthocyanins. However, dark vio­
let FLORIGENE ®MoonshadowTM was produced by expression of pansy F3′5′H gene 
(under control of promoter region from snapdragon CHS gene) and a petunia DFR‐A 
genes  (under  control  of  its  own  promoter  and  terminator  region).  Carnations  with 
s table  genes,  that  is,  FLORIGENE  ®MoonvistaTM,  FLORIGENE  ®MoonshadowTM, 
FLORIGENE  ®MoonsliteTM,  and  FLORIGENE  ®MoonaquaTM  are  being  sold  since 

Nectaries, Carnations and Ornamental Hybrid Flowers in Floriculture

255

many years (Tanaka et al., 2009). However, it is important that accumulation of delphi­
nidin‐based anthocyanins in transgenic carnations are not harmful for environment.

10.5  Future Perspectives in Floriculture Industries

There is a need to develop efficient transformation systems for target cultivars which 
are more cheap and provide resistance against pests and insects. Identification of genes 
regulating  flower  colors  and  pH  can  further  facilitate  transformation  methods. 
Genetically modified functional food should be produced by increasing anthocyanin 
contents in edible plants due to its health benefits.

Challenges  faced  by  carnation  industry  include  formation  of  carnations  of  better 
quality which are disease‐free and pest resistance‐carnations, with post‐harvest long­
evity  and  better  yield.  Many  tissue‐culture  techniques  involving  micropropagation 
techniques are improving the quality of carnation. In order to speed up breeding and 
selection,  techniques  like  double  haploidy  are  used.  Color  mutants  are  developed 
through mutation breeding. Dwarf carnations are becoming more commercial and are 
being generated through breeding techniques.

Micropropagation and tissue cultures are common ways for producing ornamental 
plants in floriculture as they provide disease‐free plants, higher level of uniformity and 
ability to survive for longer time. However, costs for establishments of micropropaga­
tion  laboratories  and  policies  for  export  in  international  marketing  provide  some 
l imitations to these techniques. Further, efforts are in progress to use ornamental plants 
in  pharmaceuticals.  Research  is  also  in  progress  to  produce  expressed  sequenced 
tags from nectaries, to explore proteomics of nectar of many species and to investigate 
transcriptional changes during nectar secretion using gene chips.

With  the  development  of  new  ornamental  varieties  with  medicinal  value,  it  is 
also  important  to  develop  innovative  techniques  of  in  vitro  conservation  and 
c ryoperservation (storage at ultra‐low temperature) of ornamental plants.

References

Adler, L.S. & Wink, M. (2001). ‘Transfer of quinolizidine alkaloids from hosts to 

hemiparasites in two Castilleja‐Lupinus associations: analysis of floral and vegetative 
tissues’, Biochemical Systematics and Ecology, 29, pp. 551–561.

Auer, C. (2008). ‘Ecological risk assessment and regulation for genetically‐modified 

ornamental plants’, Critical Reviews in Plant Sciences, 27, pp. 255–271.

Baker, H.G., Baker, I., & Hodges, S.A. (1998). ‘Sugar composition of nectar and fruits 

consumed by birds and bats in the tropics and subtropics’, Biotropica, 30, 
pp. 559–586.

Dobres, M.S. (2011). ‘Prospects for commercialization of transgenic ornamentals. In 

Transgenic Horticultural Crops; Challenges and Opportunities (Mou, B. & Scorza, R., 
eds), pp. 305–316. Boca Raton, FL: CRC press.

Fahn, A. (2000). ‘Structure and function of secretory cells, ‘Advances in Botanical Research, 

31: pp. 37–75.

FloraHolland (2014). Facts and figures, FloraHolland, The Netherlands.

256

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Heil, M. (2011). ‘Nectar: generation, regulation and ecological functions’, Trends in Plant 

Science, 16, pp. 191–200.

Jurgens, A., Witt, T., & Gottsberger, G. (2003). ‘Flower scent composition in Dianthus and 

Saponaria species (Caryophyllaceae) and its relevance for pollination biology and 
taxonomy’, Biochemical Systematics and Ecology, 31, pp. 345–357.

Katsumoto, Y., Fukuchi‐Mizutani, M., Fukui, Y., Brugliera, F., Holton, T.A., Karan, M., 

Nakamura, N., Yonekura‐Sakakibara, K., Togami, J., Pigeaire, A., Tao, G.Q., Nehra, N.S., 
Lu, C., Dyson, B.K., Tsuda, S., Ashikari, T., Kusumi T., Mason, J.G., & Tanaka, Y. (2007). 
‘Engineering of the Rose Flavonoid Biosynthetic Pathway Successfully Generated 
Blue‐Hued Flowers Accumulating Delphinidin. Plant Cell Physiology, 48, pp. 1589–1600.

Knoll, F. (1922). ‘Fettes Ol auf den Blutenepidermen der Cypripedilinae’, Osterreichische 

Botanische Zeitschrift, 71, pp. 121–129.

Lee, J.Y., Baum, S.F., Alvarez, J., Patel, A., Chitwood, D.H., & Bowman, J.L. (2005). ‘Activation 

of CRABS CLAW in the nectaries and carpels of Arabidopsis’, Plant Cell, 17, pp. 25–36.

Leonard, A.S. & Papaj, D.R. (2001). ‘X’ marks the spot: The possible benefits of nectar 

guides to bees and plants’, Functional Plant Biology, 25, pp. 1293–1301.

Lim, T.K. (2014). Dianthus caryophyllus. In: Lim, T.K., ed. Edible medicinal and non‐ 

medicinal plants: volume 7, flowers. Springer Science Dordrecht, pp. 684–693.

Liu, G., Ren, G., Guirgis, A., & Thornburg, R.W. (2009). ‘The MYB305 transcription 

factor regulates expression of nectarin genes in the ornamental tobacco floral nectary’, 
Plant Cell, 21, pp. 2672–2687.

Loberant, B. & Alon, Y. (1996). ‘The interaction between plant protection authorities, 

academia and industry, Proceedings Ninth International Symposium on Virus Disease of 
Ornamental Plants,’ Acta Horticulturae, 432, pp. 218–224.

Otaga, J., Kanno, Y., Itoh, Y., Tsugawa, H., & Suzuki, M. (2005). ‘Plant biochemistry: 

Anthocyanin biosynthesis in roses’, Nature, 435, pp. 757–758.

Petanidou, T., van Laere, A., Ellis, W.N., & Smets, E. (2006). ‘What shapes amino acid and 

sugar composition in Mediterranean floral nectars? Oikos, 115, pp. 155–169.

Ren, G., Healy, R.A., Horner, H.T., Martha, G.J. & Thornburg, R.W. (2007). ‘Expression 
of starch metabolic genes in the developing nectaries of ornamental tobacco plants’, 
Plant Science, 173, pp. 621–637.

Ruhlmann, J.M., Kram, B.W., & Carter, C.J. (2010). ‘CELL WALL INVERTASE 4 is 

required for nectar production in Arabidopsis,’ Journal of Experimental Botany, 61, 
pp. 395–404.

Tanaka, Y., Brugliera, F., & Chandler, S. (2009). ‘Recent Progress of Flower Colour Modification 

by Biotechnology’, International Journal of Molecular Science, 10, pp. 5350–5369.

Wist, T.J. & Davies, A.R. (2006). ‘Floral Nectar Production and Nectary Anatomy and 

Ultrastructure of Echinacea Purpurea (Asteraceae)’, Annals of Botany, 97, pp. 177–193.

Further Reading

Andersson, S. (2003). ‘Antennal responses to floral scents in the butterflies Inachisio, 
Aglaisurticae (Nymphalidae), and Gonepteryx rhamni (Pieridae)’, Chemoecology,13, 
pp. 13–20.

Bernardello, L., Galetto, L., & Forcone, A. (1999). ‘Floral nectar chemical composition 

of some species from Patagonia. II,’ Biochemical Systematics and Ecology, 27, pp. 779–790.

Nectaries, Carnations and Ornamental Hybrid Flowers in Floriculture

257

Carter, C., Healy, R., O’Tool, N.M., Naqvi, S.M., Ren, G., Park, S., Beattie, G.A., Horner, 
H.T., & Thornburg, R.W. (2007). ‘Tobacco nectaries express a novel NADPH oxidase 
implicated in the defense of floral reproductive tissues against microorganisms’, 
Plant Physiology, 143, pp. 389–399.

Fukui, Y., Tanaka, Y., Kusumi, T., Iwashita, T., & Nomoto, K. (2003). ‘A rationale for the 
shift in colour towards blue in transgenic carnation flowers expressing the flavonoid 
3′,5′‐hydroxylase gene’, Phytochemistry, 63, pp. 15–23.

Gardener, M.C. & Gillman, M.P. (2002). ‘The taste of nectar‐ a neglected area of pollination 

Galbally, J. & Galbally, E. (1997). Carnations and pinks for garden and greenhouse, Timber 

ecology’, Oikos, 98, pp. 552–557.

Press, Portland, Oregon.

Gaffal, K.P., Heimler, W., & El‐Gammal, S. (1998). ‘The floral nectary of Digitalis purpurea 

L., structure and nectar secretion’, Annals of Botany, 81, pp. 251–262.

Gonzá lez‐Teuber, M., Pozo, M.J., Muck, A., Adame‐ Alvarez, R.M., & Heil, M. (2010). 

‘Glucanases and chitinases as causal agents in the protection of Acacia extrafloral nectar 
from infestation by phytopathogens’, Plant Physiology, 152, pp. 1705–1715.

Horner, H.T., Healy, R.A., Ren, G., Fritz, D., Klyne, A., Seames, C., & Thornburg, R.W. 

(2007). ‘Amyloplast to chromoplast conversion in developing ornamental tobacco floral 
nectaries provides sugar for nectar and antioxidants for protection’, American Journal of 
Botany, 94, pp. 12–24.

Holton, T. A., Brugliera, F., Lester, D.R., Tanaka, Y., Hyland, C.D., Menting, J.G., Lu, C.Y., 

Farcy, E., Stevenson, T.W., & Cornish, E.C. (1993). ‘Cloning and expression of 
cytochrome P450 genes controlling flower colour’, Nature, 366, pp. 276–279.

Jackson, S. & Nicolson, S.W. (2002). ‘Xylose as a nectar sugar: from biochemistry to 

ecology’, Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology part B, 131, pp. 613–620.

Nakamura, N., Fukuchi‐Mizutani, M., Suzuki, K., Miyazaki, K., & Tanaka, Y. (2006). 

‘RNAi suppression of the anthocyanidin synthase gene in Torenia Hybrida yields white 
flowers with higher frequency and better stability than antisense and sense suppression’, 
Plant Biotechnology, 23, pp.13–17.

Nakayama, M., Koshioka, M., Yoshida, H., Kan, Y., Fukui, Y., Koike, A., & Yamaguchi, M. (2000). 

‘Cyclic malyl anthocyanins in Dianthus caryophyllus’,  Phytochemistry, 55, pp. 937–939.
Onozaki, T., Yagi, M., Tanase, K., & Shibata, M. (2011). ‘Crossings and selections for six 
generations based on flower vase life to create lines with ethylene resistance or ultra‐
long vase life in carnations (Dianthus caryophyllus L.)’, Journal of the Japanese Society for 
Horticultural Science, 80, pp. 486–498.

Prestle, J., Hornung, E., Schonfelde, M., & Mundry K.W. (1992). ‘Mechanism and site of 

action of a ribosome‐inactivating protein type 1 from Dianthus barbatus which 
inactivates Escherichia coliribosomes’, FEBS Letters, 297, pp. 250–252.

Pieroni, A., Quave, C.L., Villanelli, M.L., Mangino, P., Sabbatini, G., Santini, L., Boccetti, T., 
Profili, M., Ciccioli, T., Rampa, L.G., Antonini, G., Girolamini, C., Cecchi, M., & Tomasi, M. 
(2004). ‘Ethnopharmacognostic survey on the natural ingredients used in folk cosmetics, 
cosmeceuticals and remedies for healing skin diseases in the inland Marches, Central‐
Eastern Italy’, Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 91, pp. 331–344.

Tanaka, Y. & Ohmiya, A (2008). ‘Seeing is believing: Engineering anthocyanin and 

carotenoid biosynthetic pathways’, Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 19, pp.190–197.

258

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Problems Chapter 10

1  Many plants reward their pollinators with their nectar, however, some pollinators 

are rewarded with pollen. Explain which one of them is significant for plants.

2  Write down differences in floral and extrafloral nectaries in empty spaces in table 

below.

Characteristics

Floral nectaries

Extrafloral nectaries

  i. Location
 ii. Function
iii. Examples of plants

‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

3  Nectar  guides  are  hidden  markings  for  many  insects,  mostly  visible  under  UV. 
However, in some flowers they can be seen by human eye. In the flowers in picture 
(a, b and c) identify visible nectar guides visible in certain areas of petals.
(a)

(b)

(c)

Nectaries, Carnations and Ornamental Hybrid Flowers in Floriculture

259

4  Give some examples of methods through which the vase life of carnations can be 

prolonged?

5  Which breeding techniques are used in making a transgenic rose? Explain history of 

making of blue rose.

6  Give name of blue pigment in carnations. Explain different steps in biosynthesis of 

delphinidin.

7  Label different parts of Dianthus flowers shown below.

8  Explain main objectives of producing transgenic ornamental plants. Do you think 
that there is need to produce transgenic ‘ornamental’ plant which is also a ‘m edicinal’ 
plant? What major techniques can be used in making ornamental medicinal plants?

261

11

Floral Essential Oils: Biosynthesis, Classification and 
Commercial Applications

11.1  Fragrance Formation is a Unique and Genetically 
Controlled Characteristic of Many Angiosperms

Biosynthesis and emission of fragrances are composed of complex mixture of aromatic 
molecules which are unique characteristics of many flowering plants. Many of these 
volatile  molecules  are  composed  of  carbon  and  hydrogen  atoms  known  as  isoprene 
units (C5H8) and belong to monoterpenoids groups of terpenoids which is one of the 
largest group of natural plant products. However, in addition to terpenoids, many phe­
nylpropanoids and fatty acid derivatives are also responsible for fragrances of plants.

One of the important characteristics of volatile monoterpenoids is their ability to 
diffuse in air due to their low molecular weight in order to attract pollinators and also 
in order to provide defense against microbial pathogens, pests and herbivores, thus 
acting as insecticidal compounds. Fragrances are a way of communication among plants 
with their environments. Plants convey messages through these fragrances to their pol­
linators about the availability of nectar or pollen. Many fragrances are also produced in 
plants in response to some wound or injury or to give warning to neighbouring plants 
about  pathogen  attack.  Volatile  monoterpenes  can  diffuse  to  very  long  distance  to 
attract the pollinators as amines secreted by Amorphophallus titanium can diffuse upto 
hundreds of meters to attract bees and insects. However, not all fragrances are pleasant 
to humans and some of them cannot be even detected by humans. Some of them are 
foul, imitating decomposing animal material and are composed of amines as functional 
groups. Flowers with a foul odor often are maroon in color.

Formation of aromatic monoterpenoids also known as essential oils which is a geneti­
cally controlled characteristic of many plants as rose flower always produces mixture 
of citronellol, geraniol and linalool in its petals and a coriander plant will always emit 
linalool as a main compound. However, depending upon species and their geographical 
conditions, soil composition, amount of linalool and other essential oils, secreted by 
species may differ. In many plants, a single enzyme, that is, prenyl transferase, may 
contribute for formation of many monoterpenes and release some other oils as waste 
products, which contributes to formation of diverse number of aromatic compounds. 
Although the ability of rose to form geraniol and linalool is a genetically controlled 
feature of plants, many fragrances are also being modified through molecular elucida­
tion of terpenoid biosynthesis pathways. Major objectives of metabolic engineering of 
terpenoid pathways are to develop disease‐resistance plants through over‐expression of 

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products, First Edition. Aisha Saleem Khan. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.262

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

enzymes  in  order  to  increase  their  applications  in  perfume,  pharmaceutical,  food, 
c osmetic and beverage industries.

Terpenoids are synthesized independently in cytosol and plastids of many plant cells 
through different pathways. However, enzymes for isoprene synthesis are also present 
in mitochondria. More than 1700 volatile compounds are reported to exist in over 990 
taxa in 90 families and 38 orders (Knudsen et al., 2006).

Essential oils of many plants are a complex mixture of aromatic monoterpenoids. 
Aromatic oils of Citrus sinensis are composed of combination of almost 10 carboxylic 
acids, 14 ketones, 20 aldehydes with more than 30 alcohols, esters and 30 different 
v arieties of terpenoids compound (Figure 11.1). Crocus sativus (saffron) is known to 
emit a mixture of 150 volatile compounds out of which almost 40 to 50 constituents are 
identified which are responsible for color and aroma (Abdullaev et al., 2002).

When terpenoids are synthesized in cytosol by a pathway, that is, mevalonate path-
way  (MVA)  they  form  photosynthetic  pigments,  electron  transport  carriers,  resins, 
waxes,  oils,  latex,  growth  substances,  and  plant  hormones  like  ABA.  Terpenoids 
s ynthesized by plastids through methylerythritol pathways (MEP) serve other functions 
formation of volatile molecules.

Apart from important part of food due to their anti‐microbial properties, terpenoids 
are used commercially in many medicines, confectionaries, beverages, perfumes, vita­
mins, cosmetics, soaps, disinfectants, insecticides (azadirachtin, nepetalacotne, pyre­
thrin, warburganal) and natural dyes. Almost 50 to 60% of flavors in the food industry 
are extracted from essential oils, 15 to 20% are used in perfume industry and 5 to 10% 
in the pharmaceutical industry (Tables 11.1 & 11.2). The U.S., France and Germany are 
leading countries in the trade of essential oils. Annual turnout of food, perfume and 
cosmetic industry is more than 6 billion dollars.

OH

OH

Isoprene

Linalool

(E)--
ocimene
OH

Geraniol

Limonene

Pinene

H

-farnesene

Nerolidol

Germacrene-D Zingiberene

Caryophyllene

–cadinene

Sabinene

-santalene

Figure 11.1  Structures of representative volatile terpenoid compounds (Nagegowda, 2010). (Used 
with permission.)

Floral Essential Oils: Biosynthesis, Classification and Commercial  Applications

263

Table 11.1  Commercially important essential oils from monocots and their uses.

Plant source

Major constituents

Major countries of 
cultivation

Uses

Essential oils 
Trade name

Oil of 
Citronella

Cymbopogan 
winterianus & 
C. nardus

Java citronella oil: 
citronellal, 
citronellol, geraniol
Ceylon citronella 
oil: citronellol, 
geraniol, citronellal
Citral

Oil of 
Lemongrass

C. flexuosus 
and C. citratus

Palmarosa 
oil

C. martinii 
var. motia

Vetiver oil

Vetiveria 
zizanioides

Geraniol, geranyl 
acetate, citral, 
citronellol, linalool
Kushimor, alpha 
and beta vevitones

Indonesia, China, 
India, Sri Lanka, 
Vietnam, 
Guatemala,

Aromatherapy,
Perfumes,
Mosquito repellent 
creams

China, India, 
Sri Lanka, South 
and Central 
American countries
Indonesia, India, 
Brazil, Guatemala

Brazil, Japan, India, 
Haiti, Java, 
Seychelles

Perfumes, detergents, 
soaps

High graded 
perfumes and 
cosmetics
Cold drinks, flavoring 
of tobacco, odour 
stabilizer, and 
perfumes

11.2  Number of Carbon and Hydrogens Atoms in Isoprene 
Units Determine Their Roles in Plants

The role of terpenoids in plants is determined by their number of carbon and hydrogen 
atoms, that is, monoterpenoids which are composed of two isoprene units (C10H16) 
form volatile compounds to attract pollinators and to repel insects. Sesquiterpenes rep­
resent one of the largest group of terpenoids and are composed of three isoprene units 
(C15H24), whereas diterpenoids are composed of 20 carbon atoms. Tetraterpenoids con­
tain 40‐C atoms (Figure 11.2). They include carotenoids like phytoene, carotenoids like 
lycopene, α‐ carotene, ß‐carotene and xanthophylls (refer to Chapter 8) and hormones 
like  gibberellins,  polymeric  rubber  particles  in  milky  sap.  They  also  include  many 
c ompounds which are defensive for plants but may be poisonous for animals.

11.2.1  Two Isoprene Units (Monoterpenes) are 
Responsible for Giving Fragrances
As mentioned earlier, monoterpenoids are composed of two isoprene units (C10H16). 
Monoterpenoids are classified as acyclic monoterpenes (linalool, geraniol, citronellol), 
monocyclic (limonene) or bicyclic (camphor, thujone and pinene) terpenes. Wallach, in 
1910, obtained a Nobel Prize for his discovery of the structure of geraniol and limonene 
(Christmann & Wallach, 2010). Feodor Lynen got another Nobel Prize in 1964 for the 
identification of isopentenyl pyrophosphate.

Monoterpenoids are synthesized in almost all plant organs and work as a chemical 
messenger. They also act as natural cleanser by removing toxins from plants. In some 
plants, they also protect them from dehydration by allowing the plant to produce haze 

264

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Table 11.2  Commercially important essential oils from dicots and their uses.

Essential oils 
Trade name

Plant source

Major constituents

Major countries 
of cultivation

Uses

Indonesia, 
Philippines, 
India,

Alcoholic drinks, 
flavoring of tobacco 
and food products

Perfumes, cosmetics

South Africa, 
China, Bourbon
France, North 
Africa, Italy, 
England, U.S
Many countries High‐ grade perfumes 

Perfumes, cosmetics, 
ice creams, candies, 
baked food

and pharmaceutical 
products, cosmetics

Many countries Perfumery, cosmetics, 

food flavors, 
pharmaceuticals,

Patchouli 
oil

Pogostemon 
cablin

Geranium 
oil
Clary sage 
oil

Pelargonium
graveolens
Salvia sclarea

Lavender oil Lavendula spp.
L. angustifolia, 
L. latifolia, L. 
intermedia
Mentha piperita, 
M. citrata, M. 
spicata

Mint oil

Rosemary 
oil

Rosmarinus 
officinalis

Eucalpytol

Coriander 
seed oil

Eucalyptus 
citriodora
Coriandrum 
sativum

Patchouli alcohol, 
beta‐patchoulene, 
alpha‐guaiene, 
beta‐caryophyllene, 
seychellene
Geraniol, Citronellol

Linalyl acetate, 
linalool

Linalool, Linalyl 
acetate

Bergamot mint: 
Linalool, linaly acetate,
Japanese mint:
Menthol, menthone, 
menthyl acetate
Peppermint:
Menthol, menthone
Spearmint: carvone
Camphor (20%), 
1,8‐cineole (28%)

Citronellol (65–90%)

Spain, France 
Morocco, 
Tunisia
Pakistan

Perfumes, soaps, 
detergents, flavouring 
meat and sausages
Industrial perfumes, 
disinfectants
Perfumery, cosmetics, 
for making colognes

Linalool (60–80%)

Pakistan

that keeps their temperature low Geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate acts as a precursor for 
formation  of  all  monoterpenes.  Many  plants  like  oaks,  willows  and  poplars  release 
 aromatic essential oils during the day at a temperature of 30–40°C, releasing a part of 
photosynthetically fixed carbon in the air. In many plants, induction of isoprene syn­
thase takes place when leaves are exposed to high temperatures. It is significant for 
plants as many pollinators are active during the day time.

11.2.2  Secretory Structures and Mechanisms Involved in Release 
of Essential Oils
Formation of monoterpenoids take place within plastids of epidermal cells as well as 
in mesophyll cells petals of many flowers so they can easily diffuse in air. Essential 
oils  of  many  plants  are  emitted  through  secretory  glands,  that  is,  osmophores. 

Isopentenyl pyrophosphate

Monoterpenoids

Sesquiterpenoids

Diterpenoids

Triterpenoids

Tetraterpenoids

Polyterpenoids

C-10

Essential 

oils

Linalool

Menthol

Geraniol

Limonene

Pinene

C-15

Farnesyl-
phosphate

Capsidol

 

I
S
P
P
+
G
e
r
a
n
y
l
g
e
r
a
n
y
l
-
P
P

C-20

Retinol

C-30

C-40

C>40

Gibberellic 

acid

Carotenoids

Cytokinins

Cardenolide Squalene

Saponin

Carotene

(-Carotene)

Xanthophylls

(Lutein)

Farnesene Nerolidol Zingiberene Caryophyllene Longifolene

Figure 11.2  Terpenoid role within plants depends upon their number of carbon and hydrogen atoms in their isoprene units.

266

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Osmophores may be present in any part of flowers including sepals, petals, carpels or 
anthers. In epidermal cells they are located on the inner side of perianth with conical, 
papillate,  bullate,  rugose,  or  pileate  shapes.  Essential  oils  are  also  released  through 
glandular  epidermal  cells  or  trichomes  through  rupturing  of  cuticular  vesicle 
(Figure 11.3). There is no evidence which supports their release through stomatal cells, 
lenticels or through hydrathodes. A plant may have essential oil ducts or oil glands for 
storage and secretion of aromatic essential oils in their vegetative parts, or lysigenic oil 
glands or sometimes intercellular spaces (schizogenic glands) which are filled with 
aromatic oils. Glandular cells contain a large number of mitochondria and oil bodies 
which  contain  essential  oils  as  revealed  through  transmission  electron  microscopy. 
Essential oils may also form a bond with carbohydrates in the form of glycosides which 
released through the breakdown of glycosidic bonds. Heat also promotes their evapo­
ration in atmosphere.

In many member of Lamiaceae, formation of monoterpenoids take place within special­
ized secretory cells, however, their accumulation takes place in epicuticular cavities of 
glandular trichomes. In woody plants, they are secreted in resin ducts. In Arabidopsis, 
emission of volatile compounds is reported through flowers. Plants have two types of 
glandular trichomes depending upon their role in protection against pathogens. Short‐
term glandular trichomes which are present in young tissues and end secretion rapidly. In 
long‐term trichomes like in mature orange, secretory molecules are accumulated below 
the cuticle layer. However, the emission of floral volatiles change rhythmically within a day.
There are many mechanisms which are proposed regarding the release of volatile 
molecules from epidermal cells but no exact mechanism was known about how they are 
actually emitted until now. Some studies reported that after their biosynthesis in plas­
tids, they are transported to cytosol. They are further modified in ER and exported 
from plasma membrane into the apoplast of epidermal cells making cuticle permeable 
and are released at the cuticular surface. Protein‐mediated transport or direct vesicular 
transport is also suggested to occur. They may also develop direct contact in mem­
branes of ER and cell membranes which create a lipophilic pathway for their intracel­
lular trafficking. The role of ABC proteins and lipid transfer proteins is also reported. 
A gradient developed between the cuticle and the cell wall of flower cells may also act 
as a driving force for the release of volatile oils.

11.2.3  Formation of Monoterpenoids Like Menthol is a Part of Chemical 
Defense of Mint and Other Plants
Monoterpenoids synthesis and the site of storage within a tissue depends upon its role. 
As menthol repels insects, the synthesis of menthol takes place in glandular hair of leaves 
of M. piperita. (Figure 11.4). Due to the sensitivity of mint plant to insects, menthol 
translocation in the form of neo‐menthol glucoside takes place from phloem to the root 
where menthol is stored and protects the roots from insects in soil. Neo‐menthol is syn­
thesized from limonene and geranyl‐pyrophosphate in the mesophyll cells of mint leaves.

11.2.4  Linalool is a Defensive Terpenoid and a Volatile Attractant
Linaool  also  known  as  linalyl  alcohol  or  linalyl  oxide  is  a  common  aromatic 
a cyclic monoterpenoids from the flowers of many plants belonging to families Lami­
aceae, Lauraceae, and Rutaceae. More than 200 plants are known to synthesize linalool. 

(c)

Trichome

DOXP

(b)

G-3-P

Pyruvate

DOXP

2 (Isopentenyl pyrophosphate)

Geraniol

(a)

Petal cell

Epidermal cells

DOXP pathway

synthesizes 
geraniol in 
rose plastids

Plastid

Geraniol biosynthesis

in petal & release through

trichome

Figure 11.3  (a‐c) (a) Synthesis and release of volatile terpenoids, (b) DOXP (1‐deoxy‐D‐xylulose 5‐phosphate pathway) synthesizes 
volatile terpenoids in plastids, (c) which are either stored or immediately released through modified structures located on 
epidermal cells.

268

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(b)

Geranyl pyrophosphate

Limonene

Isopiperitenol

 Isopulegene 

Isopiperiterone

Pulegone

Piperitenone

Menthenone

Neomenthol

Piperitone

Menthol

Neomenthyl Glucose

(45%)

Menthol
Acetate

Menthol biosynthesis

Phloem 

Menthol carried to root cells

(a) Mentha piperita

(Menthol acts a repellent.

It is biosynthesized in leaves &

transported through phloem to root
where it protect root from insects.)

Insect & bacterial repellent

(c) Menthol transportation

Figure 11.4  (a‐c) Formation of menthol is a defensive mechanism of mint (Mentha piperita). 
(a) Mint plant, (b) Menthol synthesis takes place in leaves of mint plant from GPP which forms 
limonene and then isopiperitenol. Formation of isopiperitenol acts as a branching point during 
menthol biosynthesis, forming isopulegene and isopiperiterone. Isopulegene synthesizes pulegone 
which forms menthenone. Menthenone is further converted in neomenthol which forms neomenthyl 
glucoside. However, isopiperiterone forms piperitenone which is further converted in piperitone. 
Piperitone formation is followed by menthol formation, (c) Menthol is translocated through phloem 
from leaves to the root of mint plant where it acts as a repellent.

It acts both as a defensive compound as well as a volatile attractant mostly for moths. 
Some  important  plants  include  Aniba  rosaeodora  (rosewood  tree),  Cinnamomum 
verum, Citrus, and Mentha spp. Linalool is also known to be toxic to young tissues, 
therefore, many organs tend to produce it only when they are mature. It is also used in 
many insecticidal products due to its insecticidal properties.

Linalool synthase catalyzes the conversion of geranyl pyrophosphate to linalool in the 
petals of leaves where it is bound to plasma membrane. Linalool is predominantly pro­
duced by epidermal cells of petals so it can easily diffuse from petals in plants like Clarkia 
breweri. Essential oils of Coriandrum sativum L. are composed of 65–78% of linalool while 
A. rosaeodora upto 86%. However, amount and composition of essential oil of same spe­
cies may also differ due to different geographical environments as C. sativum which is 
indigenous to Asia comprises linalool less than 55%. In addition to linalool, coriander vola­
tile oil also is composed of cymene, nerol, carvacrol and geranyl acetate (Figure 11.5).

Floral Essential Oils: Biosynthesis, Classification and Commercial  Applications

269

Fruit essential oils

Linanool, -Pinene, -Terpentine, Geranyl acetate,
Camphor, Geraniol, -Pinene, Myrcene, Limonene,

P-cymol, Dipentene

Attracts insect or a ‚y for

pollination 

 Volatile signals for
pollination & defense

Repels bacteria

CH2OH

O

H

C

H

2O

H

OH

-Terpentine, -Decylaldehyde,

Borneol, Acetic acid ester

DMAPP+IPP

Cuticle

Volatiles released 

in cytosol

Mature leaves

Trichomes

Geranyl pyrophosphate
Linalool
synthase

Geraniol
synthase
Geraniol

Linalool

Plastid

(a) Coriandrum sativum

(b) Leaf showing glandular trichomes

 (c) Trichome showing monoterpene

 formation in plastid

Cold water

Still

CH2OH

CH2OH

C

H

2O

H

OH

CH2OH

C

H

2O

H

Linalool

Nerol

Geraniol

S

i
e
v
e

 
s
e
l
i
t
a
l
o
V

 
l
a
i
t
n
e
s
s
E

Steam

Water

Fire

Condenser

Water & essential oil

Hot water

Cooling coil

Essential oils

OH

CH2OH

O

H

C

H

2O

H

OH

Floral water

Figure 11.5  (a‐d) Linalool, a monoterpenoid, acts as a defensive compound and a volatile attractant. 
It is known to be synthesized by over 200 plants. Many members of family Apiaceae synthesize 
linalool as a part of their defense to keep their predators away. (a) Coriandrum sativum plant, 
(b) In C. sativum, linalool synthesis takes place within plastids of glandular trichomes located on 
epidermal cell from where it diffuses in air, (c) DMAPP and IPP serve as precursors for synthesis of 
essential oil of C. sativum which is a mixture of many volatile monoterpenoids, including linalool, 
geraniol, and many other volatile molecules (shown in (a)), (d) Extraction of essential oils like linalool 
from linalool‐synthesizing plants like C. sativum is done through steam distillation method which is a 
temperature sensitive method used commonly for extraction of essential oils and results in the 
separation of volatile molecule from plant tissues. Volatile molecules are passed through condenser in 
which vapors are condensed and essential oils are then collected in another vessel along with floral 
water, (c) Linalool is commonly used essential oil in many cosmetic and pharmaceutical products. 
(See insert for color representation of the figure.)

270

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Linalool containing cosmetic products

Face cream

Figure 11.5 (Cont’d)

Transcripts of linalool oxides are expressed during pollen growth of Clarkia breweri 
in the transmitting tissue of stigma and style as well as in petals where they are known 
to guide insects to stigma and also inhibit pollen growth of other species (Dudareva 
et al., 1996). However in snapdragon flowers, genes for terpene synthase forming lin­
alool, myrcene, ocimene and nerolidol are expressed in upper and lower petal lobes 
which  are  main  sites  involved  in  synthesis  and  release  of  these  volatile  terpenoids 
(Nagegowda et al., 2008).

In Arabidopsis, monoterpenes and sesquiterpene synthases are expressed in stigma, 
anthers, sepals and nectaries which indicate their defensive role in herbivore and pro­
tection against microbial pathogens (Tholl et al., 2005). However, plants minimize their 
energy requirements by secreting linalool only when flower is ready for pollination and 
its emission stops soon after pollination is completed. In plants of family compositae, 
linalool synthesis in petals starts at the same time, whereas floral initiation starts later.
Linalool is widely used in many food products and for making perfumes. Linalool‐
based cosmetic and food products are available in markets. They include many skin 
care products, hair shampoos, soap bars and perfumes. Linalool content is also being 
increased in some plants to increase the crop yield of plants which grow outside the 
range  of  their  pollinators  in  order  to  make  pollination  more  efficient.  Limonene  is 
another important aromatic compound of lemon that is found in leaves and peel of 
lemon fruit. Limonene synthase uses geranyl pyrophosphate as a substrate to synthesize 
limonene, myrcene, and pinene, and this may be one of the reason for the abundance 
and diversity of plant terpenoids.

11.2.5  Geraniol: A Volatile Attractant and Defensive Essential Oil in Cosmetic 
and Medicinal Products
Geraniol is an important monoterpenoids which is produced by wide variety of plants 
and it is one of the commonly used ingredients in many cosmetic, food and pharmaceu­
tical products. It forms an important part of the essential oil of geranium and rose spp. 
Cymbopogan martinii and C. winterianus are also important commercial sources of 
geraniol. Difference in geraniol content is reported in different species of Cymbopogan. 

Floral Essential Oils: Biosynthesis, Classification and Commercial  Applications

271

Essential oil of C. martinii is composed of upto 95% of geraniol, whereas C. flexuosus 
has 35–47% and Litsea cubeba has 38–45% of geraniol. Essential oil of C. martinii is low 
in geraniol content and referred as gingergrass oil or Indian geranium oil. Essential oil 
from Cymbopogan species are used to treat cough, fever, leprosy, gout and stomach 
disorders. Many aroma chemicals distilled from Cymbopogan species are used in per­
fume blending. Oil of Cymbopogan wnterianus and C. nardus is commercially sold with 
the international trade name of Oil of Citronella which is produced worldwide at 2000 
tonnes. They are aromatic grasses grown in many Southeast Asian countries. Oil of 
lemongrass is extracted from C. flexuosus and C. citratus. Palmarosa oil is extracted 
from C. martinii var. motia, whereas gingergrass oil is from C. martinii var. sofia. The 
commercial source of vetiver oil is Vetiveria zizanioides. Geraniol is often found with 
geranial and neral, which are oxidation products of geraniol.

Geraniol is an important essential oil which is used in many pharmaceutical, food 
cosmetics and perfume products. It is used in many cosmetic products to make them 
fragrant like soap bars, shampoos, skin care products, and perfumes. It is also used to 
add flavor to tobacco products. It also as acts as a mosquito repellent. Geraniol‐based 
perfumed  or  deo‐perfume  edible  candies  are  also  available  in  the  market.  Geraniol 
p ermeates through skin after eating these candies and fragrance is released through 
skin (Figure 11.6).

Different chromatographic techniques are used for the separation and isolation of 
monoterpenes. However, nature of conjugation can be determined through ultraviolet 
spectroscopy. Mass spectrometry and x‐ray analysis is used for elucidating the structure 
of terpenoids.

Figure 11.6  Deo‐perfume is an edible candy made with the fragrance of rose which makes skin 
permeable and fragrant.

272

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

11.3  Many Terpenoids are Insecticidal and Act 
as Allelochemicals

Volatile chemicals released by clary sage (Salvia sclaria), that is, camphor, 1, 8‐cineole, 
pinene and diterpenes inhibit DNA synthesis and seed germination of many weeds, 
acting as allelochemicals. Camphor produced by many plants like Cinnamomum cam-
phora, Rosmarinus officinalis, and Ocimum basilicum through the geranyl pyrophos­
phate are important allelochemicals. Other known allelochemicals are carvone, linalool, 
methyl chavicol and anethol. Pyrethin from pyrethrum daisies possesses insecticidal 
properties. Dried flower heads are pyrethrum daisies, whereas extracted active ingredi­
ents are called pyrethin. Pyrethin‐based shampoos are used to kill lice on pets. Plants 
from families Fabaceae, Lamiaceae and Verbenaceae, possess strong insecticidal activi­
ties against a lot of insect pests and can serve better substitute for synthetic compounds 
like methyl bromide and phosphine due to their availability and degradability; they also 
are less toxic to the environment (Figure 11.7).

11.4  Sesquiterpenes are Defensive Terpenoids 
of Many Plants

Many sesquiterpenes are composed of three isoprene units (C15H24) which are involved 
in defensive mechanisms and act as pheromones. Almost 5000 sesquiterpenes lactones 
are known to be synthesized by wide range of plants, however they are commonly found 
in families like Cactaceae, Solanaceae, Araceae and Euphorbiaceae. They are present in 
many  members  of  sunflower  family  in  specialized  secretory  cells,  that  is,  laticifers. 
However, sesquiterpenes which are involved in the defense against pathogens are found 
in vacuoles. Sesquiterpenes exist in the latex of many plants as one of the dominant 
metabolite in order to protect them from herbivores. They also act as allelochemicals 
signals.  In  plants  like  Aquilaria  sinensis  they  are  produced  only  in  response  to 
herbivory.

Sesquiterpenes are formed by combining ISPP with geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate 
with  the  help  of  enzyme  farnesyl  pyrophosphate  (FPP)  in  endoplasmic  reticulum. 
Important  sesquiterpene  include  farnesene,  nerolidol,  zingiberene,  caryophyllene, 
patchoulol and longifolene. Capsidiol is phytoalexin formed in pepper and tobacco. 
They make up an important part of our diet as lettuce and chicory and star anise are 
important sources of sesquiterpene lactones.

Farnesol exists in green apple coating, flowers, leaves and roots of Martricaria spp., 
and are responsible for their aroma. It serves as a precursor for the formation of sesquit­
erpenes in plants and acts as potent agent against storage pest and fungal pathogens. 
Many  sterols  like  brassinosteroids  in  plants,  saponins,  yamonin  from  yam  plant 
(Dioscorea),  cardenolides  like  digitoxigenin  and  defensive  substances  like  phty­
oecdysones are synthesized from farnesyl phosphates. Konrad Bloch received the Nobel 
Prize in 1964 for elucidating that acetly‐CoA serves as a precursor for biosynthesis of 
steroids.

Essential oils with blue‐green color are composed of chamazulene in chamomiles. 
Cayophyllene is secreted by stems and flowers of Cannabis sativa, Ocimum basilicum, 

Floral Essential Oils: Biosynthesis, Classification and Commercial  Applications

273

(b)

(f)

(a)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 11.7  (a‐f) Essential oil of Lantana spp. possesses strong insecticidal and repellents effects against 
the maize grain weevil, (b) Aromatic oil of M. piperita is composed of linalool and menthol pulegone, 
menthone, and carvone. However, the proportion of limonene decreases with the age of plant but 
menthone increases and converts into menthol (Gershenzon et al., 2000), (c) Essential oils of Ocimum 
spp. O. suave, O. basilicum, O. kilimandscharicum are used in making biopesticides against mosquitoes 
(when used in mosquito coil, 93–95% activities against killing of mosquitoes). O. basilicum (sweet basil) 
synthesizes nerol and geraniol which are stored in peltate glands of leaf epidermis. Geraniol synthase 
(GES) synthesizing geraniol is localized in glands, (d) Azadirachitin is the most important limnoid of 
Melia azedarach. Nimbin and nimbidin have anti‐viral and anti‐fungal properties useful to humans and 
animals. Gedunin, a minor limonoid, is effective in treating malaria through leaves infusion 

274

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(g)

“I have genes from
lemon, I am more
 stronger than you!”

Hey! 
“let’s run, he is 
going to kill us.”

L

Figure 11.7 (Cont’d)  (e) Leaves of Ricinus communis possess insecticidal, anti‐larval and ovicidal 
activity against mosquito larvae and contain isoquercetin, 2,5‐dihydroxybenzoic, and epicatechin, 
(f) St. John’s wart essential oil is commonly used in perfumery and blends well with clary sage, 
lavender, cedar, vetiver, rosemary and chamomile, (g) Cartoon illustration of transgenic bacteria with 
limonene which acts as anti‐bacterial volatile oil.

Origanum vulgare, Rosmarinus officinalis, and Syzygium aromaticum. It gives spiciness 
to fruit of Piper nigrum. Nerolidol makes essential oil of Citrus aurantium, Cymbopogan 
citratus,  Jasminum  sambac,  Lavendula  angustifolia,  Melaleuca  alternifolia  and 
Z. officinale and is used as a flavoring agent in perfumery due to its woody aroma. 
Zingiberene synthesized by cells of rhizome gives flavour to ginger.

11.5  Diterpenoids are Important Phytohormones Which 
Comprise of Four Isoprenoid Inits

Diterpenoids are composed of four isoprenoid units with 20 carbon atoms which are 
derivative  of  geranylgeranyl  pyrophosphate.  They  include  compounds  like  abietol, 
pimarinol, sciarcol and manool. Retinol and retinal phytol are diterpenoid derivatives. 
Many genera of family Euphorbiaceae produce economically important diterpenoids in 
their parenchmya cells (Figure 11.8). One of the diterpenoid ingenol mebutate is used 
for  the  precancerous  skin  disease.  Resiniferatoxins  and  prostratin  are  used  for  the 
t reatments of severe pain and HIV (King et al., 2014).

Floral Essential Oils: Biosynthesis, Classification and Commercial  Applications

275

(a)

(d)

(b)

(c)

(e)

Figure 11.8  (a‐e) Many Euphorbia spp. and plants from family Euphorbiaceae synthesize many 
terpenoids within their latex along with other phytochemicals, (a & b) E. rolyeana is composed of 
ingol and ingenol diterpenes which are synthesized in stem and leaves, (c) Role of E. helioscopia is 
being investigated for its possible anti‐HIV activity, (d) E. cotinifolia contain many terpenoids and 
flavonoids which have activities against phytopathogens bacteria, (e) Milky latex produced by 
E. splendens is a complex mixture of alkaloids, terpenoids, tannins, oils and resins and is toxic for 
herbivores.

Gibberellic acid is an important phytohormone, a diterpenoid, crucial for growth and 
development of plants. Many conifer resins are complex mixture of monoterpenes 
and sesquiterpenes. They form turpentine fraction which is composed of limonene and 
toxic for many insects and fungi. However, diterpenes form rosin fractions of conifer 
resins constitute resin acids containing abietic acids. They are stored as oleoresins in 
resin channels and secreted upon wound or injury to protect the infected sites. Enzymes 
for  diterpenoid  resin  synthesis  are  isolated  and  assayed  through  liquid  scintillation 
spectrometry using acetic acid as substrate.

276

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Plants like Hypericum perforatum commonly known as St. John’s wort, synthesize 
medicinal phytochemicals like hypericin, pseudohypericin and hyperforin. Hypericins 
accumulate  in  dark  red  color  oil  glands  within  in  the  leaves  and  flowers,  whereas 
h yperforins accumulate in flowers of plants. Many of these compounds are known to be 
anti‐carcinogenic, antidepressant, anti‐viral and antibiotic activities.

11.6  Terpenoid Biosynthesis in Plants Proceeds in Two 
Different Cellular Compartments

Terpenoid biosynthesis in plants takes place within cytosol as well as within their plas­
tids through different pathways. However, their end products, that is, five‐carbon con­
taining  compounds  isopentenyl  pyrophosphate  (ISPP)  and  many  enzymes  which  are 
involved in their biosynthesis are the same within cytosol and plastids. Terpenoid syn­
thesis occurs in cytosol through mevalonic acid pathway (MVA) and in plastids through 
methyl erythritol 4‐phosphate pathway (MEP).

During terpenoid biosynthesis in cytosol through MVA pathway, acetyl‐CoA serves 
as a precursor for synthesis of terpenoids. Enzyme AcAc‐CoA thiolase (AACT) cata­
lyzes the condensation of two molecules of acetyl‐CoA which results in the formation 
of acetoacetyl‐CoA (AcAc) (Figure 11.9). In the next step, AcAc is converted into HMG‐
CoA in another condensation reaction with another molecule of acetyl‐CoA. This step 
is  catalyzed  by  enzyme  HMG‐CoA  synthase.  HMG‐CoA  is  further  acted  on  by  an 
enzyme  HMG‐CoA  reductase  which 
leads  to  the  formation  of  mevalonate. 
Phosphorylation  of  mevalonate  by  phosphomevalonate  kinase  (PMK)  forms  meva­
lonate‐5‐phosphate in downstream steps. Another phosphate group is added to meva­
lonate‐5‐phosphate by enzyme mevalonate diphosphate which results in formation of 
mevalonate‐5‐diphosphate  which  further  forms  IPP  by  enzyme  mevalonate  diphos­
phate decarboxylase (MVD) in a decarboxylation reaction. In an isomerization reac­
tion, an isomer of IPP, that is, dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP), is formed by enzyme 
isopentenyl diphosphate isomerase (IDI). In tobacco BY‐2 (TBY‐2) and in C. aureus 
using [2‐13C,4‐2H]deoxyxylulose double‐labeling studies, it is revealed that regulation 
of DMAPP and IPP balance is different among plant species (Tritsch et al., 2010).

Pyruvate and glyceraldehye‐3‐phosphate (GA‐3P) act as precursor for formation of IPP 
and  DMAPP  in  MEP  pathway  in  plastids.  Initially,  1‐deoxy‐D‐  xylulose‐5‐phosphate 
(DOXP)  is  formed  in  a  condensation  reaction  catalyzed  by  enzyme  DOXP  synthase 
(DXS). DOXP is converted into MEP by DOXP reductoisomerae (DXR). MEP is further 
acted upon by enzyme 2‐C‐methyl‐D‐erythritol 4‐phosphate cytidylyltransferase (MCT) 
to form 4‐(cytidine 50‐diphospho)‐2‐C‐methyl‐D‐erythritol (CDP‐ME). Next 4‐(cytidine 
50‐diphospho)‐2‐C‐methyl‐D‐erythritol phosphate (CDP‐ME2P) is formed by enzyme 
CMK. In the next step, enzyme 2‐C‐methyl‐D‐erythritol 2,4‐ cyclodiphosphate synthase 
(MDS) converts CDP‐ME2P in another intermediate, that is, 2‐C‐methyl‐D‐erythritol 
2,4‐cyclodiphosphate  (ME‐2,4cPP)  which  is  further  acted  upon  by  enzyme  (E)‐4‐
hydroxy‐3‐methylbut‐2‐enyl  diphosphate  synthase  (HDS)  to  form  (E)‐4‐hydroxy‐3‐ 
methylbut‐2‐enyl  diphosphate  (HMBPP).  Branching  of  HMBPP  to  IPP  and  DMAPP 
is  catalyzed  by  simultaneous  action  of  enzyme  (E)‐4‐hydroxy‐3‐methylbut‐2‐enyl 
d iphosphate reductase (HDR). Interconversion of IPP into DMAPP takes place through 
isopentenyl diphosphate isomerase (IDI).

Floral Essential Oils: Biosynthesis, Classification and Commercial  Applications

277

Figure 11.9  Biosynthesis of volatile terpenoids in plants takes place either through mevalonate 
pathway (MVA) which takes place in cytosol or in plastids through methylerythritol pathways (MEP). 
Mitochondria also synthesize sesqueterpenoids from IPP (isopentenyl pyrophosphate). Boxes 
represent enzyme and volatile terpenoids are underlined. Abbreviations: AACT, acetoacetyl‐CoA 
thiolase; AcAc‐CoA, acetoacetyl‐CoA; CDP‐ME, 4‐(cytidine 5′‐diphospho)‐2‐C‐methyl‐d‐erythritol; 
CDP‐ME2P, 4‐(cytidine 5′‐diphospho)‐2‐C‐methyl‐d‐erythritol phosphate; CMK, CDP‐ME kinase; 
DMAPP, dimethylallyl diphosphate; DOXP, 1‐deoxy‐d‐xylulose 5‐phosphate; DXR, DOXP 
reductoisomerase; DXS, DOXP synthase; FDS, farnesyl diphosphate synthase; FPP, farnesyl 
diphosphate; GA‐3P, glyceraldehyde‐3‐phosphate; GDS, geranyl diphosphate synthase; GGDS, geranyl 
geranyl diphosphate synthase; GGPP, geranyl geranyl diphosphate; GPP geranyl diphosphate; HDR, 
(E)‐4‐hydroxy‐3‐methylbut‐2‐enyl diphosphate reductase; HDS, (E)‐4‐hydroxy‐3‐methylbut‐2‐enyl 
diphosphate synthase; HMBPP, (E)‐4‐hydroxy‐3‐methylbut‐2‐enyl diphosphate; HMG‐CoA,  
3‐hydroxy‐3‐methylglutaryl‐CoA; HMGR, HMG‐CoA reductase; HMGS, HMG‐CoA synthase; IDI, 
isopentenyl diphosphate isomerase; IPP, isopentenyl diphosphate; ISPS, isoprene synthase; MCT, 
2‐C‐methyl‐d‐erythritol 4‐phosphate cytidylyltransferase; MDS, 2‐C‐methyl‐d‐erythritol  
2,4‐cyclodiphosphate synthase; ME‐2,4cPP, 2‐C‐methyl‐d‐erythritol 2,4‐cyclodiphosphate; MEP, 
2‐C‐methyl‐d‐erythritol 4‐phosphate; MVD, mevalonate diphosphate decarboxylase; MVK, 
mevalonate kinase; PMK, phosphomevalonate kinase; TPS, terpene synthase (Nagegowda, 2010). 
(Used with permission of Elsevier.)

Presence of prenyltransferases in cytosol and plastids form prenyl diphosphates from 
IPP and DMAPP. Enzyme geranyl diphosphate synthase (GDS) produce 10‐C geranyl 
diphosphate (GPP) which serves as a universal precursor of monoterpenes. A variety of 
monoterpenes and sesquiterpenes are formed by action of terpene synthases (TPSs) 
(Nagegowda,  2010).  Sesquiterpenes  synthases  synthesize  15‐C  terpenes  which  are 
reported to be localized in cytosol. In strawberries, a bifunctional nerolidol and linalool 

278

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

synthase  (FaNES1)  is  detected  to  be  localized  in  cytosol  as  revealed  through  GFP 
l ocalization study and chloroplasts assays.

Further, 15‐C farnesyl pyrophosphate (FPP) can be formed in a condensation reaction 
of DMAPP and two molecules of IPP by enzyme farnesyl diphosphate synthase (FDS). 
However, spatial and temporal expression of terpene synthases in plants suggest that 
terpenoids synthesis is regulated by transcriptional control. Environmental factors like 
heat, temperature, and sunlight also control terpene synthase expressions. However, 
formation and release of volatile compounds in flowers like snapdragon is regulated at 
transcriptional level (Muhlemann et al., 2012).

Modern  methods  for  extraction  and  identification  of  commercially  important 
e ssential oils include thin layer chromatography and gas chromatography, identification 
by  retention  time,  infrared  spectroscopy,  carbon‐13  nuclear  magnetic  resonance 
s pectroscopy  and  mass  spectroscopy.  Isolation  is  achieved  by  headspace  methods, 
direct vaporization and liquid CO2 extraction.

11.6.1  Vanillin Biosynthesis
Vanillin is another important fragrant molecule which is synthesized by Vanilla plani-
folia and V. tahitenses although trace amounts are synthesized by other plants. Aroma 
of Vanilla is due to 200 molecules however, main constituent is vanillin. Vanilla pods 
are major source of commercial vanillin. Vanillin also acts as defensive compound and 
stored in pods as vanillin glucosides which when hydrolyzed releases vanillin.

Phenylalanine acts as a precursor of vanillin biosynthesis. During vallinin synthesis, 
phenylalanine  forms  cinnamic  acid  through  enzyme  phenylalanine  ammonia  lyase 
(PAL) which converts into p‐caumaric acid by cinnamate‐4‐hydroxylase (C4H). Next  
p‐Coumaroyl‐CoA is formed by 4‐hydroxycinnamoyl‐CoA‐ligase (4CL). In further steps, 
quinate and shikimate esters are formed leading to the formation of caffeic acid through 
caffeoyl‐CoA (Figure 11.10). The formation of caffeic acid leads to ferulic acid formation 
which is converted into vanillin. The conversion of ferulic acid to vanillin is catalysed by 
enzyme vanillin synthase, that is, VpVAN and proceeds in two partial reactions which 
involve  an  initial  hydration  addition  reaction  followed  by  a  retro‐aldol  elimination 
r eaction. (Figure 11.11). VpVAN is localized to inner part of vanilla pod and catalyzes the 
conversion of ferulic acid in vanillin. Higher transcripts levels of enzyme are found in 
single cells located a few cell layers away from the inner epidermis (Gallaj et al., 2014).

Mayu Yamamoto got the Nobel Prize in 2007 for extracting lignin from cow dung and 
converting it into vanillin. Vanillin is used to make L‐dopa to treat Parkinson’s disease. 
Naturally extracted vanillin makes only 0.4% of food industry, whereas the remaining is 
chemically synthesized. Mostly synthetic vanillin is obtained from petrochemical sources. 
Artificial vanilla essence is used to add flavours to chocolates and drinks, however, through 
gas‐liquid chromatography, real and synthetic vanilla flavour can be distinguished.

11.7  Economically Important Terpenoids

Many aromatic monoterpenes are well known for their antimicrobial properties and 
therefore make an important part of human diet in form of many herbs and spices. They 
also help plants in maintaining homeostasis. Due to their medicinal values they are 

(a)

O

OH

NH2

Phenylalanine

Phenylalanine ammonia
lyase (PAL)

O

OH

Cytochrome P450 reductase

(POR)

2e–

Cinnamic acid
O2
Red
Ox
H2O

O

Cinnamate 4-hydroxylase (C4H)

OH

*HO

–Coumaric acid

O

Hydroxycinnamoyltransferase

(HCT)

Sh/Q

4-hydroxycinnamoyl-CoA 
ligase (4CL)

O

SCoA

*HO

4-Coumaroyl shikimate/quinate

*HO

-Coumaroyl CoA

Cytochrome P450 reductase

(POR)

2e–

O2
Red
Ox
H2O

Coumaroyl ester 3߰-hydroxylase (C3߰H)

CYP98A3 orthologue

O

Hydroxycinnamoyltransferase

O

HO

HO

Sh/Q

(HCT)

Caffeoyl shikimate/quinate

MeO

*HO

O

HO

HO

HO

*HO

MeO

*HO

Vanillin

Vanillin synthase (VAN)

hydratase/lyase

MeO

O

Glucose

-O
Vanillin glucoside

(b)

COOH

COOH

HO

CHO

VPVAN

OCH3

OH

Ferulic acid

OCH3

OH

VPVAN

OCH3

CH3COOH

OH
Vanillin

SCoA

Caffeoyl CoA

4-Hydroxycinnamoyl-CoA
ligase (4CL)

O

OH

Caffeic acid

Caffeic acid/5-hydroxyferulic acid

O-mehyltransferase

(COMT)

O

OH

Ferulic acid

Q, quinate; Sh, shikimate
OH* indicates that glucosylation can
occur at this point during the formation
of vanillin glucoside

Figure 11.10  (a‐b) Vanillin is a defensive compound which is synthesized within pods of Vanilla spp., 
(a) Enzyme vanillin synthase (VpVAN) catalyzes de novo biosynthesis of vanillin through cleavage of 
ferulic acid and its glucoside to produce vanillin and vanillin glucoside, (b) The conversion of ferulic 
acid to vanillin byVpVAN takes place sequentially by two partial reactions which involve an initial 
hydration addition reaction followed by a retro‐aldol elimination reaction (Gallage et al., 2014). 
(Used with permission.)

280

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(b)

(a)

(c)

Figure 11.11  (a‐c) Enzyme VpVAN synthesizes vallinin from ferulic acid in V. planifolia. It is localized to 
an inner part of the pod: (a) Detection of VpVAN transcripts through FITC‐conjugated antibodies 
which recognize digoxigenin (DIG) incorporated in the specific PCR products and represents VpVAN 
transcript, (b) same image at higher magnification, (c) Fluorescence shows unspecific binding of the 
FITC‐conjugated antibodies recognizing DIG to cell walls and supporting fiber cells surrounding the 
vascular systems. Note chloroplasts are visible (as orange dots) due to their auto fluorescence at the 
used filter settings. Abbreviations: e, epidermis; c, cortex; cl, chloroplast; s, supporting fibre tissue; 
Scale bar, 100 µm. (Gallage et al., 2014). (Used with permission.)

used in many pharmaceutical products. Many essential oils are part of our daily food 
due to their aromatic, anti‐microbial, anti‐carcinogenic and anti‐inflammatory proper­
ties.  Commonly  used  aromatic  compounds  are  antheol,  cuminyl  alcohol,  limonene, 
geraniol, thymol, linalool, eugenol, capsicin, menthol, piperine and zingiberone. Many 
of them are used in flavouring like ginger, cordamom, cumin, fenugreek, saffron and 
clove. Vanilla extracts and oleoresins are widely used by food and beverage industries, 
in  frozen  dairy,  desserts,  puddings,  custards,  ice  creams  like  cream  caramel,  cream 
b rulee, peach melba, and apple.

Many  terpenoids  act  as  natural  blockers  by  protecting  the  plants  from  harmful 
radiations. Therefore, terpenoids from Melaleuca cajuputi which secrete platyphyllol 
are being used by many sun‐blocker manufacturing companies. Nelumbo nucifera is 

Floral Essential Oils: Biosynthesis, Classification and Commercial  Applications

281

reported to stimulate melanin synthesis and tyrosine activity due to its terpenoids 
(Jeon  et  al.,  2009).  It  is  also  effective  in  the  development  of  gray  hair‐preventing 
chemicals.

Some plant‐derived medicinal products which contain diterpenoids include forskolin 
and ingenol‐3‐angelate. They are used for cardiovascular and skin cancer treatments. 
Patchoulol from Pogostemon cablin is source of the chemotherapic drug Taxol. Essential 
oils of Melaleuca alternifolia has antiviral activity against Herpes simplex virus type 
1(HSP‐1 and HSP‐2). The antiviral activity of some essential oils is also demonstrated 
against poliovirus, adenovirus and influenza virus. Linalool is known to have the strong­
est activity against adenoviruses. Menthol is classified as topical analgesic and can cause 
a feeling of coolness due to stimulation of ‘cold receptors’ by inhibiting the Ca2+ cur­
rents of neuronal membranes. Abietane diterpenoids from Clerodendrum eripophyllum 
roots  have  antimicrobial  and  antiparasitic  properties  (Machumi  et  al.,  2010).  Many 
diterpenoids are being explored for their analgesic, anti‐microbial, anti‐fungal and psy­
choactive properties.

Essential oil of Lavendula hybrida has analgesic efficacy when administered through 
the inhalatory route. Lavender oil with its constituents like linalool, linalyl acetate and 
1,8‐cineole, are effective against ulcer and can alleviate pain. Essential oil of Salvia afri-
cana‐lutea and Dodonaea angustifolia also exhibit analgesic activities. Perillyl alcohol 
and limonene have potential against breast cancer and pancreatic tumors. Syzygium 
aromaticum essential oil has anti‐carcinogenic and anti‐mutagenic activities. Geraniol 
exhibits anti‐carcinogenic by reducing polyamine metabolism, a process involved in 
cancer proliferation. Terpenoids of plants like Tanacetum parthenium, Yarrow (Achillia 
spp.), and quinghaosu (A. annua) are used in the treatment of malarial type ailments 
both in traditional and medicinal treatments.

Many medicinally important plants in sunflower family contain sesqueterpenoids. 
Sesquiterpene lactones from members of this family are used to impart bitterness of 
alcoholic drinks. Caryophyllene is widely used in food and beverage products, creams, 
lotions and detergents and a key component of balm of Gilead. Products like Charlotte. 
‘Amouge’, ‘Jicky’, and ‘Habanita’ include vanillin as principal note. The pharmacological 
value of vanillin is also known due to its role as carminative, aphrodisiac, antimetastatic 
and antiangiogenic activities. Vanillic acid is also useful in sickle cell. It is also used to 
add flavour to pharmaceutical products.

11.7.1  Bio‐engineered Terpenoids
Metabolic  engineering  of  volatile  terpenoids  has  provided  information  about  the 
p resence of GPP and FPP pools in plastids, mitochondria and in cytosol and about 
silent metabolism of some enzymes which do not have endogenous substrate.

A web‐based database, that is, www.atipd.ethz.ch is constructed known as Arabidopsis 
thaliana Isoprenoid Pathway Database (AtIPD). This pathways is based on the informa­
tion from isoprenoid pathway models and genes from public metabolic pathways data­
bases  like  BioPathAt  (Lange  &  Ghassemian,  2005),  AraCyc  (www.arabidopsis.org/
biocyc) KEGG (www.genome.jp/kegg) and SUBA (suba.plantenergy.uwa.edu.au). They 
serve as valuable resources for investigation of regulation of carotenoid pathway through 
quantitative  technologies  and  systems  biology.  MASCP  Gator  web  portal  (gator.
mascproteomic.org) also provides resources to Arabidopsis community. AtCHLRO is 

282

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

another important database which gives information about biosynthesis of isoprenoids. 
It makes use of extensive proteomics data about peptide sequencing, molecular weight, 
chromatography  retention  times,  MS/MS  spectra,  spectral  count,  corresponding 
to  proteins  in  highly  purified  leaf  chloroplasts  and  their  envelopes,  stroma,  and 
thylakoids.

11.8  Future Challenges

Although terpenoids‐synthesizing pathways are being genetically engineered in many 
plants in order to provide defense against pathogens, to extract natural fragrances for 
their applications in different industries, it has been successful only in limited number 
of species so far. Use of essential oils with anti‐microbial, and pesticidal properties is 
increasing in food and agricultural industries and replacing use of synthetic preserva­
tives which are harmful for health. However, introduction of many of these products in 
market is still a challenge due to poor coordination among researchers and industries, 
due to tedious process of registration of product in order to be approved by EU which 
is also expensive and involves toxicity testing.

There is a need to development efficient ways of bioactive packing of antimicrobial 
compounds which maintain their higher encapsulation efficiencies which are a cceptable 
by European legislation in order to increase their use in food industries.

More research should be conducted to introduce plants based insecticides market 

and there is a need to develop transgenic bioinsecticidal plants.

Agriculture  industry  is  still  searching  for  genes  involved  in  terpenoids‐synthesizing 
enzymes which can be cloned and overexpressed in edible plants and cereals which are 
sensitive to pathogen attacks. There is need to conduct sufficient research in making ter­
penoids based pesticides to protect crops from pests. Similarly, characterization of linalool 
synthase expression can also fill the gaps regarding the evolution of fragrant species into 
non‐fragrant species about how they lost the tendency to synthesize f ragrant molecules.

References

Abdullaev, J.F., Cabarello‐Ortega, H., Rivero’n‐Negrete, L., Pereda‐Miranda, R., Rivera‐

Luna, R., Manuel Herna’ndez, J., Pe’rez‐Lo’pez, I., & Espinosa‐Aguirre, J.J. (2002). 
‘In vitro evaluation of the chemopretentive potential of saffron’, Revista de Investigacion 
Clinica, 54, pp. 430–436.

Christmann, M. & Wallach, O. (2010). Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 49, 

p. 9580.

Dudareva, N., Cseke, L., Blanc, V.M., & Pichersky, E. (1996). ‘Evolution of floral scent in 
Clarkia: novel patterns of S‐linalool synthase gene expression in the C. breweri flower’, 
Plant Cell, 8, pp. 1137–1148.

Gallage, N.J., Esben‐Hansen, H., Kannangara, R., Olsen, C.K., Motawia, M.S., Jørgensen, 

K., Holme, I., Hebelstrup, K., Grisoni, M., & Møller, B.L. (2014). ‘Vanillin formation from 
ferulic acid in Vanilla planifolia is catalyzed by a single enzyme’, Nature 
Communications, 5, p. 4037 doi: 10.1038/ncomms5037.

Floral Essential Oils: Biosynthesis, Classification and Commercial  Applications

283

King, A.J., Brown, G.D., Gilday, A.D., Larson, T.R., & Graham, I.A. (2014). ‘Production of 
bioactive diterpnoids in the euphorbiaceae depends on evolutionarily conserved gene 
clusters’, Plant cell, 26, pp. 3286–3298.

Knudsen, J.T., Eriksson, R., Gershenzon, J., & Stahl, B. (2006). ‘Diversity and distribution of 

floral scent’, Botanical Reviews, 72, pp. 1–120.

Lange, B.M. & Ghassemian, M. (2005). ‘Comprehensive post‐genomic data analysis 

approaches integrating biochemical pathway maps’, Phytochemisty, 66, pp. 413–451.

Muhlemann, J.K., Maeda, H., Chang, C., Miguel, P.A., Baxter, I., Cooper, B., Perera, M.A., 

Nikolau, B.J., Vitek, O., Morgan, J.A., & Dudareva, N. (2012). ‘Developmental Changes in 
the Metabolic Network of Snapdragon Flowers’, PLoS ONE, 7,p: e40381. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0040381.

Machumi, F., Samoylenko, V., Yenesew, A., Derese, S., Midiwo, J.O., Wiggers, F.T., Jacob, 

M.R., Tekwani, B.L., Khan, S.I., Walker, L.A., & Muhammad, I. (2010). Antimicrobial and 
antiparasitic abietane diterpenoids from the roots of Clerodendrum eriophyllum’, 
Natural Product Communications, 5, pp. 853–858.

Nagegowda, D.A. (2010). Plant volatile terpenoid metabolism: ‘Biosynthetic genes, 
transcriptional regulation and subcellular compartmentation’, FEBS Letters, 584, 
pp. 2965–2973.

Jeon, S., Kim, N., Koo, B., Kim, J., & Lee, A. (2009). ‘Lotus (Nelumbo nucifera) flower 

essential oil increased melanogenesis in normal human melanocytes’, Experimental & 
Molecular Medicine, 41, pp. 517–524.

Tritsch, D., Hemmerlin, A., Bach, T.J., & Rohmer, M. (2010). ‘Plant isoprenoid biosynthesis 

via the MEP pathway: in vivo IPP/DMAPP ratio produced by (E)‐4‐hydroxy‐3‐
methylbut‐2‐enyl diphosphate reductase in tobacco BY‐2 cell cultures’, FEBS Letters, 
584, pp.129–134.

Tholl, D., Chen, F., Petri, J., Gershenzon, J., & Pichersky, E. (2005). ‘Two sesquiterpene 
synthases are responsible for the complex mixture of sesquiterpenes emitted from 
Arabidopsis flowers’, Plant Journal, 42, pp. 757–771.

Further Reading

Canales, M., Hernández, T., Caballero, J., de Vivar, A.R., Avila, G., Duran, A., & Lira, R. 
(2005). ‘Informant consensus factor and antibacterial activity of the medicinal plants 
used by the people of San Rafael Coxcatlán, Puebla’, Méxican Journal of 
Ethnopharmacology, 97, pp. 429–439.

Charles, D.J. (2012). Antioxidant Properties of Spices, Herbs and Other Sources, Springer.
Chen, F., Tholl, D., D’ÕAuria, J.C., Farooq, A., Pichersky, E., & Gershenzon, J. (2003). 

‘Biosynthesis and emission of terpenoid volatiles from Arabidopsis flowers’, Plant Cell, 
15, pp. 481–494.

Cseke, L.J., Kaufman, P.B., & Kirakosyan, A. (2007). ‘The Biology of Essential Oils in 

Pollination of Flowers’, Natural Products Communications, 2, pp. 1317–1336.

Davies, K.L. & Turner, M.P. (2004). ‘Morphology of floral papillae in Maxillaria Ruiz & Pav. 

(Orchidaceae)’, Annals of Botany, 93, pp. 75–86.

Koch, C., Reichling, J., Schneele, J., & Schnitzler, P. (2008). ‘Inhibitory effect of essential oils 

against herpes simplex virus type 2’, Phytomedicine, 15, pp. 15:71–78.

284

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Nagegowda, D.A., Gutensohn, M., Wilkerson, C.G., & Dudareva, N. (2008). ‘Two nearly 

identical terpene synthases catalyze the formation of nerolidol and linalool in 
snapdragon flowers’, Plant Journal, 55, pp. 224–239.

Pateraki, I., Andersen‐Ranberg, J., Hamberger, B., Heskes, A.M., Martens, H.J., Zerbe, P., 
Bach, S.S., Møller, B.L., Bohlmann, J., & Hamberger, B. (2014). ‘Manoyl oxide (13R), the 
biosynthetic precursor of forskolin, is synthesized in specialized root cork cells in Coleus 
forskohlii’, Plant Physiology, 164, pp.  1222–1236.

Sanganeria, S. & Vibrant, I. (2005). ‘Opportunities for flavor and fragrance industry’, 

Perfumer and Flavorist, 30, pp. 24–34.

Wedge, D.E., Galindo, J.C.G., & Macías, F.A. (2000). ‘Fungicidal activity of natural and 

synthetic sesquiterpene lactone analogs’, Phytochemistry, 53, pp. 747–757.

Floral Essential Oils: Biosynthesis, Classification and Commercial  Applications

285

Problems Chapter 11

1  Aromatic monoterpenoids in plants have two main functions either they attract 
pollinators  or  they  provide  defense  against  microbial  pathogens  and  herbivores 
which find these molecules unpleasant and stay away from plants secreting them. 
Although grasses and roses belong to two different groups of flowering plants, that 
is, monocots and eudicots, but many of their fragrant molecules like geraniol and 
linalool are same. It shows that same metabolic pathways synthesize these aromatic 
molecules through mevalonate pathways, which take place within their plastids. 
Based upon this information, show steps involved in geraniol biosynthesis within 
plastids of (a) leaves of lemongrass (b) epidermal cells of the petal of a rose.

2  Plants with insectidical properties are used in making bioinsecticides. Use of many 
plants  is  becoming  common  in  many  mosquitoes  and  pesticidal  sprays.  Among 
them  basil,  lavender,  rosemary,  chinaberry  and  geranium  are  more  noticeable. 
However, plants synthesize these molecules for their own defense against predators 
but they are also toxic for such plants and they use different strategies to protect 
them from toxic effects of such molecules. Explain different ways through which 
plants protect them from toxic effects of such molecules.

3  Menthol synthesis and secretion in mint plant is a part of its herbivory defense. 

Explain how menthol translocation to roots of mint protects them from insects.

4  Match plants in column A to their main essential oil in column B.

Column A

Column B

Theol
Geraniol
Zingiberone
Linalool
Oryzol
Coffecol
Limonene

Rice
Ginger
Coffee
Rose/Lemongrass
Coffee
Lemon
Mint/Jasmine/Citrus

5  Volatile molecules are released through modified structures present in epidermal 
cells  of  leaves  and  flowers  in  order  to  attract  their  pollinators.  However,  once 
released in air through diffusion, they become part of atmospheric gases. Do you 
think that these molecules can again be taken up by plants? Give reasons to support 
your hypothesis.

6  Give reasons to explain how environmental and climatic factors cause change in the 
chemical composition of essential oils of the same plant species and give some solu­
tions to overcome problems associated with species which produce less essential oil 
due to a change in their habitat?

286

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

7  Aromatic molecules from plants can influence your mood, efficiency, and health 
through aromatherapeutic techniques. Do you support it or not? Give reasons to 
support your answer.

8  Explain the principle of gas chromatography‐mass spectrometry for isolation and 

separation of fragrant molecules.

9  Fragrances have been part of tradition and culture of different countries throughout 

history. Give an account of use of aromatic plants in different countries.

10  Explain important factors in solid phase microextraction which determine success 

of this method.

11  How can tissue culture techniques and breeding techniques bring advancement in 

the perfume and cosmetic industries?

12  Bioengineered  perfumes  will  be  common  in  markets  which  are  made  through 
t aking genes for mevalonate synthesis from flowering plants and introducing them 
in bacteria. How can this idea be helpful in preserving the biodiversity of the plant?

287

12

Aromatic Molecules From Flowers in Perfume 
and Cosmetic Industries

Introduction and Overview of Perfume 

12.1 
and Cosmetic Industries

Perfume and cosmetics industries of world largely rely on many aromatic molecules and 
pigments synthesized by flowering plants. As explained in last chapter, many of these 
fragrant  molecules  are  carbon  and  hydrogen  containing  molecules  (isoprene  units) 
which combine with other molecules in order to make a peculiar fragrance. They are 
composed of few carbon atoms which acquire kinetic energy and can evaporate in air. 
A  perfume may be defined as a mixture of aromatic molecules which are preserved in a 
fixative which can retains their fragrance.

Aromatic molecules are extracted from plants through both traditional as well as 
modern  techniques  involving  distillation  methods,  solvent  extraction,  enfleurage, 
 maceration, supercritical CO2 method, headspace method, solid‐phase micro extrac-
tion (SPME), simultaneous distillation/extraction, distillation/absorption, accelerated 
solvent extraction, microwave extraction, a combination of spectrometric techniques 
and  mass  spectrometric  techniques,  or  through  gas  chromatography/olfactometry 
(GC/O). After extraction, molecules are blended and mixed with other molecules in 
order  to  develop  a  desired  fragrance  and  are  finally  preserved  in  a  suitable  solvent 
 usually ethanol. Concentration of aromatic molecules, solvent and water determines 
whether it is a perfume, cologne or a toilette.

Recently, some research has been successfully conducted by some biotechnological 
companies in forming genetically engineered aromatic microbes by incorporating genes 
for fragrance formation (genes from MEP pathway which takes place in plastids) from 
plants into bacteria. One of the main objective of making perfumes from these geneti-
cally engineered bacteria is to preserve plants biodiversity and also to develop a desired, 
modified and unique product within shorter period of time.

World’s largest perfume markets are in Europe, Africa, Middle East Region, North 
America, Asia Pacific and South America. Main producers from emerging countries 
are Brazil, China, Egypt, Mexico, Guatemala and Indonesia. Largest companies are 
Givaudan and international flavours and fragrance, Firmenich and Symrise, Quest 
International, Takasago, T. Hasegawa, Sensient Technologies, Mastertaste, Danisco 
and Mane (Berger, 2007). Many publications like the Encyclopedia of Essential Oils by 
Gildemeister and Hoffmann in 1899 and the Theory of the Extraction and Separation 
of Essential Oils by way of Distillation, by Carl V. Rechenberg, in 1908, determined 

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products, First Edition. Aisha Saleem Khan. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.288

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

foundations of perfume industry. The European Pharmacopeia contains monograph 
on 25 essential oils. The United States is the world’s largest perfume market with 
annual sales of millions of dollars. However, many perfumes which are synthesized 
today are used in cosmetic products like soap bars and in make up and skin care 
products to make them fragrant. Asia‐Pacific market accounts only 6% of perfume 
industry (Jones, 2010). Ten major crops of world contribute to world’s major supply 
of essential oil.

12.2  History of Perfume Making

The  ability  of  plants  to  synthesize  aromatic  compounds  and  their  release  in  air  to 
 communicate with the environment has fascinated humans since long ago. This has led 
to many attempts to preserve the nature of aromatic molecules not only for the aroma 
but also for healing purposes. Ancient perfumes were prepared by extracting essential 
oils from plants by pressing and steaming and oils which were then burned to make the 
air fragrant.

In history of Greece, Egypt, Rome and other Arabian countries, perfumes have been 
a symbol of beauty, art, attraction, love, spiritualism and religious rituals. Many myths 
and beliefs are associated with the use of perfume throughout the history. Their use is 
also representative of culture, tradition and civilization of different regions of world. 
The  concept  of  using  perfumes  or  aromatic  plants  was  also  based  on  a  myth  that 
Aphrodite, goddess of beauty and love was the first one to use perfume. Alexander the 
Great, sent home shipments of spices, incense and perfume‐making plants while he 
conquered Arabia. Greek are believed to be first manufacturer of perfumes through 
distillation process and prepared perfumes through steeping of aromatic plants in hot 
and cold oils. Greek and Romans used to take daily baths and this ritual included use of 
many perfumes and aromatic plants. Theophrastus (371–287 B.C.) wrote about many 
aromatic plants. Dioscorides (c. 40–90 C.E.) wrote about perfume recipes during the 
time of Nero. Use of perfume and attar was also part of Islamic culture. Al‐Kindi, a 
Muslim Arab philosopher, for the first time described the formation of pure distilled 
alcohol from wine distillation. He wrote about recipes of fragrant oils and aromatic 
perfume  water  in  his  book  Kimiya‐al‐Itr  (Book  of  the  Chemistry  of  Perfume).  Later, 
Avicenna discovered process of extraction of essential oils and fragrances.

Egyptians used perfumes in their temples as an offering to their Gods. Perfumery was 
used  for  oriental  art  until  the  healing  effects  of  perfumes  were  discovered  through 
Europeans in the seventeenth century (Figure 12.1). Due to the antiseptic and germi-
cidal nature of many aromatic molecules, like cloves and cinnamon, they were used by 
doctors while treating patients suffering from plague. The French king, Louis XIV, was 
called the Perfume King, due to his court decorated with floral aromatic pavilion, and 
dried flowers placed in bowls throughout the palace to freshen the air. Royal guests 
were given baths in rose petals. However, in England, the use of perfume was common 
in lockets and canes for sniffing. Mughal Queen Noor Jahan used to sail in a canal filled 
with rose water with great Moghul. Iban Chaldun reported that in the eighth and in 
ninth centuries, roses were traded to India and China. Rose industry developed in the 
tenth to seventeenth century in Persia, and spread over to India, Austria and North 
Africa. Roses were introduced in Bulgaria by Turks.

Aromatic Molecules From Flowers in Perfume and Cosmetic Industries

289

Figure 12.1  Egyptian scene depicting the preparation of lily perfume, fourth century B.C.

First  synthetic  perfume  was  nitrobenzene,  made  from  nitric  acid  and  benzene  to 
scent the soaps with almond like smell. Citronellol, an alcohol with rose‐like odor, was 
created in the U.S. by Francis Despard Dodge. In 1925, the stronger smelling ethyl vanil-
lin  which  does  not  occur  naturally,  was  used  to  create  another  synthetic  perfumer, 
Shalimar. Culturally, perfume bottles were crafted in Europe, Egypt and Venice.

12.3  Aromatic Flowers, Leaves and Woods Used 
in Perfumery

Although flowers are the main aromatic part of flowering plants but leaves of many 
plants are also aromatic and therefore used in perfume making as well as in cosmetic 
products.  Common  aromatic  leaves  used  by  perfume  industries  include  lavender, 
patchouli, sage, violets, rosemary and citrus leaves. Tomato and hay leaves are used for 
their green fragrance they add to perfumes. Resins like labdanum are also utilized in 
making perfumes. Fruits of lemon, orange, litsea, juniper berry and vanilla are aromatic 
but apples, strawberries and cherries do not yield significant odors and mostly their 
flavours are synthetic. Seeds of tonka beans, coriander, cocoa, nutmeg, and anise are 
also aromatic.

Flowers of rose, jasmine, frangipani, lavender, narcissus, lilies, linage, geranium, mag-
nolia, marigolds, moonflower, ocimum, chamomile, lemongrass, vetiver, violets, vanilla, 
rosemary, citrus, cannabis flower, wallflowers, and iris are used in making of perfumes. 
Well‐known aromatic plant families include Apiaceae, Asteraceae, Lamiaceae, Lauraceae, 
Myrtaceae,  Piperaceae,  Rutaceae,  Santalaceae,  Zingiberaceae  and  Zygophyllaceae. 
Popular essential oils used in making of perfume include geraniol, linalool, agar oil, basil 
oil, bergamot oil, cardamom oil, frankincense oil, grapefruit oil, jasmine oil, and patch-
ouli oil (Figure 12.2).

290

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 12.2  (a‐d) Essential oil of: (a) Rosa spp. and (b) Jasminum spp. exhibit a wide range of 
antimicrobial activities and also used in perfumery, (c) Cestrum spp. contain complex mixture of 
α‐pinene, camphene, myrcene, α‐phellandrene, α‐terpinene, phellandrene and β‐ocimene, linalool 
and fenchol, (d) oil secretory structures in epidermal peel of Citrus spp.

Roses are widely used in perfumery due to their stable fragrance and oriental nature. 
They  can  blend  well  with  any  floral  group.  Rose  absolute  from  R.  damascena  and 
R. centifolia is prepared by steam‐based solvent extraction from rose flowers, however 
later is cheaper and commonly used for making rose solutes. Use of rose water from 
rose oil is common in Asian countries. Rose oil is obtained through hydrosteam and 
hydrodistillation of rose flowers in 0.025 to 0.030% yield. Almost 3500 to 4000 kg of 
flowers make one kg of rose oil.

12.4  Traditional and Modern Techniques of Distillation 
and Isolation of Fragrant Molecules

Advancement in analytical techniques and in biotechnological sciences is producing 
modified and unique products of commercial importance not only in pharmaceuticals, 
food, textile, beverage industries, but also in cosmetic and perfume industries. Today, 
modern techniques have developed more reliable and efficient methods for extraction 
of  aromatic  molecules  from  plants  which  retain  their  original  nature  in  products. 
Many of these methods are environmental friendly and produce products which are not 
 hazardous for environment.

Essential oils are extracted through steam distillation, hydrodistillation or through 
water distillation. Distillation parameters which are standardized include distillation 
length, steam pressure, temperature and packing of plants in distillation stills. After 

Aromatic Molecules From Flowers in Perfume and Cosmetic Industries

291

distillation, essential oils are refined and marketed for industries. World’s demand of 
essential  oils  is  100,000  to  110,000  tonnes  out  of  which  4344  tonnes  is  utilized  by 
 perfume  industry,  80410  tonnes  for  processing,  and  217670  tonnes  for  flavors 
(Sanganeria, 2005).

Perfume  oil  is  diluted  with  solvent,  whereas  undiluted  oils  are  composed  of  high 
 concentrations of volatile compounds. Ethanol or mixture of ethanol and water are used 
as a medium. However, sometimes dilutions are done with jojoba, fractionated coconut 
oil or wax.

Extraction of essential oils from plants requires the following steps:

12.4.1  Collection & Extraction of Essential Oils are Prerequisite Steps 
in Traditional Perfume Making
Extraction of essential oils from aromatic parts involves prerequisite in perfume  making. 
Steam is passed through the samples in a container which converts essential oil into gas. 
Gas  is  then  passed  through  the  tubes,  cooled  and  then  liquified.  Oils  can  also  be 
extracted by boiling the petals of aromatic plants in water instead of streaming them. 
However, temperature of steam should be maintained in a way that, it is ideal for heat‐
sensitive  fragrant  molecules  and  do  not  change  their  nature.  In  steam  distillation 
method,  live  steam  is  injected  under  pressure  upto  7kg/cm2.  This  method  is  more 
 efficient and yields higher yield, however it is not suitable for delicate flowers.

12.4.2  Enfleurage & Maceration Through Grease and Fats
In enfleurage, flowers are spread on glass sheets coated with thin layer of grease, which 
are further supported by wooden frames in tiers. Many wooden frames are sandwiched 
one above the other separated by layers of fat. Flowers are removed through hand and 
are continuously replaced until the grease absorbs considerable amount of fragrance. 
This method is used for flowers like jasmine and tuberose (Figure 12.3).

In maceration, warm fats are used at 60–70°C instead of grease to absorb flower smell. 
Fat can be separated from flowers and can be re‐used for fresh flowers. Grease or fats 
are further dissolved in alcohol to obtain the essential oil. However, fats used should be 
saturated and odorless in order to make sure that they do not transfer their aroma to 
extracts.

12.4.3  Solvent Extraction Convert Aromatic Molecules in Concrete and Absolute
During solvent extraction, flowers are placed in large rotating containers or drums and 
benzene or petroleum ether is poured over them to extract fragrant molecules. It results 
in the formation of waxy material or concrete which is composed of oil. The waxy mate-
rial is highly fragrant, composed of long‐lasting aromatic compounds. Aromatic oils are 
extracted from waxy concrete with ethyl alcohol. After the removal of ethyl alcohol, 
remaining material is called an absolute which makes the concentrated form of natural 
fragrances. When burnt off, it leaves a higher concentration of oil on the bottom.

After the extraction of desired essential oils, perfumes are blended by an expert called 
nose. A mixture of different fragrances is required in many cases to develop a certain 
fragrance and this may take even years to develop a perfume formula. Once scent is 
approved by expert, it is mixed with alcohol. However, amount of alcohol may vary 

Plant essential oil based cosmetic and food products

Cinnamol

Eucalyptol

Geraniol

Limonene

Linalool

Citronellol

Farnesol

Eugenol

Cosmetic products

Food products

Greasy glass sheet

with (cid:31)oral bed

 
e
m
a
r
f
 

n
e
d
o
o
W

t
e
e
h
s
 
s
s
a
l
g

 

g
n
i
d
l
o
h

Multitray for 

extraction

Essential oils

Solvent extraction

Perfumes

Collection & harvest

Solvent extraction

En(cid:31)eurage

Maceration

Distillation

Blending

Top Note

xxxx

Middle Note

Base Note

EAU DE COLOGNE

EAU DE TOILETTE

EAU DE PARFUM

10–20%

perfume oil
in alcohol

3–5%

perfume 

in alcohol and water

less than 2%

perfume 

Figure 12.3  Essential oils are widely used in perfume and in cosmetic products. Different steps of extraction of essential oil in 
making perfumes involve enfleurage in which flowers are spread on glass sheets coated with thin layer of grease or solvent 
extraction in which flowers are placed in large rotating drums and benzene or petroleum ether is used to extract fragrant 
molecules. This is followed by formation of fragrant waxy material or concrete which is composed of oil. Ethyl alcohol is removed 
and remaining material is called an absolute which makes the concentrated form of natural fragrances. Essential oils are 
blended and diluted with water or ethanol. Eau de perfumes have 10–20% of essential oils, eau de cologne is composed of 
3–5% of perfume in alcohol or in water, whereas eau de toilette contains less than 2% of perfume.

Aromatic Molecules From Flowers in Perfume and Cosmetic Industries

293

according  to  perfume.  Perfumes  having  higher  concentration  of  essential  oils  are 
 generally expensive than perfumes with low amount of essential oils.

In expression or cold press, fruit is manually pressed to remove essential oil, that is, 
citrus oil is separated from rind using this old method. A combination of essential oils 
and watery components are produced through this process which produce essential oils 
after separation. However, main disadvantage of this method is that it does not produce 
pure essential oils and they oxidize if not refrigerated. Many cold press oil machines are 
used for making industrially important products within few minutes. They maintain 
high temperature, pressure and continuous conditions. Infrared temperature control 
system is used to control the pressing temperature and moisture. They are used for 
pressing sunflower, tea seed, cottonseed, pepper seeds, walnuts, castor, almonds and 
other oil crops widely.

Another method head‐space analysis is also used to isolate fragrant molecules. This 
method makes use of glass bell jars which is placed over plant. The glass jar is composed 
of  material  which  absorb  odors  from  plants  by  acting  as  a  trap  to  collect  fragrant 
 molecules. It grabs air in the jar and can also be used for re‐creating or associating 
 fragrances with location from where they are collected (Figure 12.4).

However, the head‐space method is replaced by a better and less time‐consuming 
method, that is, SPME which actually maintains the originality of aromatic compounds 
in the gas phase above a product. It facilitates analytical detection of olfactory impres-
sion which can be perceived by the nose. It is a solvent‐free sample extraction technique 
which is used to concentrate flavors and fragrances in a shorter period of time. This 
method is based on developing an equilibrium between sample which is in liquid or gas 
phase and in stationary phase which is a silica microfiber coated with a polymer film, 
followed by thermal desorbing of concentrated compounds through the injecting of gas 
chromatograph which is transferred to capillary column. Thickness and coating of fiber, 
concentration, time and temperature for desorption are important factors in SPME. 
Due to reliability of this method it is widely used in many industries and also for analyz-
ing spice flavor in food industries.

Headspace method

Inverted jar containing
absorbent for trapping odors

Fragrant molecules

Floral bed

Figure 12.4  Isolation of essential oils using the head‐space method. Plant material are placed in an 
inverted jar which contains absorbent for trapping odors of fragrant parts of a plant.

294

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Solvent‐assisted flavor evaporation (SAFE) is another reliable method for extraction 
of aroma compounds from food which produces high yields of polar flavor substances 
and produces high quality aromatic molecules without changing their nature. It is used 
in commercially sold grapefruit juice and soft drinks.

12.4.4  Eau De Parfum, Eau De Toilette and Eau De Cologne
Many perfumes, colognes and toilettes are available in market which can be distin-
guished from each other on the basis of their fragrance and duration that how longer 
they can be smelled. It is actually the ratio of alcohol and perfume oil which differenti-
ates perfume from eau de toilette and eau de cologne. Most of the perfumes are  composed 
of 10–20% perfume oil dissolved in alcohol and sometimes are composed of a negligible 
amount of water. Cologne constituents include 3–5% oil diluted in 80–90% alcohol and 
10% of water. Toilette are more diluted ones with less than 2% of perfume oil which is 
dissolved in 60–80% alcohol and 20% water. Attars are distillates from flowers collected 
with sandalwood oil.

12.4.5  Perfume Notes
Perfumes were entirely based on natural molecules from plants until 1880, however, 
Aime  Guerlain  in  1889,  introduced  the  concept  of  perfume  notes.  Each  perfume  or 
essential oil comes with three notes, that is, top note or notes de tete, middle or notes de 
coeur and bottom notes or notes de fond. These notes are indications of their fragrances. 
Top notes are associated with citrus‐like smells. Middle notes give an indication that 
aromatic sources of perfumes are rose and jasmine. However, base notes show woody 
fragrances. Top notes are perceived immediately, middle or central notes emerge just 
prior to when top notes dissipate, whereas base notes appear almost half an hour after 
the departure of middle notes.

Many perfumes reflect aspects of different families. Even perfumes claimed as single 
floret have undertone of other fragrances. However, true or unitary perfumes are not 
common as it requires perfumes to exist as only singular aromatic. Ambery perfumes 
consist of fragrances from vanilla, along with fragrance from other flowers and wood, 
which are further modified by camphorous oils, and incense resins. They remind of 
Victorian Era imagery of Middle East and Far East. Woody fragrances are dominated by 
woody scents of sandalwood, cedar and patchouli. However, leathery are synthesized 
from scents of honey, tobacco, wood and wood tars.

12.5  CO2 as a Solvent to Extract Fragrant Molecules 
in Super‐critical CO2 Fluid Extraction Method

As mentioned in Chapter 9, CO2 is used as an ideal organic solvent to isolate fragrant 
molecules and to extract flavors from spices due to its chemical stability and nonflam-
mable nature and low critical point (Figure 12.5). If higher pressure is applied during 
extraction of oils, it results in formation of thicker and waxier material, which consti-
tutes plants compounds as well as essential oil. It is known as total. However, lower 

Aromatic Molecules From Flowers in Perfume and Cosmetic Industries

295

32° C

Supercritical (cid:31)uid

Critical point

7.4 MPa

Gas phase

Solid phase

Liquid phase

Pressure

Triple state

Temperature

Figure 12.5  Phase diagram (p, V) for a pure compound in a close system. The triple point indicates the 
critical pressure and temperature of carbon dioxide (Capuzzo et al., 2003).

pressure produces select which is composed of only essential oils. Super‐critical CO2 
extraction method is proved to be more efficient in extracting essential oils from many 
different  parts  because  volatile  compounds  extracted  though  this  method  maintain 
their organoleptic properties.

Major parameters in involved in this method are temperature, pressure and flow rate. 
Main steps involved include extraction, separation, and CO2 recovery. Plant is charged 
into the extractor, along with the CO2 which is introduced into the extractor through a 
high‐pressure pump (>74bar) and CO2 heater (>31 °C). The extract laden CO2 is sent to 
a separator through a pressure reduction valve. At reduced temperature and pressure, 
the extract precipitates in the separator, whereas the CO2, free of extract, is recycled to 
the CO2 main tank (Figure 12.6).

Modern supercritical extraction machines make use of ultrasonic effect to enhance 
the  mechanical  action  of  essential  oil  extract.  Applications  of  supercritical  CO2 
machines also extend to herbal extraction of wide variety of a Chinese herbs. They are 
equipped with dynamic extraction and concentration unit attached with water separa-
tor and efficient condenser.

Supercritical fluid extraction is very efficient and widely used in products like foods 
and flavors, pharmaceuticals and nutraceuticals due to its mild and gentle extraction 
conditions which maintain the original flavor of food constituent and original aromatic 
nature of molecules. It is commonly used for decaffeination of extraction of essential 
oils, oleoresins and aromas from spices.This method is also efficient in removing resid-
ual organic solvents or impurities like pesticides from main food ingredients. It is also 
used for processing of tobacco, hops, spices, fats and oils and in cosmetic, leather, textile 
and paints and beverages.

296

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

(d)

(e)

(
E
x
t
r
a
c
t
o
r
 
E
1
)

(
E
x
t
r
a
c
t
o
r
 
E
2
)

(c)

CO2 Heater

(31°C)

(Supercritical)

(g)

 
(
g
a
s
e
o
u
s
)

C
o
n
d
e
n
s
e
r

(f)

(
S
e
p
a
r
a
t
o
r
 
e
x
t
r
a
c
t
)

(
L
i
q
u
i
d

 

g
a
s
e
o
u
s
)
C
O
2

(h)

C
O
2

(
l
i
q
u
i
d
)

 
s
t
o
r
a
g
e
 
t
a
n
k

Floral extract

(b)

(Liquid)

Pressure controlling

pump
>74

(a)

(

C
o
n
d
e
n
s
e
r
 
l
i
q
u
i
d
)

Figure 12.6  (a‐e) Supercritical CO2 method is one of the reliable and efficient method used for making 
perfumes: (a) CO2 (liquid) is passed through condenser, (b) Pressure of flow is maintained by pump, (c) CO2 
heater converts CO2 in supercritical form, (d‐e) CO2 in its supercritical form enters extraction vessels (E1 and 
E2), (f) It is followed by separation of volatiles from liquid CO2 in a separation vessel, (g) CO2 recovery as 
gaseous state in a condenser, (h) storage in a tank. (See insert for color representation of the figure).

12.6  Modern Perfume Making Machines

Modern perfume‐making machines have originated from France. They are composed 
of stainless steel heat preservation freezing tank with titanium metal coiled pipe and 
microscopic filtration films. Stainless steel acts as a moveable supporter. These machines 
have sealing type electric control system which is provided with sanitary pipe fittings 
and valves. Nowadays electric fragrance oil machines are used to make commercially 
important essential oils which uses an essential oil distillator suitable for extracting 
essential oil and hydrosols from plants such as such as lavender, rosemary, pine and fir 
needles, peppermint and eucalyptus leaves. Main applications of products are extrac-
tion  of  essential  oils  and  aromatherapy  products  stores.  Almost  220V  (options  of 
3000W, 5000W) electricity is used to form steam which is transferred to the bottom of 
a distillation still in which two layers of steam for re‐use and extraction of approximately 
1.2 L per degree of electricity consumption are made (Figure 12.7).

12.7  Aromatherapy: Relaxation Through Aromatic 
Molecules

Although aromatherapy has a broad meaning but it can best explained as a ‘branch of 
herbal medicine which involves use of different parts of aromatic plants for relaxation 
of mind, body as well as soul in order to bring peace, harmony and balance in life’. 

Aromatic Molecules From Flowers in Perfume and Cosmetic Industries

297

(a)

(b)

Figure 12.7  Supercritical CO2 machines.

Aromatic molecules from plants may serve for humans to know more about their inner 
self, to develop a bond between man and nature and also to clean soul which is reflected 
through a positive behavior towards life and people. It can be used as a psychological 
treatment by psychiatrists as well as for medical doctors. Although aromatherapy is 
widely practiced in many countries as a part of ancient civilization, unfortunately until 
now there has not been sufficient evidence which reports its increase its applications in 
medical sciences although in some countries like France, aromatherapy is practiced by 
chemists and medical doctors.

Aromatic plants have been used since long ago for making the air fragrant, making 
aromatic solutions and also for healing purposes. Hippocrates, the Greek physician first 
developed methodical system for aromatherapy. Archaeological evidences from tomb 
engravings, stones, clay tablets have shown that use of aromatic plants as perfumes, for 
cooking, bathing, for magic‐religious rituals and for aromatherapy was very popular in 

298

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Egypt, Mesopotamia, Babylonia and in India. Fennel, garlic and cumin were used as 
ancient recipes by physicians and as a part of folk medicine. Myrrh and frankincense 
were associated with religious activities and considered to be sacred. Aromatic plants 
were also used in embalming of mummies in Egypt in order to preserve corpses from 
decay. They were also used in ancient medicinal treatments in form of juices, infusions, 
decoctions and poultices. Egyptian remedy kyphi was prepared through 16 different 
ingredients for various uses as medicines, incense, perfume, and as sedatives. Discovery 
of clay distillation unit from an ancient city Taxila in Pakistan indicated that oils were 
extracted  from  aromatic  plants,  however,  distillation  process  was  introduced  by 
Avicenna or Ibn Sena who practiced a medical system known as Unani Tibb which was 
based on ancient system of Hippocrates and Galen.

Aromatic  wood  of  Cinnamomum  camphor,  Santalum  album  and  cedar  are  used 
for  many  religious  rituals  in  many  countries  of  world  due  to  their  essential  oils  for 
 aromatherapy. Lavender oil, rose oil, rosemary, jasmine, daisies, eucalyptus and citrus 
spp.  are  commonly  used  plants  for  aromatherapy.  However,  some  oils  may  also  be 
 poisonous due to their high ketone contents. Many of them have therapeutic effects, 
like  antiseptic,  analgesic,  antinflammatory,  antimicrobial,  stimulants  and  relaxants. 
They  can  be  inhaled  when  applied  externally  on  skin,  or  may  be  applied  through 
 massage.  Many  health  problems  like  anxiety,  depression,  insomnia,  headache  and 
 muscular pains can be relieved through aromatherapy.

Rose  flowers  are  widely  used  in  aromatherapy  due  to  their  pleasant  and  peaceful 
 fragrances which is a mixture of almost 300 volatile essential oils. Two species of roses 
are mainly grown due to their fragrances, that is, R. damascena and R. centifolia. R. 
damascena is also known commonly as damask rose. It is grown in Bulgaria, Turkey and 
China. R. centifolia or cabbage red is grown in Morocco, France and Egypt. Major rose 
oil producing countries are Bulgaria, Iran, Turkey, Morocco and China.

Main fragrant volatiles of roses are β‐damascenone, β‐damascone, β‐ionine and rose 
oxides  which  are  responsible  for  90%  fragrance  of  rose  flowers.  In  addition,  other 
 compounds in rose oils are citronellol, geraniol, nerol, linalool, phenyl ethyl alcohol, 
farnesol, stearoptene, α‐pinene, β‐pinene, α‐terpinene, limonene, p‐cymene,  camphene, 
β‐caryophyllene,  neral,  citronellyl  acetate,  geranyl  acetate,  neryl  acetate,  eugenol, 
methyl eugenol, rose oxides, α‐damascenone, β‐damascenone, benzyl alcohol, rhodi-
nyl acetate, β‐ionone, and phenyl ethyl formate.

Modern aromatherapeutic techniques involves direct application of aromatic essential 
oils or plant‐based cosmetic products in the form of massage creams, lotions, moistur-
izers in spas and in beauty salons. It is also reported that sniffing rosemary can increase 
a person’s memory but scientific studies to support this hypothesis are still missing.

12.8  Cosmetic Industry: An Overview and History

Plants are known to be used in herbal home‐made remedies and in many cosmetic 
products since long ago. Historical evidences have shown that cosmetic products were 
used by Egyptians and ancient Greeks many years ago. Egyptians used eye makeup and 
cosmetics around 3500 B.C.E. Use of hair dyes and makeup for eyes and cheeks became 
common in Rome in 100 C.E. (Willett, 2010).

Aromatic Molecules From Flowers in Perfume and Cosmetic Industries

299

Cosmetics is a broad term which includes all skin and body care products including 
lotions, creams, sun‐blocks, massage creams, scrubs, facial masks, lip balms, founda-
tions, toners, face wash, cleansers, age controlling creams, blush, mascaras, eye liners, 
kajals, hair care products like hair oil, shampoos and hand‐care products like nail  polish, 
and lipsticks. In 1879, Procter and Gamble introduced ivory soap for hygiene purposes. 
Avon Brand developed in 1886 as California Perfume Company.

It was followed by foundation of many well‐known companies which used plants as 
their major products. The Pure Food and Drug Act allowed federal government to regu-
late  cosmetic  industry  in  1906.  French  chemist  Eugene  Schuller  developed  the  first 
commercial  hair  color  product  and  this  led  to  foundation  of  the  company  L’Or’eal. 
Beauty tycoon Elizabeth Arden opened her first salon on New York’s Fifth Avenue in 
1908. Max Factor foundation was developed for film artists in 1914. Camay soap was 
introduced in 1926 by Proctor and Gamble. In 1932, Revlon company was founded and 
a year after later, Este’e Lauder was developed which is one of the prominent twentieth‐
century in cosmetic industries. Use of animals for testing of cosmetic products, regard-
ing whether they are safer to use, was initiated in 1933 in the United States, as a result 
of an incident in which eyelash‐darkening treatment, Lash Lure, made a woman blind. 
The  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)  regulated  the  Federal  Food,  Drug  and 
Cosmetic  Act  to  provide  safety  against  hazardous  chemicals  in  1938  in  cosmetic 
products.

An international company, Beauty Without Cruelty (BWC) was formed in support of 
animals used for testing cosmetic products in 1959. Anita Roddick, developed friendly 
cosmetics  and  skin  care  business  Body  Shop  in  Great  Britain  in  1976.  FDA  banned 
27 harmful ingredients in shampoo products in 1990. The concept of using bacteria in 
cosmetic products originated in 2002 when the U.S. FDA approved use of Botox, which 
is a derivative of Botulinum bacterium. It is used for anti‐wrinkle cosmetic treatment 
due to its paralyzing effect on facial muscles which otherwise form wrinkles around the 
eyes and forehead. The European Union banned animal testing in cosmetic products in 
2009. However, L’O’real which is one of the world’s largest cosmetic industry and other 
companies like Avon, Clinique, Este’e Lauder, and Body Shop made a strong protest 
against animal testing. Cell cultures, donated eye tissues and computer modeling are 
suggested as an alternatives to animal testing.

It is estimated that people all over the world spend $330 billions on cosmetics each 
year, among which France and Japan spend over $230 per capita on an annual basis. 
Americans and Germans spend over $173 and $154 respectively. In America, it is 
one of the most profitable businesses after pharmaceutical and software industries. 
New York and Paris are known to be symbols of beauty. Over $230 per capita are 
spent by France and Japan on beauty products (Jones, 2010). Only L’Oreal and P&G 
contribute over one fifth of total world’s sale. In 2008, Avon is worth $11.3 billion. 
However, Dove by Unilever, and Pantene by P &G earned sales of $5.3 billions and 
$4.5 billion respectively. China also makes the world’s fourth largest market for cos-
metic products.

L’Oreal by Paris, is one of the world’s largest cosmetic industry known for its cosmetic 
products and introduced over 500 products. Other popular industries used world wide 
are  Olay,  Ponds,  Keihls,  Neutrogena,  Dove,  Nivea,  Estee  Lauder,  Clinique,  Proctor, 
Maybelline, Rimmel, Lancome, and Gamble, and Unilever.

300

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

12.9  Popular Plants and Their Products in 
Cosmetic Products

Essential oils of many plants are used in skin care products for cleansing, moisturizing, 
steaming, facial scrubs and masks. Many of them are extracted from chamomile, lavender, 
roses, jasmine, daffodils, daisies, lemon, orange and patchouli. Citronellal, geraniol, citron-
ellol, and geranyl acetate from C. winterianus and C. nardus have value in beauty products. 
Oils of lemon, lavender, mint and sage control oil levels of oily skin. Rosemary, lemon, and 
verbena oil are used for dry skin. For acne, lavender, sage, chamomile and geranium, patch-
ouli are commonly used. R. damascena, synthesize citronellol, geraniol, nerol and linalool. 
Essential oil of lemongrass and roses are widely used in cosmetics and fragrances.

Flowers of Michelia champaka are commonly used in many perfumes and cosmetic 
products due to presence of cineole and isoeugenol as active components. Leaf twigs of 
Eucalyptus citriodora are source of citronellal, citronellol, cineole and iso‐pulegol that 
make an important part of many cosmetic products. Patchouli Pogostemon spp. synthe-
size patchoulinol and caryophyllene in the leaf twigs which are also used in cosmetic 
products. Flowers of Tagetes erecta yield beauty and aromatic products due to molecules 
like  tagetone,  linalool,  limonene,  linalyl  acetate  (Figure  12.8).  Farnesol  and  geraniol 
from flowers of Polyanthes tuberosa are also popular in cosmetic industries. Almost 
34% of materials used by L’Oreal are plant based products.

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 12.8  Plants which are commonly used in many cosmetic products: (a & b) Marigolds and 
daisies are known to be used in over 200 cosmetic formulations including creams, shampoos and 
lotions. Their main activity is due to presence of many triterpene alcohols, triterpene saponins, 
flavonoids and carotenoids, (c & d) Tagetes spp. contain beauty molecules like tagetone, linalool, 
limonene and linalyl acetate.

Aromatic Molecules From Flowers in Perfume and Cosmetic Industries

301

12.10  Anti‐Aging Properties of Some Plants and Their 
Applications in Cosmetic Products

Plant stem cells do not undergo aging process due to their hormones like auxins and 
gibberellins. Some research is focusing on the use of stem cells from plant meristems 
containing these phytohormones in anti‐aging products in order to delay process of 
aging. Novacell plant stem cell anti‐aging night cream is made from meristem cells of 
Vigna radiata (mung beans). They are rich in many anti‐oxidants and provide protec-
tion to plants against UV radiations. These creams are not tested on animals and there-
fore  100%  cruelty  free  products.  Although  many  anti‐aging  skin  care  products  are 
available in market, however, plant stem cells‐based cosmetic products are rare.

Turmeric (Curcuma longa) is an ancient plant which has been used since 4000 years 
ago by folklore and in many traditional remedies by Asian and African countries. It is a 
perennial herb and its rhizome is used as a powder which is a popular spice flavor in 
Asian  cuisine.  Medicinal  and  anti‐aging  properties  of  turmeric  are  due  to  group  of 
cucurminoids of rhizomes. It prevents aging of skin due to inhibition of matrix metal-
loproteinase‐2 expression (MMP‐2) which is responsible for aging process. Curcumin 
administration also increases activities of oxidative defense system and extend the life 
span of Drosophila melanogaster through modulation of expression of aging genes (Lee 
et al., 2010). Flower extract of M. grandiflora is known to decrease the melanin content 
in  B16F10  melanoma  cells,  which  indicate  the  potential  use  of  plant  in  skin  care 
 products.  It  is  also  reported  to  protect  skin  photo‐aging  by  inhibiting  NF‐  kappaB 
 transcription (Lim et al., 2014).

Many polyphenols and polysaccharides of C. sinensis contribute to age‐defying prop-
erties (Povichit et al., 2010) more than vitamin C and E. Most common polyphenols are 
epicatechin,  epicatechin‐3‐gallate,  epigallocatechin‐3‐gallate,  theanine  and  caffeine. 
Many  anti‐oxidants  in  tea  have  skin  rejuvenation  potential  which  are  reported  to 
improve redox imbalance due to senescence in cardiac tissues of aged rats. Pomegranates 
also have strong activity on preventing collagen degradation by suppressing the expres-
sion  of  matrix  metalloproteinase  in  osteoarthritis  patients  (Ahmed  et  al.,  2005). 
Pomegranate rind extract possesses skin‐whitening activity due to its effects on inhibi-
tion of melanocyte proliferation and melanin synthesis by tyrosinase in melanocytes. 
Pomegranate also promotes production of collagen and elastin due to presence of many 
antioxidants in its fruits and in flowers.

Major part of skin is made up of collagen fibers which give tensile strength to skin 
while elasticity is provided by elastin fibers and glycoaminoglycan which keeps skin 
hydrated. They are produced by fibroblasts which produce wrinkles and pigmentation 
when  they  become  aged.  Phytochemicals  from  plants  can  inhibit  activities  of  colla-
genases and elastases due to flavonoids, phenolics and tannins. They also inhibit activ-
ity of collagenases from Clostridium histolyticum (ChC) which degrades extracellular 
matrix of skin (Thring et al., 2009). Leaf extract of Camellia japonica is also used in 
anti‐aging cosmetics due to its inhibitory effect on expression of collagenase MMP‐1 in 
human fibroblast cells.

A. vera is also know to improve skin fibroblast and accelerates the collagen produc-
tion process. Therefore it is being used in many skin care products like scrubs, face 
polishers and other cosmetic products, due to its anti‐aging potential. Aloe leaf gel is 

302

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

used to rejuvenate and to tone skin in many commercial skin products. Aloin, a brown 
gel of aloe is a used as sunscreening factor in many skin care products (Figure 12.9).

Leaf extract of billberry are known to have inhibitory activities on collagenase and 
elastase enzymes which causes ragging and wrinkled skins. They also reduce melanin 
contents in B16 melanoma cells and therefore are being used in skin whitening and 
anti‐aging creams (Table 12.1).

Many skin care anti‐aging products of Loreal, Geraniol, Olay and Aesop are com-
posed of plant molecules including linalool, limonene, caffeine, geraniol, citronellol, 
tocopherol which are known to have anti‐aging activities. Oil of Olay was introduced in 
1949 by Graham Wulff with skin‐healing abilities which was followed by formation of 
many anti‐aging creams by Lancome and Este’e Lauder. Cosmetic industries market 
anti‐aging skin care treatments known as cosmeceuticals more than any other product 
containing UV‐protection anti‐aging factor. FDA has also approved use of Botox as a 
substitute to cosmetic surgery due to its anti‐aging properties.

12.11  Bioengineered Aromatic Bacteria With Lemon 
and Rose Fragrances

Introduction of metabolic pathways involved in the formation of aromatic molecules in 
microorganisms like bacteria by taking genes from plants is an emerging trend which 
has led to formation of fragrant bacteria which can be widely used as natural insecti-
cidal  and  pesticidal  products  in  agricultural  and  perfume  industries.  Formation  of 
 fragrant microorganisms can save plants biodiversity and can also free up land used for 
plant crops for their uses in food and pharmaceutical products, which is more impor-
tant rather than in perfume and cosmetic products. This also minimizes the risks and 
other natural factors which are related with plant growth as sometimes yield is not 
enough due to natural factors in order to meet demand of industries.

Concept of making aromatic microbes originated in 2010 due to shortage of patchouli 
plant which is widely used as fragrance in incense sticks and health care products due 
to climatic conditions. Biotech companies like Allylix, Isobionics, Givaudan, Firmenich, 
Evolva, and International Flavors and Fragrances produce microbial‐based perfume. 
Valencene is a commonly used microbial‐based perfumes. It is naturally found in orange 
peel of Valencia orange (Bomgardner, 2012; Gupta et al., 2015). Metabolically engi-
neered microbes can produce linalool, nerolidol and patchoulol. Givaudan has patented 
a microbial biosynthetic pathway for vanillin synthesis. Now genes for aromatic  shikimic 
acid pathway are also engineered in bacteria.

In addition to microbial fermentation and tissue culture, scientists are developing 
methods to genetically engineer microorganisms in order to produce fragrant mole-
cules like geraniol, linalool and menthol. E.coli is also being genetically engineered to 
produce zingiberone by a group of biologists at Kent University. They are forming 
genes of interest and submitting them to I GEM HQ to add it to repository, making 
iGEM database of genes and functional products known as biobricks. These scientists 
are also making further efforts to introduce gene for mevalonate pathway in bacteria 
(which  lack  this  pathway)  for  terpenoid  biosynthesis  through  transformation  with 
plasmid  pBbA5c‐MevT‐MBIS5  containing  genes  encoding  mevalonate  pathway 
(Figures 12.10 & 12.11).

(a) A. vera extract in form of a gel

Aloin

Polysaccharides

Amino Acids
Anthraquinone

Rejuvenating

molecules

Fibroblast skin cells

Aloe Vera plant

A. vera rejuvenating cream

Inhibits action of MMP-1

(matrix metalloproteinases), 
collagenase, elastase enzymes 

which causes wrinkles

Deep Wrinkles

(b) Young skin

Collagen (cid:31)bers give strength

to the skin

(c) Old skin

MMP-1 (matrix metalloproteinases), collagenase,

elastase enzymes causes wrinkles

(d-e) Rejuvinating skin
Molecules from A.vera make 

skin (cid:31)rm by inhibiting action of aging

enzymes & form collagen (cid:31)bers

Figure 12.9  (a‐e) A. vera is used in many anti‐aging products due to its ability to strengthen collagen fibers of skin and in improving 
fibroblast cell structure. It is due to inhibitory effects on collagenase and elastase enzymes and MMP‐1 (matrix metalloproteinases) 
which can cause wrinkles on skin. (a) Aloe gel or aloin in leaves has wound healing properties due to its effects on rapid maturation 
of collagen. It is used as sunscreening factor in skin care products, (b) section through normal skin, (c) wrinkled skin, (d‐e) recovery 
with A. vera anti‐aging cream.

304

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

Table 12.1  Plants with anti‐aging properties and some products.

Plant

Family

Main molecules
with anti‐aging effects

Products

Aloe vera stem cell antiaging
cream
Novacell Plant stem cell antiaging
night cream (nutraceutical solution)
Camillea nut facial hydrating cream
Camillea antiaging serum
Camellia anti‐aging skin butter
Cotswold Lavender Daily 
moisturizer
Lavendula oil Face wash
Pure nature Blueberry and 
Lavender extract
calming face cream
Lavender body yoghurt
Rose water
Rosa face mask
Rose hip facial moisturizer
Rose day cream

Aloe spp.

Aloaceae

aloin

Camillea spp.

Theaceae

Lavandula spp.

Lamiaceae

Catechins,
phenolic
compounds, tannins
limonene, α‐pinene, 
β‐farnesene, geraniol, 
borneol, lavendulol

Rosa spp.

Rosaceae

citronellol,
geraniol,
linalool,
limonene,
β‐ionine,
rose oxides,
farnesol,
stearoptene,
α‐pinene,
β‐pinene,
β‐caryophyllene

Genes sequence for terpene synthases genes encoding zingiberone synthase and 
 linalool synthase from Sorghum bicolor and lavender are introduced in plasmid for 
expression in bacteria to produce fragrant bacteria. Genes for limonene synthase 
are also being introduced in plasmids to produce bacteria with lemon smell. Bacteria 
living in roots of vetiver play an important role in determining the composition of 
fragrance oil. Therefore researchers are working to modify oil’s structure through 
microbes to promote production of essential oil and to also change the chemical 
structure of oil by giving it different flavors. It may also increase their use in bioin-
secticides due to their insectidical properties. In fact, vetiver it is only grass which 
is mainly cultivated due to its root essential oils. Solid state fermentation is also 
being  used  as  a  technique  to   produce  aromatic  microbial  metabolites  in  large 
quantities.

(b)

Plasmid with genes 

encoding MVA pathway

(c)

MVA  
   pathway
MVA

pathway

Geraniol
Limonene
Linalool
Citronellol

(d)

E coli.

(a) Cell of petal of Rosa sp.

Aromatic gene inserted

(e) Bioengineered

in E coli.

perfume

Figure 12.10  (a‐e) Steps in making of genetically engineered aromatic bacteria: (a) Cell of petal of Rosa sp., (b) Genes for MVA 
pathway which forms volatile molecules from plants like roses are incorporated in plasmids, (c) Transformed plasmids are 
incorporated in bacteria like E. coli, (d) Transgenic  
E. coli with MVA pathway, (e) Aromatic bacteria are used in making perfumes, cosmetics and pesticides in order to minimize use of 
plants for making perfumes and cosmetic products. (See insert for color representation of the figure.)

Hey! “look, I have got

new genes. I am fragrant 

now.”

“Don’t worry now because
of this guy, the people will

not harm us 

for making their products”

Hey! “he stole our

genes”

“Let him be happy” 

“He is no more our friend. Let’s go” 

Figure 12.11  Cartoon illustration of transgenic E. coli with geraniol to be used in different products like perfumes.

Aromatic Molecules From Flowers in Perfume and Cosmetic Industries

307

12.12  Future Considerations

Due to the success in formation of perfumes containing bioengineered aromatic bacte-
ria, it is now possible to develop aromatic bacterial perfumes which can be used as 
insecticides and pesticides. Therefore, biotechnologists should focus on introduction of 
bacterial‐based biopesticides in the market. There is a need to form pleasant perfumes 
with anti‐microbial and anti‐viral attributes which can protect us from disease‐causing 
microbes when we spray them.

Hazardous  skin  chemicals  banned  by  FDA  which  cause  skin  cancer  and  allergies 
should be totally replaced by safe chemicals in all cosmetic products. Concept of green 
chemistry and ecorespectful chemicals need to be promoted. Although, it is a big chal-
lenge for industries to go green, therefore there is a need to explore further biochemical 
nature of plants in order to replace harmful chemicals with natural producers in cos-
metic products (without compromising on their biodiversity).

Further, use of plants need to be restricted to food, agriculture, and pharmaceutical 
products instead of using them in making perfumes or adding fragrance to cosmetic 
products, so we depend upon plants only for necessities and not for luxury in order to 
preserve our natural biodiversity.

References

Ahmed, S., Wang, N., Hafeez, B.B., Cheruvu, V.K., & Haqqi, T.M. (2005). ‘Punica granatum 

L. extract inhibits IL‐1beta‐induced expression of matrix metalloproteinases by 
inhibiting the activation of MAP kinases and NF‐kappa B in human chondrocytes 
in‐vitro’, Nutrition, 135, pp. 2096–2102.

Berger, R.G. (2007). Flavours and Fragrances: Chemistry, Bioprocessing and Sustainability, 

Bomgardner, M.M. (2012). ‘The Sweet Smell of Microbes’, Chemical and Engineering News, 

Springer.

90, pp. 25–29.

Capuzzo, A., Maffei, M.E., & Occhipinti, A. (2013). ‘Supercritical Fluid Extraction of Plant 

Flavors and Fragrances’, Molecules, 18, pp. 7194–7238.

Gupta, C., Prakash, D., & Gupta, S. (2015). ‘A Biotechnological Approach to Microbial 
Based Perfumes and Flavours’, Journal of Microbiology & Experimentation, 2, pp. 1–8. 
DOI: 10.15406/jmen.2015.01.00034.

Jones, G. (2010). Beauty imagined: A History of the Global Beauty Industry, Oxford 

University Press Inc., New York.

Lee, K.S., Lee, B.S., Semnani, S., Avanesian, A., Um, C.Y., Jeon, H.G., Seong, K.M., Yu, K., 
Min, K.J., & Jafari, M. (2010). ‘Curcumin extends life span, improves health span, and 
modulates the expression of age‐associated aging genes in Drosophila melanogaster’, 
Rejuvenation Research, 13, pp. 531–570.

Lim, T. (2014). Edible medicinal and non‐medicinal plants: Flowers, 8, Springer.
Thring, T.S., Hili, P., & Naughton, D.P. (2009). ‘Anti‐collagenase, anti‐elastase and anti‐
oxidant activities of extracts from 21 plants’, BMC Complementary and Alternative 
Medicine, 9, p. 27. DOI: 10.1186/1472‐6882‐9‐27

Povichit, N., Phrutivorapongkul, A., Suttajit, M., Chaiyasut C., & Leelapornpisid, P. (2010). 

‘Phenolic content and in vitro inhibitory effects on oxidation and protein glycation of 

308

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

some Thai medicinal plants’, Pakistan Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 23, 
pp. 403–408.

Sanganeria, S. (2005). Fragrance, Flavours & Essential Oils, Ultra International Limited, 

Vibrant India.

Willett, J.A. (2010). The American Beauty Industry Encyclopedia. Greenwood.

Further Reading

Arora, D., Rani, A., & Sharma, A. (2013). ‘A review on phytochemistry and 

ethnopharmacological aspects of genus Calendula’, Pharmacognosy Reviews, 7, 
pp. 179–187.

Kaiser, R. (1991). In Perfumes, Art, Science, and Technology. In: Muller P.M., and 

Lamparsky. D (ed.). Elsevier, Amsterdam, p. 213.

Marsili, R. (2010). Flavor, Fragrance and Odor Analysis, Marcel Dekker.
Pitman, V. (2004). Aromatherapy: A Practical Approach, Nelson Thornes Ltd.
Rozenbaumm, H.F., Patitucci, M.L., Antunes, O.A.C., & Pereira, N. (2006). ‘Production of 
aromas and fragrances through microbial oxidation of monoterpenes’, Brazilian Journal 
of Chemical Engineering, 23, pp. 273–279.

Singh, O., Khanam, Z., Misra, N., & Srivastava, M.K. (2011). ‘Chamomile (Marticaria 

chamomilla L.): An overview’, Pharmacognosy Reviews, 5, pp. 82–95.

Sumiyoshi, M, & Kimura, Y. (2009). ‘Effects of a turmeric extract (Curcuma longa) on 

chronic ultraviolet B irradiation‐induced skin damage in melanin‐possessing hairless 
mice’, Phytomedicine, 16, pp. 1137–1143.

Yoshimura, M., Watanabe, Y., Kasai, K., Yamakoshi, J., & Koga, T. (2005). ‘Inhibitory effect 
of an ellagic acid‐rich pomegranate extract on tyrosinase activity and ultraviolet‐induced 
pigmentation’, Bioscience, Biotechnology and Biomedicine, 69, pp. 2368–2373.

Aromatic Molecules From Flowers in Perfume and Cosmetic Industries

309

Problems Chapter 12

1  Explain medicinal, pharmaceuticals and aromatic nature of following molecules by  
filling  spaces  in  the  columns.  Also  give  example  of  one  plant  which  synthesizes  
these molecules. 

Aromatic
molecules

Pharma­
ceuticals

In storage 
of food 
products

Cosmetic 
products

Perfumes

Biopesticides
and
Insectides

Examples

Zingiberone
Linalool
Lemonene
Nerol
Citronellol
Coffecol
Curcumin
Safrole
Vanillin
Caryophyllene
Eugenol
Isoeugenol
Menthol
Geraniol

2  What advantages does the supercritical CO2 method for extraction of essential oils 

provide over other methods for extraction of essential oils?

3  Which plants are commonly used as anti‐aging ingredients in cosmetic industries. 
Explain the mechanisms through which anti‐aging molecules from these plants can 
reduce wrinkle and melanin formation in skin fibroblasts.

4  Give example of some phytochemicals in tea which have anti‐aging properties.

5  Differentiate between the following:

i.  enfleurage and maceration
ii.  SPME and SAFE
iii.  eau de perfume and eau de perfume cologne
iv.  concrete and absolute
v.  headspace analysis and cold expression
vi.  ambery and woody fragrances
vii.  top notes and middle notes

6  Genetically engineered bacteria with the smell of ginger and lemon are produced by 
a group of scientists by expressing genes for zingiberone synthase and linalool syn-
thase from Sorghum and lavender. This results in the introduction of mevalonate 

310

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products

acid  pathway  (MVA)  in  bacteria  which  is  largely  responsible  for  formation  of 
 aromatic molecules in plants. Similarly many genetically engineered bacteria are 
capable of producing linalool, nerolidol and patchoulinol.
A  Do you think that aromatic molecules in these bacteria can serve the same 
purposes as natural aromatic molecules from plants? Or are they safe to be 
used for food and pharmaceutical products? Propose different ways through 
which genetically engineered aromatic bacteria can be used as biopesticides.
B  Show the process of binary fission in an aromatic bacteria with genes of MVA 

expressed from lemon.

  7  What  is  the  concept  of  ecorespectful  cosmetics?  What  efforts  can  you  do  to 

 promote the use of ‘green cosmetics’ among your community?

  8  What 

applications.

is  solvent‐assisted  flavor  evaporation  method  (SAFE)?  Explain 

its 

  9  Sunflower family (asteraceae) is composed of many genera which are commonly 
used in making of many cosmetic products. Examples include calendula, chamo-
mile and daisies.
A  Give for any five plants in family asteraceae which can be used in making 

 cosmetics and perfumes

B  Explain the uses of chamomile in cosmetic products.

10  Daisies  produce  a  wide  variety  of  aromatic  molecules  which  are  used  to  add 
 fragrance to many cosmetics products. Given below is flower of daisy; give exam-
ples of any five molecules which are biosynthsized by daisies within plastids of 
their petal cells in the figure below.

311

Glossary

A

ethyl alcohol.

from molecular phylogenetics.

taste to plants.

plants.

related to the controlling of vision due to aging process.

Absolute:  A mixture of essential oils produced during solvent extraction without 
Age‐related macular degeneration (AMD):  Degeneration of the part of the retina 
Alkaloids:  Defensive nitrogen‐containing secondary metabolites which give bitter 
Allelochemicals:  Chemicals released by plants to inhibit growth of neighboring 
Amphitropous:  Ovules with curved nucellus on both sides.
Anatropous:  Ovules with micropyle adjacent to funiculus.
Androecium:  Collective term for stamens or male flowers.
Angiosperms:  One of the abundant group of plants also known as flowering plants 
with ovules enclosed in ovary and endosperm as nutritive tissue around embryo.
Angiosperms phylogeny group:  Modern system of classification based on facts 
Antenna pigments:  Light‐absorbing pigments in chloroplasts which act as antenna.
Anthocyanins:  Flavonoid pigments which give pink, blue, purple or red color to 
Anthocyanoplasts:  Anthocyanins‐storing bodies in vacuoles of some plants.
Antipodal cells:  A group of three cells towards the chalazal end of ovules of 
Apomorphies:  Also known as derived traits; distinguishing character of a species and 
Aromatherapy:  Application of fragrant essential oils from plants to relieve from 
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP):  Energy currency of cell synthesized within 
ATP Binding cassettes (ABC):  Protein transporters of one of the largest gene 
ATP synthase:  Enzyme in mitochondria and chloroplast which produces energy in 
Avon:  American international cosmetic company.

superfamily, essential extra or intracellular transport of molecules.

m itochondria or chloroplasts which acts as a coenzyme.

plant organs.

embryo sac.

its descendants.

stress and to stimulate brain.

form of ATP.

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products, First Edition. Aisha Saleem Khan. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.312

   Glossary

B

of xylem.

which diverged from lineage towards monocots and eudicots.

Basal angiosperms:  Group of flowering plants composed of only a few species 
Bast fibers:  Supporting fibers of phloem.
Bicollateral vascular bundles:  Vascular bundles having phloem on both sides 
Body Shop:  British cosmetic company known for skin care products.
Botox:  Drug from bacteria Clostridium botilinum used for anti‐wrinkle treatment.
Bottom notes:  Main theme of perfume fragrance which lasts for longer after 
Bryophytes:  Non‐vascular plants which reproduce through spores and do not 

evaporation of top and middle notes.

produce seeds or flowers.

C

cell wall.

with 40 carbons.

suspended liquid medium through agitation.

yellow and red shades and important in photosynthesis.

depends upon products of light reactions, that is, ATP and NADPH.

Caleosins:  Calcium‐binding proteins associated with oleosomes.
Callose:  Plant polysaccharide synthesized by enzyme callose synthase located on 
Calvin cycle:  Light independent cyclic pathway in stroma of chloroplasts which 
Calyx:  Outermost protective whorl of many flowers also known as sepal.
Campylotropous:  Partially inverted ovule in which micropyle is close to funiculus.
Cardenolides:  Toxic steroids in plants which are defensive against herbivores.
Carnations:  Ornamental spp. of Dianthus which are popular in floriculture.
Carotenes:  Deoxygenated fat‐soluble pigments in plants which give them orange, 
Carotenoids:  A large group of fat‐soluble plant pigments synthesized within plastids 
Cell suspension culture:  Also known as cell culture. Multiplication of cells in 
Cellulose:  Cell wall polysaccharide of glucose molecules composed of β‐1,4 linkage.
Chalaza:  Part of ovule opposite to micropyle.
Channels:  Passive membrane transporters on biological membranes with low 
Chromosomes:  Thread like structures of nucleic acids which bear genetic 
Cisternae:  Flattened membranes of Golgi bodies and endoplasmic reticulum.
Cladogram:  A diagram of evolutionary relationships within a group of related 
Closed system of venation:  Venation of leaves without free veinlets.
Cold press:  Removal of essential oil from citrus fruits through manual press.
Collateral vascular bundles:  Phloem surrounding xylem either on upper side or on 
Collenchyma:  Supporting parenchyma with uneven thickenings of pectin and 
cellulose on cell wall.

organisms which share common ancestors.

substrate specificity.

information in form of genes.

lower side.

Glossary

313

eudicots.

extraction.

Concrete:  Fragrant waxy material produced from aromatic plants during solvent 
Connective:  Vascular supply of anthers.
Core angiosperms:  Main group of angiosperms composed of monocots and core 
Corolla:  Petals of flowers.
Cosmetic:  Beauty products for skin and body care, health and hygiene.
Cristae:  Folds of inner membrane of a mitochondrion.
Cryopreservation:  Preservation at low temperature which inhibits germination 
Cyanogenic glycosides:  Sugar containing secondary metabolites which release HCN.
Cytoskeleton:  Network of microtubules and actin filaments which gives support 
Cytosol:  Main fluid of cell in which enzymes and organelles are suspended. Site for 

of seeds.

to cell.

metabolic activities of cell.

D

DNA:  Double‐stranded nucleic acid which carries genetic information.
Double fertilization:  Fertilization of embryo sac with two sperm nuclei. A 

characteristics of flowering plants.

E

essential oils.

cells and associated synergids.

friendly with environment, renewable and safer to use.

Eau de Cologne:  Perfume from Cologne, Germany containing almost 3–5% of 
Eau de parfum:  Perfume with 10–20% of essential oils.
Eau de parfume:  Perfume with less than 2% of essential oils.
Ecorespectful cosmetics:  Cosmetic products based on concept of green chemistry, 
Egg apparatus:  Group of three cells in embryo sac of angiosperms containing egg 
Elaiophores:  Oil‐releasing epidermal cells.
Embryo sac:  Female gametophyte also known as embryo sac which contains egg cells 
Endergonic:  Energy depending reactions which produce products of higher energy.
Endoplasmic reticulum:  Network of tubules in connection with nuclear membrane 
Endosperm:  Nutritive tissue of embryo within seeds of flowering plants.
Endothecium:  Inner layer within walls of anthers.
Enfleurage:  Extraction of essential oils and perfumes from flowers through odorless 
Epidermis:  Outermost layer surrounding all plant organs.
Essential oils:  Mixture of volatile atoms synthesized by plants to attract pollinators 
or to repel pathogens.

with synergids and antipodal cells present opposite to egg cell.

with or without ribosomes.

animals or vegetable fats.

314

   Glossary

tricolpate pollens.

Este’e Lauder:  American cosmetic company.
Eudicots:  Also known as true dicots. Angiosperms having monophyletic origin and 
Exergonic:  Energy‐utilizing reactions within cells which produce products of low 
Extrafloral nectar:  Nectar from any part of plant except flowers.

energy.

F

and floristry.

Fibers:  Sclerenchyma with long and tapering ends.
Flavonoids:  A group of polyphenols pigments which attract pollinators.
Floral nectar:  Nectar synthesized by flowers.
Floriculture:  Branch of horticulture which deals with ornamental flowers for gardens 
Florigene:  Australian biotech company which produces novel color of flowers 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA):  Federal agency of U.S which deals with legal 
Fragrant bacteria:  Genetically engineered bacteria with genes of fragrance formation 
Funiculus:  Vascular supply of ovule through stalk at base of ovule.

introduction of foods and drugs in markets.

through genetic modification.

from plants.

G

usually haploid.

carrier medium and used for isolation and identification of compounds.

Gametophyte:  Gametes‐producing phase in life cycle of angiosperms which is 
Gas chromatography:  Technique in analytical chemistry which uses gas as a moving 
Genetic engineering:  Process of producing desired products or desired organisms 
Genomics:  Branch of genetics which deals with genetic make of individuals.
Glycolysis:  Series of reactions in cytosol of cells of almost living organisms which 

through modification of genetic material.

glycosidic bond.

breakdown glucose in order to release energy and to form important intermediates 
required by cell.

and transport of molecules‐like proteins.

Glycosides:  Sugar‐containing molecule attached with functional group through 
Glyoxysomes:  Specialized peroxisomes in which breakdown of fatty acids 
Golgi apparatus:  System of vesicles and folded membranes involved in modification 
Granum:  Stacked membrane structure in chloroplasts composed of an aggregate of 
Green textile:  Plant‐derived environment friendly fabrics.
Gymnosperms:  Group of seed‐producing plants with ovules not enclosed 
Gynoecium:  Collective term for carpels or female part of flower.

thylakoids and site of light reactions.

take place.

in ovary.

L

Glossary

315

membrane involved in transfer of energy from light to reaction center.

Laticifers:  Latex‐containing cells or vessels.
Light harvesting complex:  Aggregate of antenna proteins and pigments on thylakoid 
Lignin:  Aromatic polymers in cell wall of xylem and fibers covalently attached with 
Lipton:  A tea brand by Unilever and Pepsico.
Loreal:  A French cosmetic company.
Lytic vacuoles:  Vacuoles with hydrolytic enzymes and involved in detoxification of 

cellulose.

harmful and waste molecules.

M

activities like citric acid cycle.

according to their mass to charge ratio.

synthesizes volatile terpenoids.

related with transport of many secondary metabolites.

molecules within a cell to give better understanding of cell biology and physiology.

Matrix:  Fluid of a mitochondrion which is the site of many important metabolic 
Mass spectrometry:  Analytical technique which isolates and characterizes molecules 
Multidrug and toxin extrusion proteins (MATE):  Protein transporters in plants 
MEP (Methylerythritol pathway):  Non‐mevalonate pathway in plastids which 
Maceration:  Extraction of essential oils through warm fats.
Metabolomics:  Comprehensive qualitative and quantitative analysis of small 
Metaxylem:  Xylem which differentiates after protoxylem.
Micropyle:  Opening of embryo sac towards egg cell which ruptures when pollen tube 
Microsporangium:  Sporangium which forms male gametophyte and contains 
Microsporocytes:  Cells which produce microspores after meiosis.
Microwave assisted extraction:  Extraction of essential oils through microwave.
Mid‐vein:  Main vascular supply composed of xylem and phloem.
Middle lamellae:  Cementing material of cell wall.
Middle notes:  Perfume fragrance which appears after top notes dissipate.
Mitochondria:  Organelles in which biochemical respiration takes place. It provides 
Monocots:  Group of flowering plants which are mostly herbs, with parallel venation 
Monophyletic:  A group of organisms having a common ancestor.
Monoterpenoids:  Volatile terpenoids having two isoprene units (C10H16).

of leaves, scattered vascular bundles and have seeds with one cotyledons.

energy to cell due to presence of enzyme ATPsynthase.

enters.

microspores or pollens.

N

NADH (Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide):  Coenzyme in living cells.
NADPH (Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate):  Cofactor used in many 

anabolic reactions and provides energy almost equal to three molecules of ATP.

316

   Glossary

chemist Henri Nestle in 1867.

towards hidden nectar. They are visible under UV light.

Nectar:  Nutrient‐rich fluid produced by nectaries of plants to attract pollinators.
Nectar guides:  Visible or invisible patterns on petals of many flowers to guide insects 
Nectaries:  Nectar‐producing tissue.
Nestle:  Swiss international food and beverage company after the name of Swiss 
Neurotransmitters:  Chemical messengers which communicate between brain 
Nucellus:  Central part of ovule containing embryo sac.
Nucleotides:  Building blocks of DNA‐containing nucleosides linked with 
Nucleus:  Organelle containing DNA and RNA.

p hosphate group.

and body.

O

Olay:  American cosmetic company, a brand of Procter and Gamble’.
Oleosomes:  Spherical organelles which are storage site of triacylglycerols and mostly 
Opiates:  Drug derived from opium.
Osmophores:  Fragrance releasing glands on epidermal cells.

found in seeds and pollens of many angiosperms.

P

lamina of many monocots.

Parallel venation:  Veins of almost equal length which run parallel along the leaf 
Parenchyma:  Ground tissue of plants which is composed of actively dividing thin 
Pentose phosphate pathway:  A series of reactions which use phosphorylated 

cells and site of metabolic activities.

glucose to synthesize lignin, deoxyribose, ribose, cambium and phenolic 
compounds.

connected and transport water molecules.

appear in order of top, middle and bottom notes.

Perforation plate:  End plates in xylem vessels through which they xylem cells are 
Perfume:  Mixture of fragrant molecules preserved in a medium.
Perfume notes:  Different elements of a perfume which give different fragrances and 
Perianth:  Sepals and petals of flowers.
Peroxisomes:  Single membrane‐bounded organelles responsible for oxidative 
Phloem:  Food‐conducting tissue of plants.
Photolysis:  Breakdown of water in presence of light which leads to flow of protons 

reactions and involved in detoxification of many waste products.

towards ATPsynthase and flow of electrons towards electron transport chain 
carriers on thylakoid membrane.

Pit aperture:  An opening on inner surface of secondary cell wall where lignin is not 

deposited.

Glossary

317

leucoplasts and amyloplasts.

formed by smooth endoplasmic reticulum.

wall and which regulates movement of molecules in and out of cells.

Pith:  Central part of stem made up of parenchyma cells.
Plasma membrane:  Lipid bilayer structure with proteins which is present next to cell 
Plasmodesmata:  Passages in cell walls of plants for transport of molecules. They are 
Plastids:  Double membrane organelles in plant cells, chloroplasts, chromoplasts, 
Platoglobuli:  Plastids of plants cells containing chromoplasts in form of droplets.
Polar nuclei:  Two haploid nuclei in the center of embryo sacs of female 
Primary plasmodesmata:  Extensions of smooth endoplasmic reticulum in the form 
of tubelike opening, lined by plasma membrane. They develop during cell division.
Procambium:  Meristematic tissue which forms primary xylem and primary phloem.
Protoxylem:  First developed xylem with narrow vessels.
Psychoactive:  Drug which can alter mental state.
Pteridophytes:  Vascular spore producing plants like ferns.

gametophytes.

R

flowers due to absence of pollinating birds.

takes place due to presence of specific proteins.

Reaction center:  Pair of chlorophyll ‘a’ molecules in photosystem where photoylsis 
Relaxed selection:  Reduction in morphological structures like perches in some 
Replication:  Formation of two identical molecules of DNA from parent DNA.
Reticulate venation:  Web‐like network of veins found in leaves of many eudicots.
Revlon:  American cosmetic company.
Ribosomes:  Small particles are composed of RNA and proteins which help in protein 
RNA (Ribonucleic acid):  Single‐stranded nucleic acid involved in protein synthesis.

synthesis.

S

thick walls.

Saponins:  Glycosides with foaming characteristics.
Sclerenchyma:  Supporting tissues, that is, fibers or sclereids with lignified 
Secondary cell wall:  Cell wall between primary cell wall and plasma membrane.
Secondary metabolites:  Defensive molecules in plants produced during primary 
Secondary plasmodesmata:  Branched plasmodesmata which develop during cell 
Shikimic acid pathway:  Pathway which links metabolism of carbohydrates to 
Sieve areas:  Areas in wall of sieve tube members through which transport of 

metabolism. Also known as plant functional or natural products.

formation of amino acids and lignin.

expansion.

m olecules takes place.

318

   Glossary

dominant.

takes place.

angiosperms.

Sieve tube members:  Carbohydrates and nutrients conducting cells of phloem in 
Sieve plate:  Areas where phloem cells are connected and transport of molecules 
Sporophyte:  Spore‐producing phase in the life cycle of angiosperms which is 
Starbucks:  American coffee company and coffeehouse chain.
Steam distillation:  Steam‐based separation process for extraction of less‐volatile 
Steroleosin:  Sterol‐binding oil bodies.
Storage vacuoles:  Main vacuoles storing water, pigments and nutrients.
Stroma:  Fluid of chloroplast and site of Calvin cycle.
Supercritical CO2:  Fluid form of CO2 above its critical temperature and pressure.
Synergids:  Associated cells of egg apparatus of embryo sac which guide pollen tube 

essential oils.

to egg cell for fertilization.

T

pollens.

differentiated.

light reactions due to the presence of antenna pigments and proteins.

Tannins:  Polymers of phenolic compounds which give yellow or brown color.
Tannosomes:  Tannin containing organelles.
Tapetum:  Nutritive tissue within anthers which provide nutrition to developing 
Tassel:  Pollen‐bearing flowers in plants like corns.
Tepals:  Sepals and petals of monocots which are combined and cannot be 
Terpenoids:  Secondary metabolites containing isoprene units (C5H8).
Thylakoid:  Membrane‐bound compartments in chloroplasts which are the site of 
Tissue culture:  Development of an organism in artificial medium from living cells.
Tissues:  A group of cells with similar metabolic activities.
Tonoplast intrinsic proteins:  Aquaporins in vacuolar membrane of seeds.
Top notes:  Perfume fragrances which can be smelled immediately after spray.
Tracheids:  Water‐conducting cells of xylems with elongated tapering ends.
Transcription:  Formation of mRNA from DNA.
Transgenic:  A genetically modified organism due to incorporation of genes from 
Translation:  Protein synthesis in cytosol from ribosomes and RNAs.
Translocators:  Proteins on biological membranes which form pores for transport of 
Transmission tissue:  Tissue which provides nutrition and supports growth of 
Transmission tissue specific proteins:  Act as an attractant for the growth of 
Trichomes:  Epidermal outgrowths of leaves or flowers which may be defensive and 
Tricolpate:  Pollens with three grooves or furrows and characteristics of eudicots.

developing pollen tube through style.

other organism.

pollen tube.

molecules.

secretory.

V

Glossary

319

and maintains turgidity of a plant cell.

Vacuole:  Water and pigments storing organelle which degrades toxic compounds 
Vascular cambium:  A lateral meristem found only in eudicots.
Vessels:  Water‐conducting cells of xylem with spiral, reticulate, annular or helical 

thickenings of lignin.

X

pollens, leaves and petals.

Xanthophylls:  Oxygen‐containing carotenoids which give yellow color to fruits, 
Xylary fibers:  Fibers found in wood and originate from vascular cambium
Xylem:  Water and mineral conducting tissue of plants.

321

Index

a
Absolute, 291
Acetyl‐CoA, 34f
Aconitine, 215, 228, 233
Acyclic, 263
Adenosine diphosphate (ADP), 138f, 139
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 138f, 139
ADP‐glucose phosphorylase, 246
Age‐related macular degeneration, 204
Ajmaline, 228
Alkaloids, 32f, 33
Allelochemicals, 214, 272
Alpha‐carotene, 197
Amphitropous, 93
Anandamine, 227
Anatropous, 93
Androecium, 78
Angiosperms Phylogeny Group, 2
Annual carnations, 252
Antenna pigments, 143, 144f
Anther, 92f, 93
Antheraxanthin, 192f
Anthocyanin(s), 15, 36f, 161
Anthocyanin biosynthesis, 166f, 167f
Anthocyanoplasts, 15
Anti‐aging, 301–302, 303f, 304t
Anti‐cellulite, 231, 236
Antipodals, 93
Apocarotenoids, 192f
Aquaporins, 69
Aromatherapy, 296
Astaxanthin, 192f
Asterids, 3, 78f
Astrosclereids, 59, 61f

ATP binding cassettes (ABC), 14, 99
ATP synthase, 138f
Atropine, 228
Attar, 294
Attention deficit disorder, 228
Auraxanthin, 192f
Aurones, 35, 36f
Avon, 299

b
Basal angiosperms, 2–3, 78f
Base note, 292f
Bast fibers, 57
Benzoxazinoids, 42
Berberine, 228
Beta‐carotene, 192f, 197
Betalains, 36f, 181
Bicyclic, 263
Biobricks, 302
Bioenergy crops, 65
Bioengineered bacteria, 302, 305f
Bioengineered terpenoids, 281
Biquinate, 235
Black tea, 226
Border carnations, 252
Bordered pits, 64f
Botulinum, 299
Brachysclereids, 59
Bryophytes, 1

c
Cacao beans, 227, 229f
Caffeine, 213
Caffeine biosynthesis, 219, 220f

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products, First Edition. Aisha Saleem Khan. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.322

Index

Caffeine extraction, 225f
Caffeine synthase, 220f, 221f
Caleosins, 19
Callose, 69
Calvin cycle, 144f
Campylotropous, 93
Cannabinoids, 40f
Capsaicin, 200–202, 201f
Capsanthin, 192f
Capsorubin, 192f
Caramelization, 224
Carbonization, 224
Cardioactive glycosides, 37
Carnation, 241, 250–255
CarotenAll, 204, 206f
Carotene, 36f
Carotenoid(s), 17, 36f, 136f, 190–191, 198f
Carotenoid biosynthesis, 193, 194f, 195f, 196f
Carotenoids in pollen, 197, 198, 198f, 199
Carpel, 87–88, 91f
Carriers, 20
Caryophyllene, 272
Caryopsis, 96
Cell suspension culture, 42f
Chalaza, 90
Chalcones, 35, 36f
Channels, 19, 20, 21f, 98–99, 101f
Chocolatl, 227
Cisternae, 15
Cladogram, 2, 4f
Cocaine, 216, 234
Codeine, 234
Coffecol, 224
Cola nut, 223
Collenchyma, 53, 57
Commelinids, 3
Companion cell, 69
Conching, 228, 229f
Concrete, 291
Condensed tannins, 17
Convolvulin, 216
Core angiosperms, 2, 78f
Cosmeceuticals, 302
Cosmetic, 270f, 287, 299
Cotton bolls, 57
Coupled transport, 21
Criollo, 227

Cristae, 13
Cryopreservation, 255
Curare, 215
Cyanidin, 165, 166f
Cyanogenic glycosides, 37
Cyryptoxanthin, 192f
Cysteine‐rich proteins (CRP), 124
Cytoskeleton, 7, 10

d
Delphinidin, 165, 166f, 248f
Deo‐perfume, 271
1‐Deoxy‐D‐xylulose‐5‐phosphate 

(DOXP), 267f

Deoxygenated carotenoids, 190
Dicots, 2
Dioecious, 107
Diterpenoids, 263, 265f, 274
Double fertilization, 124, 125 F
Dove, 299
DOXP see 1‐Deoxy‐D‐xylulose‐5‐phosphate 

(DOXP)

Dry method, 223
Dye‐sensitized solar cell, 179f, 181

e
Eau de cologne, 292f, 294
Eau de perfum, 292f
Eau de toilette, 292f, 294
Ecorespectful cosmetic, 307
Egg apparatus, 93
Elaiophores, 55, 79
Elizabeth Ardon, 299
Embryo sac, 93
Endergonic, 62, 137
Endosperm, 2
Enfleurage, 291, 292f
Environment friendly, 290
Environment Protection Agency (EPA), 250
Essential oil, 261, 263t, 264t, 269f, 290
Este’e Lauder, 299
Excedrine, 232f
Exergonic, 137
Exocarp, 151
Extracellular matrix, 120, 121f
Extrafloral nectaries, 241
Extraxylarly cortical fibers, 57

f
Farnesol, 272
Female gametophyte, 92f
Fermentation, 227, 229f
Fertilization, 124, 125f
Fibers, 57–59
Filament, 92f, 93
Filiform sclereids, 59
Flavandiols, 35, 36f
Flavones, 35, 36f
Flavonoids, 35, 38f
Flavonols, 35, 36f
Floral nectary, 245f
Floriculture, 247–248
Florigene Moondust, 254
Flying ointments, 215
Food and Drug Administration,  

250, 299

Food colors, 200f
Food vaccines, 230
Forastero, 227
Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy 

(FTIR), 45

Fragrant bacteria, 302, 305f, 306f
Friendly cosmetics, 299
Functional products, 31
Funiculus, 90
g
Gametophyte, 108
Gamma‐aminobutyric acid (GABA), 107
Gas Chromatography, 43f, 45
Gates, 19
Gene expression, 15, 140f
Genetic biofortification, 205
Geraniol, 267f, 270–271, 306f
Ghazaniaxanthin, 192f
Gibberellic acid, 275
Globular shaped embryo, 126f
Glycolysis, 32
Glycosides, 37, 39f
Grana, 16
Green perfume, 289
Green tea, 214, 226
Guarana, 223
Gymnosperms, 2
Gynoecium, 78

Index 323

h
Half‐bordered pits, 66
Headspace method, 293
Heart shaped embryo, 126f
Heroin, 216
Hollow style, 120, 121f
H+ pumps, 22
Hydrolyzed tannin, 36f
Hyperforin, 276
Hypericin, 276
i
Insecticidal, 272, 273
Integuments, 90
Intercellular communication, 20f
Inter membrane space, 13, 138f
Intracellular communication, 19,  

20f, 21f

Intramarginal veins, 62, 62f
Iridoids, 216
Isopentenyl pyrophosphate, 276
Isoprene, 263
k
Karyogamy, 124
Keihls, 299
Kernel, 96
Kolatin, 223

l
Lateral nectaries, 244f
Layering, 224
Leaf disc method, 231f
Leucoplasts, 200
Libriform fibers, 57
Ligandin transport, 168
Light harvesting complex (LHC),  

143, 144f

Light reaction, 143, 144f
Lignification, 65
Linalool, 266, 269f, 270f
Lipton, 226
Locule, 122f
L‘O’real, 299
Luteins, 191f, 192f, 199, 206f
Lycopene, 192f
Lytic vacuoles, 14

324

Index

m
Maceration, 291, 292f
Macrosclereids, 59
Macular pigments, 204
Magnoliids, 2
Male gametophyte, 92f
Malvidin, 165
Margo, 66
Mass Spectrometry, 43f, 45
Matrix, 13
Matrix metalloproteinase, 301, 303f
Maybelline, 299
Median nectaries, 244f
Medox, 179f, 180
Menthol, 268f
Mescaline, 215
Metabolomics, 44
Metaxylem, 62
Methylerythritol‐4‐phosphate (MEP), 217
Mevalonate pathway (MPA), 262, 276, 

277f, 305f

Mevalonic acid pathway, 34f
Microencapsulation, 181
Microgametophyte, 94
Micropropagation, 255
Micropsore, 94
Micropyle, 90
Microspore mother cell, 94
Microsporocytes, 93
Microwave‐assisted simultaneous 

extraction, 44f
Middle lamella, 10
Middle note, 292f, 294
Mitochondria, 13
Monocots, 2, 78f
Monoecious, 107
Monophyletic, 2
Monoterpenoid indole alkaloids, 216
Monoterpenoids, 263, 265f
Morphine, 234–235
Multidrug resistant transport proteins 

(MRP), 168

n
Naringin, 165
Natural products, 31
Nectar, 243–245

Nectar guides, 14, 242, 244f
Nectaries, 88, 241–242
Nectarin, 242, 246
Nectar robbing, 245
Nectar secretion, 245, 246f
Nectary, 242
Neoxanthin, 192f
Neurotransmitters, 216
Nicotine, 68f, 235
Nivea, 299
N‐methyltransferases, 222
Nose, 291
Nucellus, 90
Nuclear magnetic resonance, 45
Nucleotides, 16
Nutracuetical, 203

o
Olay, 299
Oleoresin, 275
Oleosins, 19
Oleosome, 32f
Oolong tea, 226
Opiates, 234
Optiberry extract, 181
Organoleptic, 295
Orthotropous, 93
Osmophores, 79
Osteosclereids, 59
Ovary, 88, 121f
Ovule, 90, 91f
Oxygenated carotenoids, 190

p
Para‐Caff, 232f
Parallel venation, 63
Parenchyma, 53, 55, 56f
Pelargonidin, 165, 166f
Pentose phosphate pathway (PPP), 141, 142f
Peonidin, 165
Perfect, 78
Perforation plates, 63, 64f
Perfume, 287
Perianth, 77
Petals, 77, 81, 82f, 87
Petals carotenoids, 200f
Petunidin, 165

Phloem, 69
Phloem proteins, 69
Phloem sap, 71
Photolysis, 143, 144f
Photoprotective pigments, 199
Physiologically functional food, 230
Phytoene, 193
Phytofloral, 205
Pistillate, 78
Pit(s), 64f
Pit aperture, 64f, 66
Pit membranes, 63, 64f, 66
Pit pairs, 66
Placenta, 90
Plant tissues, 53, 54f
Plasmodesmata, 11
Plasmogamy, 124
Plastoglobuli, 193, 196
Polar nuclei, 93
Pollen tube, 120, 122f, 123–124
Polylactic acid fibers, 59, 60
Portisins, 180
Primary cell wall, 10
Primary plasmodesmata, 11, 12f
Proanthocyanins, 35, 36f
Proctor and Gamble, 299
Protoxylem, 62
Psychoactive, 215
Pteridophytes, 1–2
P type pumps, 22
Pumps, 19, 21f, 22
Pyrethin, 272

q
Qahwa, 222
Quinalan, 235
Quinidex, 235
Quinidine, 228
Quinine, 235

r
Reaction center, 143, 144f
Receptacle, 88
Red Bull, 223
Relaxed selection, 85
Revlon, 299
Rosids, 3, 78f

Index 325

s
Saponins, 37, 39
Sclereids, 57, 59
Sclerenchyma, 53, 56f, 57, 58f
Secondary cell wall, 10
Secondary metabolites, 31, 32f
Secondary plasmodesmata, 11, 12f
Secondary veins, 62
Select, 295
Semisolid style, 120, 121f
Sepals, 77, 79, 80f, 150
Septum, 122f
Sesquiterpenoids, 263, 265f, 272
Sieve elements, 69
Sieve plates, 69
Sieve pores, 69
Sieve tube member, 70
Solid Phase Microextraction, 45
Solid state fermentation, 304
Solid style, 120, 121f
Solvent‐assisted flavor expression 

(SAFE), 294

Soma, 215
Sperm cell, 94, 127
Spikelets, 3, 95
Sporophyte, 108
Stamen, 92f, 93–95
Staminate, 78
Starch synthase, 246
Steam distillation, 45f, 269f
Steroleosin, 19
Stigma, 88, 90f, 91f, 111, 116–117
Stimulants, 216
Storage vacuoles, 14
Stroma, 17
Style, 88, 119–120, 121f
Supercritical CO2, 224, 225f, 294, 295f,  

296, 297f

SWEET, 72, 140
Sweet William, 252
Synergids, 93

t
Tannins, 36f
Tannosomes, 17
Tapetum, 92f, 93
Tassel, 96

326

Index

Tea, 224, 226
Tempering, 228, 229f
Tepals, 78
Terpenoid biosynthesis, 276, 277f, 278
Terpenoids, 32f, 39–41, 41f, 261
Theca, 93
Theobromine, 213, 227
Theophylline, 228
Thylakoids, 199
Tissue culture, 44, 255
Tonoplast, 14
Tonoplast intrinsic proteins (TIP), 19
Top note, 292f, 294
Torpedo, 126f
Torus, 66
Total, 294
Toxic compound extrusion‐type 

transporter (anthoMATEs), 168, 169f

Tracheids, 63
Transcriptional regulation, 203
Transgenic, 230, 231f, 234f, 247,  

248f, 274f

Transgenic tomatoes, 206f
Translocators, 14
Transmembrane proteins, 19
Transmitting tissue, 120, 121f, 122f
Trichome, 267f, 269f
Tricolpate, 2

Trinitario, 227
Tropane alkaloids, 216
Tube cell, 94

v
Vanillin, 278
Vanillin biosynthesis, 279
Vegetative cell, 94
Vesicular transport, 168
Vessels, 63
Vinblastine, 216, 217f, 228
Vincristine, 216, 228
Violaxanthins, 192f
Volatile terpenoids, 267f

w
Wet method, 223

x
Xanthophyll, 36f
Xanthophylls, 192f, 197
Xylarly fibers, 57
Xylem, 61–62, 64f
Xylem sap, 66

z
Zeaxanthin, 192f, 197
ZING, 223

(a)

Peroxisome

Golgi body

Nuclear 
membrane
Ribosomes

Nucleolus

Smooth 

endoplasmic reticulum

Rough 

endoplasmic reticulum

Chromatin

Plasma

 membrane

Plasmodesmata

(b)

(c)

Oleosomes

Palisade cell of leaf

Seed cell 

(d)

(e)

Storage vacoule

Crystals

Tannosome

Cell wall

Chloroplast

Anthocyanoplasts

Mitochondrion

Lytic vacoules

Figure 1.6  (a‐e) Plant cells show differences depending upon their role: (a) A typical plant cell, (b) Cells of mesophyll of leaves contain 
abundant chloroplasts due to their role in photosynthesis, (c) Seed cells of many plants store lipid in form of oil bodies or oleosomes, 
(d) Cells of petals of many eudicots contain large vacuoles for storing water soluble pigments in order to attract their pollinators, (e) 
Vacuoles of sepals and petals (perianth) of most monocots are not as conspicuous as in eudicots, as many of them are pollinated 
by wind.

Eudicot petal cell

Monocot (cid:157)oral cell

Flowering Plants: Structure and Industrial Products, First Edition. Aisha Saleem Khan. © 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.Antiporters 

+
H 
AA 
+
H 

–

+
H 

Suc 
+
H 

+
H 

+
H 
AA 

+
H 

–

+
H 

+
H 

+
K 
Suc 
+
H 

pumps

+
H 
pumps

s
y
m
p
o
r
t
e
r
s

p
u
m
p
s

 

P
l
a
s
m
a
m
e
m
b
r
a
n
e

 

 

P
l
a
s
m
a
m
e
m
b
r
a
n
e

 

Plasma membrane

channels

Cd 

Anthocyanin
GSX pump

Transporters 

Anions

C
h
a
n
n
e
l
s
 

Anions
Cations

+
H 

pumps

Antiporters 

Glu 
Fru 

Suc 

Cd 

Mg 

+
H 

+
H 

+
H 

+
H 

Mg 

+
H 

Sucrose 

ef(cid:22)ux carrier

Figure 1.11  An overview of intracellular communication within a plant cell which is achieved through 
porins present on plasma membrane as well as on other organelles. Many channels, gates and pumps 
present within membranes of a plant cell allow transport of molecules from one organelles to other. 
Note some transporters within membranes allow only one molecule to pass through them, they are 
uniporters, whereas some allow two molecules to pass through them within same direction, they are 
symporters. However, some are antiporters which allow counter‐exchange of molecules. NO3/H+, 
3‐/H+, Suc/H+ are symporters on plasma membrane, whereas Na+/H+ is an antiporter. Glu/H+, Suc/
PO4
H+, Ca2+/H+, Cd/H+, Na+/H+ and Mg+/H+ are antiporters in vacuoles. Pumps like H+, K+, Ca2+ and Cl‐ are 
present on plasma membrane.

(a)

(b)

(d)

(c)

(e)

Figure 2.5  (a-e) Flavonoids accumulation in flowers of eudicots serves to attract many pollinators 
which are not color‐blind: (a & b) Daisies and Petunia spp. accumulate different flavonoids in their 
petals, (c) Viola tricolor shows great variety of pigments due to hydroxyl, metoxyl, and glycosyl 
substituents and yellow color is due to violaxanthin, (d) Linaria maroccana, (e) Daisy flower showing 
different shades which are anthocyanins which give pink color (due to cyanidin‐3‐ glucoside) in ray 
florets and blue color (delphinidin‐3‐glucoside) in disc florets.

Parenchyma (Ground tissue)

Epidermal

parenchyma cell

Cortical

parenchyma cell

Cambial cell

Epidermal

Cortical

cell

cell

Cambial cell

Pith
cell

Xylem vessel

Vascular tissue (Conducting tissue)

Xylem Tracheids

Scalariform

Tracheids

Sieve element

Xylem

Phloem

Xylem vessel

Pith

parenchyma cell

Transverse section

n
o
i
t
c
e
s
 
l
a
i
d
a
R
&

 

 
l
a
n
i
d
u
t
i
g
n
o
L
Epidermis

Pith

y l e m

X
Cambium

e m

h l o
Cortex

P

Figure 3.2  Stem anatomy of eudicot showing transverse, radial and longitudinal section. Note different arrangement of xylem 
vessels.

(c)

Pit 
aperture

(e)

Water enters plasma membrane

through aquaporins in 

most plants

In transverse view water

transfer from xylem to parenchyma cells

(Arrow show direction of movement)

Xylem parenchyma

Pits on front side

Pits on back side (dotted)

(a)
Bordered pits 

(d)

Pit 
aperture

Pit border 

(b)

Perforation plate

Xylem vessels arranged

axially through perforation

Figure 3.8  (a‐e) Pits in xylem cells are involved in lateral transfer of water to neighbouring cells (in longitudinal section): (a) Bordered 
pits (face view),  (b) Half bordered pits are present between xylem and parenchyma cells (sectional view), (c) Simple pits (face view), 
(d) Xylem vessels and parenchyma cells (longitudinal view), (e) Water enters plasma membrane through aquaporins in some cells.

Paradermal

Trichomes

Hexagonal cells are base cells of 

epidermis which form 
conical epidermal cells

(b) 

(a)

Epidermal cells in 
paradermal view

Trichomes

T.S of 
petal

Collateral 

vascular bundle (V.B)
showing xylem (in blue)
and phloem (in green)

Mesophyll made up 
of parenchyma cells

  p e t a l

L . S   o f

Xylem
Phloem

Lower epidermis

Mesophyll

Collateral 

vascular bundle

T.S

Epidermal cells 

Xylem

(c)

Phloem

Epidermal cells 

V.B 

Bi(cid:31)d
Stigma 

(d)

T.S of anther lobes 

Anther 

Filament 

(e)

Collateral 

vascular bundle

Style 

Axile placentation

T.S of (cid:31)lament

L.S of (cid:31)lament

(f) Carpel 

Figure 4.4  (a‐f) Floral anatomy of Petunia sp. (a) Paradermal view and T.S. of sepal, (b) Petal in three‐dimensional view showing 
arrangement of cells in paradermal, transverse and longitudinal section. Note the shape and position of epidermal cells, trichomes 
and vascular bundles (in b and c) which are mostly collateral in sepals and petals, (d) Transverse‐section of anther lobe, (e) T.S. and L.S. 
of filament, (f) Carpel showing axile placentation in L.S.

(a)

Growing fruit

Calyx

Flower bud

Lea(cid:10)ets

Thorns

(b)

(c)
Epidermal cells

Trichomes

Glandular trichomes

(d)

(e)

Epidermal cells

l
l
y
h
p
o
s
e

M

 
h
t
i

w

 
l
l
y
h
p
o
s
e

M

s
e
c
a
p
s
 
r
a
l
u
l
l
e
c
r
e
t
n
i

(f)

(g)

Anther

Filament

Stigma

Style

Figure 4.12  (a‐g) Floral anatomy of Rosa sp. (a) Flower, (b & c) T.S. and paradermal view of sepal, (d & e) T.S. & paradermal view of petal, 
(f) Anthers, (g) Stigma.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(e)

(d)

(f)

Figure 5.5  (a‐m) Life cycle of Rosa spp. (a) Bud initiation is start of gametophytic phase, (b‐c) 
Gametophytes of rose is monoecious and is composed of carpel in the center surrounded by cluster 
of stamens, (d) glandular trichomes are responsible for secretion of volatile compounds and serve to 
attract pollinators and also prevent flowers against microbial attack, (e‐f) Close view of anthers 
(yellow) and stigma (red), (g‐i) pollens in Rosa spp., (j‐l) stages in fruit and seed formation. Young fruit 
(rose hips) are green and their ripening is indicated by carotenoids accumulation in epidermal cells of 
exocarp, (m) seed formation.

(h)

(j)

(l)

(g)

(i)

(k)

(m)

Figure 5.5 (Cont’d)

(a)

Pollen germination

Papillar cell
on stigma

Dorsal V.B

Epidermis

Cortex

(b)

Citric acid cycle & ATP synthase
provide energy for pollen growth

Ventral V.B
showing xylem (in red)
and phloem (in blue)

Callose plugs in
growing pollen tube

Epidermis

CAC

Golgi body

Transmitting tissue

Sperm cells

Mitochondria

ER vesicles

Tube nucleus

Style transmitting
 tissue

Secondary wall

Pollen tip with Golgi

vesicles

t
r
a
n
s

m

i
t
t
i
n
g
 
t
i
s
s
u
e

p
o
l
l
e
n

 
t
u
b
e
 

g
r
o
w
t
h

 
t
h
r
o
u
g
h

S
o
l
i
d

 
s
t
y
l
e
 
s
u
p
p
o
r
t
i
n
g

O
v
a
r
y
w

 

i
t
h

 

o
v
u
l
e
s

Funiculus

Septum

Figure 5.11  (a‐b) (a) Development of pollen tube through style, (b) Main events on the pollen tip.

(a)

(b)

Septum

Orthotropous 

ovules

(c)

Dorsal V.B

Septum

Pollen tube

Carpel

Locule

(d)

Ventral V.B

showing xylem (in red)
and phloem (in blue)

Ovary wall

Chalazal end

Antipodal cells

(e)

Zygote 
formation

Sperm nucleus

Sperm nucleus 
tube
Pollen tip

Sperm cells enter
micropyle

Funiculus

Outer integument

Synergids

Micropyle

Inner integument

Pollen tube within

ovule

Polar nuclei of central cell

Vacuole

Egg cell

Figure 5.12  (a-e) A summary of events of sexual reproduction in angiosperms starting from pollination to fertilization, (a &b) 
T.S. of carpel showing trilocular ovary, (c) Trilocular ovary showing unfertilized ovules, (d) A close view of female gametophyte 
showing entry of pollen tube, (e) Entry of pollen tube and main events in fertilization.

(a)

(b)

Ovary wall

(c)

Developing 
fruit wall

Embryo
proper
Suspensor
Basal cell

Locule

Globular shape embryo

(e)

Hypocotyl

(d)

Cotyledons

Heart shape embryo

Torpedo

Epidermis

Seed coat
Cotyledons
(Dicot)
Endosperm

Ground tissues

Suspensor

Vascular bundles
(phloem-blue, xylem-red)

Mesocarp
Mature fruit wall
(Exocarp)
Fertilized ovule
(seeds) (Endocarp)

Mature embryo (seed)

Mature ovules (seed) within developing fruit

Figure 5.13  (a-e) Post‐fertilization stages in angiosperms starting from embryo formation to fruit formation: (a) Globular‐shaped 
embryo, (b) Heart‐shaped embryo, (c) Torpedo‐stage, (d) T.S. of developing fruit showing fertilized ovules (seeds), (e) Mature embryo 
(dicot seed).

(a)

(b)

Mid-vein

(c)

Epidermis
Palisade mesophyll cells

Main-vein surrounded

by anthocyanic
parenchyma cells

(d)

Xylem

Phloem

(e)

(f)

Vascular veins

(g)

Epidermis

Palisade
anthocyanic cells

Mid-vein

Anthocyanins accumulated
in adaxial epidermal cell
Xylem

Phloem

Figure 7.1  (a-g) Genes encoding anthocyanins are expressed during different stages of a plant either 
in response to some stress or as a genetically controlled characteristic of plants. In many plants like, 
Psidium guajava, anthocyanin accumulation takes place in different areas within leaves. (a‐c) 
Anthocyanins accumulation in cells surrounding mid‐vein and vascular tissues, (d) Upon maturity, 
leaves become green, (e‐g) During senescence, genes encoding anthocyanins are expresses in lamina 
of leaf except vascular tissues.

(a)

(c)

(b)

Serrate margins

Mid-vein

Anthocyanin accumulation in 
adaxial (upper) epidermal cells

(f)

(d)

Mid-vein

Serrate margins

Anthocyanic vacuole of 

epidermal cell 

Epidermis

(e)

Xylem

Phloem
Trichomes

Figure 7.2  (a-f) Many Rosa spp. accumulate anthocyanins during different stages. In roses anthocyanins exist as anthocyanidin 
mixtures. Their expression in petals of rose flower is a genetically controlled feature. However, expression of anthocyanins in leaves, 
petioles, and ligules of Rosa spp. species seems to be in response to certain abiotic and environmental factors, (a & b) In young 
juvenile leaves, their role seems to protect photosynthetic apparatus from high intensities of light or against temperature and give 
whole lamina red color, (c & d) Serrate margins of rose leaves accumulate anthocyanins in their adaxial epidermal cells (paradermal 
section), (e) Genes for anthocyanins are also expressed in glandular trichomes of leaves, (f) Three‐dimensional view of rose leaf 
showing anthocyanin accumulation in adaxial epidermal cells of leaves.

(a)

(c)

Petiole

(b)

Xylem

(d)

Phloem

Anthocyanin

accumulation in epidermis

(e)

Longitudinal view

Anthocyanic
vacuole

Phloem

Xylem Cortical region

Epidermal cells

Figure 7.9  (a-e) Genes for anthocyanins are also expressed in petioles and pedicels which might be an indication of their sensitivity 
against UV‐radiation: (a) Petiole of Euphorbia pulcherrima appears pink in color due to accumulation of anthocyanins. Note the 
appearance of pink color in petiole, where genes for anthocyanins are expressed, (b & c) T.S. of petiole showing anthocyanin 
accumulation in epidermal and sub‐epidermal cells, (d) longitudinal section of epidermal cells of petiole showing anthocyanin 
accumulation, (e) Three‐dimensional view of petiole of E. pulcherrima.

Applications of carotenoids in industries

Food

products

Agriculture &
plant breeding

programs

Nutraceutical & pharmaceutical

Floriculture

Food color

Feed additives

 for poultry

Dietary

carotenoids

Eye health

Cardiovascular

health

Carrot

Tomato Marigold

Development of tobacco
resistant plant through

altering carotenoid

biosynthesis pathways

Development of transgenic 
tomatoes to increase their
nutritional value by altering

-genes

 (beta genes in tomatoes)

Ornamental hybrids containing

carotenoid pigments

Overproduction of -carotenes
to meet vitamin A de„ciency

in potatoes, corn & …ax
through regulation of fruit

speci„c regulators

Transcriptional regulation of
carotenoids in fruits to enhance

their color & increase their

demand in market

Ronen et al. 2000 (used with permission from National Academy of Science, U.S.A)

Figure 8.11  Major applications of carotenoids in industries. 

Water + Beans

ScCO2+Caffeine

Water

Caffeine

High Pressure
extraction vessel

Caffeine dissolves in water

 in absorption vessel

Water

ScCO2

Caffeine

Commercial use of caffeine

Decaffeinated Beans

Cosmetic products

Pharmaceutical products

Soda Drink

(Slimming products, perfumes, creams)

(Pain killers)

(Mountain Dew, Sprite, Coke)

Instant coffee

Cappuccino

Mocha

Espresso

Figure 9.6  Steps in industrial manufacture of decaffeinated coffee through supercritical CO2 method and uses of beans in beverage 
products.

(a)

(c)

(e)

(b)

(d)

(f)

Figure 10.4  Transgenic cultivars of blue roses containing delphinidin. The rose cultivars WKS77, 
WKS82, WKS100, WKS116, WKS124 and WKS140 transformed with pSPB130 (left, host; right, a 
transformant). A flower of the line exhibiting the most significant color change is shown. (a) WKS77, 
(b) WKS82, (c) WKS100, (d) WKS116, (e) WKS124, (f) WKS140 (Katsumoto et al., 2007). (Used with 
Permission from Oxford University Press.)

(a)

(b)

Figure 10.5  (a‐b) (a) Dianthus barbaratus known as sweet William is an important carnation in 
floriculture, (b) D. caryophyllous (sweet William) is a carnation with possible anti‐HIV potential.

Fruit essential oils

Linanool, -Pinene, -Terpentine, Geranyl acetate,
Camphor, Geraniol, -Pinene, Myrcene, Limonene,

P-cymol, Dipentene

Attracts insect or a (cid:160)y for

pollination 

 Volatile signals for
pollination & defense

Repels bacteria

-Terpentine, -Decylaldehyde,

Borneol, Acetic acid ester

Mature leaves

Trichomes

Volatiles released 

in cytosol

Cuticle

Plastid

(a) Coriandrum sativum

(b) Leaf showing glandular trichomes

 (c) Trichome showing monoterpene

 formation in plastid

Cold water

Still

 
s
e
l
i
t
a
l
o
V

 
l
a
i
t
n
e
s
s
E

S

i
e
v
e

Steam

Water

Fire

Hot water

Cooling coil

Condenser

Water & essential oil

Essential oils

Floral water

Linalool containing cosmetic products

Face cream

Figure 11.5  (a-d) Linalool, a monoterpenoid, acts as a defensive compound and a volatile attractant. It is 
known to be synthesized by over 200 plants. Many members of family Apiaceae synthesize linalool 
as a part of their defense to keep their predators away. (a) Coriandrum sativum plant, (b) In C. sativum, 
linalool synthesis takes place within plastids of glandular trichomes located on epidermal cell from 
where it diffuses in air, (c) DMAPP and IPP serve as precursors for synthesis of essential oil of C. sativum 
which is a mixture of many volatile monoterpenoids, including linalool, geraniol, and many other 
volatile molecules (shown in (a)), (d) Extraction of essential oils like linalool from linalool‐synthesizing 
plants like C. sativum is done through steam distillation method which is a temperature sensitive 
method used commonly for extraction of essential oils and results in the separation of volatile 
molecule from plant tissues. Volatile molecules are passed through condenser in which vapors are 
condensed and essential oils are then collected in another vessel along with floral water, (c) Linalool is 
commonly used essential oil in many cosmetic and pharmaceutical products.

(d)

(e)

(
E
x
t
r
a
c
t
o
r
 
E
1
)

(
E
x
t
r
a
c
t
o
r
 
E
2
)

(c)

CO2 Heater

(31°C)

(Supercritical)

(g)

 
(
g
a
s
e
o
u
s
)

C
o
n
d
e
n
s
e
r

(f)

(
S
e
p
a
r
a
t
o
r
 
e
x
t
r
a
c
t
)

(
L
i
q
u
i
d

 

g
a
s
e
o
u
s
)
C
O
2

(h)

C
O
2

(
l
i
q
u
i
d
)

 
s
t
o
r
a
g
e
 
t
a
n
k

Floral extract

(b)

(Liquid)

Pressure controlling

pump
>74

(a)

(

C
o
n
d
e
n
s
e
r
 
l
i
q
u
i
d
)

Figure 12.6  (a‐e) Supercritical CO2 method is one of the reliable and efficient method used for 
making perfumes: (a) CO2 (liquid) is passed through condenser, (b) Pressure of flow is maintained by 
pump, (c) CO2 heater converts CO2 in supercritical form, (d‐e) CO2 in its supercritical form enters 
extraction vessels (E1 and E2), (f) It is followed by separation of volatiles from liquid CO2 in a 
separation vessel, (g) CO2 recovery as gaseous state in a condenser, (h) storage in a tank.

(b)

Plasmid with genes 

encoding MVA pathway

(c)

MVA  
   pathway
MVA

pathway

Geraniol
Limonene
Linalool
Citronellol

(d)

E coli.

(a) Cell of petal of Rosa sp.

Aromatic gene inserted

(e) Bioengineered

in E coli.

perfume

Figure 12.10  (a‐e) Steps in making of genetically engineered aromatic bacteria: (a) Cell of petal of Rosa sp., (b) Genes for MVA 
pathway which forms volatile molecules from plants like roses are incorporated in plasmids, (c) Transformed plasmids are 
incorporated in bacteria like E. coli, (d) Transgenic E. coli with MVA pathway, (e) Aromatic bacteria are used in making perfumes, 
cosmetics and pesticides in order to minimize use of plants for making perfumes and cosmetic products.

