BotGar_Cover (5-8-2004)  11/8/04  11:18 AM  Page 1

$19.95/ £14.99

GARDENING & HORTICULTURE / Reference

Botany for Gardeners

offers a clear explanation of how plants grow. 

• What happens inside a seed after it is planted?
• How are plants structured?
• How do plants adapt to their environment?
• How is water transported from soil to leaves?
• Why are minerals, air, and light important for healthy plant growth?
• How do plants reproduce?

The answers to these and other questions about complex plant processes,
written in everyday language, allow gardeners and horticulturists to
understand plants “from the plant’s point of view.”

A bestseller since its debut in 1990, Botany for Gardeners has now been expanded
and updated, and includes an appendix on plant taxonomy and a comprehensive
index. Two dozen new photos and illustrations
make this new edition even more attractive
than its predecessor. 

Brian Capon received a ph.d. in botany
from the University of Chicago and was for
thirty years professor of botany at California
State University, Los Angeles. He is the
author of Plant Survival: Adapting to a Hostile
World, also published by Timber Press. 

Author photo by Dan Terwilliger.

For details on other Timber Press books or to receive our
catalog, please visit our Web site, www.timberpress.com.
In the United States and Canada you may also reach us
at 1-800-327-5680, and in the United Kingdom at 
uk@timberpress.com.

ISBN 0-88192-655-8

ISBN 0-88192-655-8

90000

0 08819 26558 0

9 780881 926552

UPC

EAN

B
o
t
a
n
y
 
f
o
r
 
G
a
r
d
e
n
e
r
s

 

B
r
i
a
n
C
a
p
o
n

TIMBER
PRESS

Botany for Gardeners
REVISED EDITION Brian Capon

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:20 AM  Page 1

Botany for Gardeners

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 2

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 3

Botany for Gardeners
Revised Edition

Written and Illustrated by
BRIAN CAPON

TIMBER PRESS
Portland * Cambridge

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 4

Cover photographs by the author.

Text copyright © 2005 by Brian Capon
Photographs and drawings copyright © 2005 by Brian Capon
All rights reserved

Published in 2005 by

Timber Press, Inc.
The Haseltine Building
133 S.W. Second Avenue, Suite 450
Portland, Oregon 97204-3527, U.S.A.

Timber Press
2 Station Road
Swavesey
Cambridge CB4 5QJ, U.K.

www.timberpress.com

Printed through Colorcraft Ltd., Hong Kong

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Capon, Brian.
Botany for gardeners / written and illustrated by Brian Capon.-- Rev.
ed.

p. cm.

Includes index.
ISBN 0-88192-655-8 (pbk.) -- ISBN 0-88192-655-8
1.  Botany. 2.  Gardening.  I. Title. 
QK50.C36 2005
580--dc22

2004003695

A catalog record for this book is also available from the British Library.

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 5

CONTENTS

Introduction

PART I. GROWTH

Chapter 1

Cells and Seeds: Basics and Beginnings

Cells 
Cell Walls
Wall Structure and Cell Growth
Growth Processes
Meristems
Seed Coats
Food-Storage Structures and the Embryo
Seed Germination
Other Germination Requirements

Chapter 2 

Roots and Shoots: How Plants Mature

Root Systems
Root Growth
Root Hairs and Branches
Primary Growth in Stems
Development of a Woody Twig
Features of a Woody Twig
Leaves

9

13

16
18
20
22
22
24
25
29
31

34
36
37
38
44
45
47

5

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 6

6

Contents

PART II. ORGANIZATION

Chapter 3 

Inside Stems

Herbaceous Stems
Stem Thickening
Other Features of Wood
Monocot Stems

Chapter 4 

Inside Roots and Leaves

A Root’s Primary Tissues
Secondary Growth in Roots
Cellular Organization in Leaves
Plant Cell Types

PART III. ADAPTATION

Chapter 5 

Adaptations for Protection

The Garden Habitat
Environmental Modiﬁcation
Limiting Factors
Protection in Extreme Environments
Protection against Animals
Protection by Camouﬂage
Protection by Ants
Wound Healing
Chemical Protection
Mode of Operation of Chemical Protectants
Other Methods of Defense

Chapter 6 

Adaptations to Fulﬁll Basic Needs

Competition between Plants
Reaching toward the Sun
Spreading Stems
Climbing Structures

53

56
59
64
67

71
73
74
79

83

87
88
91
92
96
99
100
101
103
106
108

109
110
111
113

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 7

Contents

7

Lianas and Epiphytes
Supportive Roots
Special Methods of Water Uptake
Adaptations for Water Storage
Underground Food- and Water-Storage Organs
Saprophytes and Parasites
Mycorrhizae and Root Nodules
Insectivorous Plants

PART IV. FUNCTIONS

Chapter 7 

Control of Growth and Development

115
115
117
118
120
124
126
128

131

134
Growth Responses to Light
137
Responses to Gravity and Touch
140
Other Growth Movements in Plants
Hormones and the Aging Process
141
Control of Branching and Adventitious Root Formation 143
144
Other Hormone Effects: Synthetic Growth Regulators
Environmental Control: Temperature
145
147
Vernalization
Environmental Control: Photoperiod
148

Chapter 8 

The Uptake and Use of Water, Minerals, and Light

Osmosis: The Cell’s Water Pump
Development of Root Pressure
Transpirational Pull
Cold Hardening
Mineral Nutrient Needs
Soils
The Photosynthetic Apparatus
Light Transformed into the Energy in Food
The Photosynthetic Process
Gas Exchange with the Atmosphere

152
155
156
158
158
163
165
168
169
172

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 8

8

Contents

PART V. REPRODUCTION

Chapter 9 

From Flowers to Fruits

Flower Parts and Their Functions
Pollination by Animals
Road Maps and Rewards
Inﬂorescences
Pollination by Wind and Water
Pollination Alternatives
The Reproductive Process
Seedless Fruits and Unusual Embryos
Fruit Types
Seed Dispersal
The Cost of Reproduction

Chapter 10 

Strategies of Inheritance

Genetics: The Science of Heredity
Mitosis and Meiosis
The Life Cycle of a Moss
The Life Cycle of a Fern
The Two Generations of Flowering Plants
Chromosome Segregation during Meiosis
Gene Segregation during Meiosis
Consequences of Imperfection
The Origins of Polyploidy
Custom-made Plants of the Future

Epilogue
Appendix: Plant Names
Glossary
Index

175

178
182
183
186
189
191
193
195
195
198
200

201
202
203
205
207
209
210
213
214
217

219
220
224
234

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 9

INTRODUCTION

Earth  has  been  called  the  green  planet, a  world
clothed in a mantle of vegetation that sustains all other forms of life on this
tiny  spot  in  the  universe.  From  simple  beginnings,  plants  evolved  ﬁrst
among Earth’s living things and thereby established a fundamental princi-
ple of nature: Plants, in one form or another, can exist forever without ani-
mals, but animals cannot exist without plants.

Plants purify the air by exchanging the oxygen we breathe with carbon
dioxide, which is poisonous in too high a concentration. Plants convert the
energy  of  sunlight  into  foods  that  sustain  all  animals  and,  from  the  soil,
draw minerals such as nitrogen, potassium, calcium, and iron that are essen-
tial for our well-being. For creatures large and small, plants provide shade
from the sun, refuge from predators, and protection from the ever-chang-
ing  elements.  Since  the  ﬁrst  cells  came  into  being  millions  of  years  ago,
plants have been the connecting links in an unbroken chain of life. It is they
that have made the biosphere, the part of Earth’s crust where both plants
and animals exist, a place of limitless opportunity for human inquiry.

The range of uses we make of plants is as broad as our ingenuity permits.
We have exploited them for ﬁbers to make cloth, drugs to cure a multitude
of ailments, and wood to construct houses, furniture, and ships. From them
we have extracted raw materials to manufacture innumerable goods, includ-
ing paper. Without that latter commodity, the detailed history of our race
would not have been recorded and so remembered, nor could knowledge
have  been  so  easily  disseminated.  And  culture,  the  possession  of  which
makes  humans  out  of  animals,  would  never  have  developed  beyond  the
basic skills and habits of primitive peoples had we not had paper on which
to write music, poetry, and prose.

Some  of  us  look  at  plants  as  a  source  of  livelihood,  while  others  ﬁnd
them intriguing subjects for scientiﬁc study. But most enjoy plants for the
sheer delight of having them in their everyday surroundings, to savor the
varied colors, textures, tastes, and aromas that they alone can offer. Plants

9

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 10

10

Introduction

stimulate the senses, bring us a sense of peace and tranquility, and direct our
thoughts to contemplating the mysteries of life.

Few  gardeners  share  the  botanist’s  knowledge  of  plant  biochemistry,
anatomy, physiology, and intricate reproductive systems, yet all have expe-
rienced the extraordinary satisfaction derived from growing ﬂowers, fruits,
vegetables, and trees.

When  we  work  with  plants,  questions  about  them  inevitably  come  to
mind. What takes place inside a seed after we have set it in the ground?
How does water travel from soil to treetops? What makes a plant become
bushy with repeated pruning? What controls seasonal ﬂowering patterns?
How do plants grow, and why is light necessary to make growth happen?
Over  the  centuries,  botanists  have  worked  to  ﬁnd  answers  to  these  and
other problems. Slowly, plants have revealed some of their secrets.

Botany is a useful and rewarding study from which, unfortunately, many
laypersons are frightened away by the technical jargon that constitutes the
language of the science. The reader will encounter a number of scientiﬁc
words in the following pages. Some are part of the common parlance of
gardeners. For want of suitable nontechnical equivalents, others cannot be
avoided when writing such a book. Each technical word, whether common
or obscure, is explained in the text and glossary, and occasional reference is
made  to  the  Greek  and  Latin  roots  from  which  these  words  have  been
derived. In addition, it is hoped that the numerous illustrations will give
added meaning to the botanical vocabulary and ideas developed.

Some of the photographs are not the customary things that gardeners
look for in plants, but they are plants or parts of them seen in close-up,
sometimes through a microscope. A majority of the plant specimens that
have been photographed were selected from those available in my own and
neighbors’  gardens,  local  parks,  and  botanical  gardens  in  southern
California. But the broad principles of botany each photograph exempliﬁes
are equally applicable to plants in almost any part of the world.

There  are  close  to  400,000  recognizably  different  kinds  of  plants,  or
species, in the world today. So diverse are their forms that to write an all-
inclusive  deﬁnition  of  the  word  plant is  not  at  all  easy.  One-third  of  all
plants do not have roots, stems, and leaves as we know these parts in the
examples most familiar to us. About 150,000 plant species never produce
ﬂowers, and almost that same number do not grow from seeds, but rather
from dustlike particles called spores. The vast majority of plants manufac-
ture their own food supplies by a process called photosynthesis. Mushrooms,
molds, and other fungi rely on foods created by green plants for their sus-

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 11

Introduction

11

tenance (as do animals) and, for that reason, have now been reassigned from
the  plant  kingdom  to  the  fungal  kingdom.  Most  plants  spend  a  lifetime
anchored in one place, yet a few simple, one-celled plantlike organisms are
capable of swimming to different locations in the waters they inhabit. It is
this kind of diversity and amazing variety of shapes, colors, and lifestyles
that continually excite our interest in these organisms called plants.

As  we  delve  into  the  science  of  botany,  we  shall  largely  be  concerned
with  the  two  groups  of  plants  with  which  we,  as  gardeners,  most  often
work. One, known as the ﬂowering plants, or angiosperms, is the largest
group  in  the  plant  kingdom  and  consists  of  about  250,000  species.  The
name angiosperm refers to the fact that seeds from these plants are formed
inside  containers  that  we  call  fruits  (Greek:  angeion,  “vessel”;  sperma,
“seed”).  The  ﬂowering  plants  most  often  decorate  our  homes  and  land-
scapes, supply almost all of the vegetable matter in our diets, and are the
source of the world’s hardwoods. They are the most sophisticated of plant
forms and are best adapted to survive in a wide range of climates and places.
Second are gymnosperms, plants that produce seeds in the open spaces
of cones—between the ﬂaplike parts that make up a pine cone, for example.
The Greek words gymnos, “naked,” and sperma, “seed” describe this form of
development. On the evolutionary scale, gymnosperms are more primitive
than angiosperms but are of considerable economic importance as well as
interest to landscapers for their compact forms and richly colored, needle-
shaped, or scalelike leaves. Softwoods such as pine and ﬁr are not only used
to make paper, lumber, and plywood, but are the source of utilitarian prod-
ucts such as pitch, turpentine, and rosin. The gymnosperms include all the
conifers: cedar, redwood, juniper, cypress, ﬁr, pine, and the largest living
things on earth, the giant sequoias. Members of this group include many
ornamental  shrubs,  such  as  varieties  of  Chamaecyparis (false  cypress)  and
Thuja  occidentalis (American  arborvitae);  the  beautiful  maidenhair  tree,
Ginkgo biloba, a broad-leaved species; and, the least typical of gymnosperms,
the cycads.

For comparative purposes, passing mention is made of ferns, mosses, and
other primitive plants, but it is to the ﬂowering plants and gymnosperms
that we direct our attention because it is they that give us the most reveal-
ing picture of how marvelous plants are.

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 13

PART I

Growth

A  person,  a  plant,  a  pebble,  this  book  page—four
objects no one has trouble putting into simple categories of living and non-
living. But what makes the difference? Why can we be so sure that the pot-
ted geranium is living and a piece of the same plant that was pressed and
dried last year is unquestionably dead? From all appearances, a seed also
seems dead. What happens when, upon reawakening, it becomes charged
with  life  during  germination,  and  what  mysterious  entity  leaves  a  plant
when  it  dies?  Few  people  believe  in  the  departed  souls  of  plants.
Philosophers  may  endlessly  ponder  such  questions,  but  trying  to  ﬁnd
answers  strictly  based  on  observation  and  repeatable  experiment  is  the
essence of scientiﬁc inquiry.

In the broad sense, a living plant has the ability to make seeds or spores
from which other plants of the same species can be grown. In other words,
a living plant can reproduce. A dead one has lost that capacity. Then again,
if one has the opportunity to look at any part of a plant through a micro-
scope, it becomes obvious that plants are composed of countless numbers
of cells, which are invisible to the naked eye. This gives another clue to the
nature of living things. It may be argued that cells are still in a leaf when it
is dead and dried. But when the leaf was a part of a living plant, its cells were
actively  engaged  in  a  complicated  chain  of  chemical  reactions,  grouped
together under the term metabolism. We can be quite sure that, as long as a
cell or a whole creature is alive, it is going to display some sort of metabol-
ic activity. When their chemistry irreversibly stops, cells die.

Perhaps the most obvious difference between a rock and a rose is that the
rock doesn’t grow. In fact, it progressively becomes smaller as its surface

13

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 14

14

PART I

erodes. Plants and animals, on the other hand, begin life as single, fertilized
eggs and become larger as they mature. In the case of animals, including
ourselves,  a  determinate  growth pattern  dictates  a  preﬁxed,  maximum  size
that the body may reach. This pattern is implicit in and established by genes,
cellular instructions inherited from parents, and is more or less related to
the number of cells that the body is programmed to produce. Strenuous
exercise  may  enlarge  cells  but  relatively  few  new  cells  are  added.  Full
growth potential is realized if an animal receives adequate nutrition and its
muscles are exercised, especially during the formative years.

For the most part, plants have no deﬁnite size toward which they grow.
That is, they display indeterminate growth or, at least, their stems and roots
do. When left untouched and growing in an unrestricted volume of soil, a
plant’s roots will never reach an established size, nor will its branches in the
freedom of an open-air space. Limits of plant growth are proportional to
the availability of light, water, minerals, and oxygen. Life span is genetical-
ly determined—one year for annuals, two for biennials, and indeﬁnitely in
perennials.

Compare the indeterminate growth pattern of roots and stems with the
pattern found in leaves, ﬂowers, fruits, and seeds. The latter are both char-
acteristically ephemeral and determinate in growth. Their maximum possi-
ble sizes are rarely displayed in nature but can be realized under a skillful
gardener’s  control  of  the  plant’s  environment.  With  plenty  of  fertilizer,
careful watering schedules, optimum illumination, and thinning—removal
of parts that may compete for available nutrients—a plant can be pushed to
the limits of leaf, ﬂower, and fruit growth. All regular visitors to county fairs
know  what  prize-winning  blossoms  and  fruits  look  like.  They  are  giants
compared with normal specimens but never reach super-giant status.

Animals  grow  and  spend  their  lives  in  a  variety  of  places.  Mobility
enables them to choose habitats that are most favorable for existence under
changing conditions at different times of the year. A plant is anchored in
one place throughout its life. Half of its body, its root system, is buried in the
dark, damp, and somewhat stuffy recesses of the soil. Despite being sur-
rounded by a legion of potentially destructive grubs and soil microorgan-
isms, such as fungi and bacteria, from which the roots can’t escape and their
passage through the soil manipulated by encounters with immovable rocks,
roots are wonderfully adapted to this strange, hidden environment.

In contrast, shoot systems, consisting of stems and leaves, occupy a sunlit,
airy but frequently tempestuous world. Growth impediments are different
from those below ground and may range from insects and larger animals

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 15

Growth

15

with voracious appetites, out to survive at the plant’s expense, to the drying
effect of wind and sun or even damage from ﬁre.

Roots and shoots are frequently thought of as different entities growing
in opposite directions. To a plant they are parts of the whole body that must
be as well coordinated as are torso and legs during the course of growth and
the varied activities humans undertake. Root growth and shoot growth are
harmonized events, one complementing the other, with energy reserves and
raw materials for body building equally allocated to the two halves. And
when  daily  or  seasonal  environmental  changes  affect  one  part,  the  other
must respond in sympathy. The fact that plants do respond to their envi-
ronment, albeit in more subtle ways than animals, could be listed as anoth-
er characteristic of their being living organisms. Fulﬁllment of the funda-
mental  qualities  of  living  things—reproduction,  cellular  metabolism,  growth,
and response to the environment—can only be achieved by such precisely con-
trolled interactions between roots, stems, leaves, and ﬂowers.

The science of botany is divided into various disciplines, each having its
specialists, subject limitations, and technical vocabulary. Among them, cytol-
ogy (Greek: kytos, “container”) is the detailed study of cells. Study of the
form and structure of plants is the work of morphologists (Greek: morphe,
“form”). By virtue of their practical relationships with plants, gardeners are
more familiar with morphology than with cytology.

This  section  deals  with  plant  cells,  their  structure  and  role  in  growth
processes,  followed  by  a  look  at  the  growth  of  representative  ﬂowering
plants from germinated seeds to maturity. For convenience, growth and the
external forms of roots, stems, and leaves are treated separately. This is not
to imply that all parts of a plant do not develop simultaneously. The read-
er is invited into the realm of cells to better understand what goes on inside
roots, stems, and leaves when they grow.

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 16

CHAPTER 1

Cells and Seeds: Basics and Beginnings

CELLS

Robert Hooke, an English physicist, was understandably excited when, in
1665, he wrote about having used a crude microscope to look at a slice of
cork.  He  probably  thought  he’d  simply  conﬁrm  the  prevailing  idea  that
plants are composed of some sort of amorphous material, like clay shaped
by the Creator’s hands. But contrary to such expectations, Hooke was the
ﬁrst person to ﬁnd that plants were actually constructed of tiny units which
he named cells. His choice of word more likely reﬂected his acquaintance
with Latin (cella, “a small room”) than with the interior of a jailhouse.

What  subsequently  became  known  as  the  cell  theory—that  all  living
things are composed of one or more cells—was as revolutionary to scien-
tiﬁc thought as was, in our own time, the discovery of DNA (deoxyribo-
nucleic  acid),  the  chemical  substance  controlling  biological  inheritance.
Each year, as scientists delve deeper into cells, the revelation of what life
really is, at microscopic and ﬁner levels, continues to offer surprises.

To get an idea of what a typical plant cell is like and what it can do, think
of a large factory, capable of manufacturing thousands of different and elab-
orate products from simple raw materials—water, air, and soil. The factory
uses sunlight rather than electricity or oil as an energy source. It is designed
to  exert  considerable  autonomous  control  over  what  goes  on  within  its
boundaries  and,  whenever  increased  productivity  is  called  for,  it  simply
builds an exact copy of its entire physical structure—within a day or two.
Now,  mentally  squeeze  the  factory  into  a  box,  each  side  approximately
1/2000 of an inch (0.05 mm). That is a cell.

16

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 17

Cells and Seeds

17

middle lamella

cell wall

cytoplasmic membrane

cytoplasm

plasmodesmata

chloroplast

vacuole

other organelles

nucleus

Details of a plant cell

The living part of a cell, the protoplasm, consists of two parts: a nucleus,
which is the center of inheritance and cellular control, and the cytoplasm, a
soft, jelly-like material (a colloid) in which most of the cell’s metabolism
takes  place.  The  cytoplasm  is  enclosed  within  a  sac  called  the  cytoplasmic

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 18

18

CHAPTER 1

membrane. This, like other membranes in a cell, is composed of protein and
fatty substances and has the ability to control the passage of water, foods,
and selected minerals across the boundary that it deﬁnes.

Suspended in the semi-liquid cytoplasm are numerous small bodies, or
organelles, which specialize in the cell’s separate functions. Some organelles
are the same in both plant and animal cells, hinting at ancient ancestral ties.
Chloroplasts are  organelles  unique  to  plants  and  they  are  the  place  where
photosynthesis  takes  place,  where  light  energy  is  used  to  manufacture
foods. The green pigment chlorophyll, essential for the process, is located
within the chloroplasts, as its name indicates (Greek: chloros, “green”; plas-
tos, “body”; phyll, “leaf”). Obviously, one would not expect to ﬁnd chloro-
plasts in most roots or other parts of a plant that are not green. The color
of a leaf is actually the combined appearance of millions of chloroplasts dis-
cernible only with the aid of a microscope.

Other organelles include mitochondria that extract energy from foods by
the process of cellular respiration and those that specialize in protein pro-
duction, the ribosomes. The functions of some organelles, visible only with
powerful electron microscopes, are still not fully understood.

The nucleus of a cell is its control center from which instructions for the
cell’s operation, maintenance, and reproduction emanate. It is comparable to
the main ofﬁce in the imaginary industrial plant. Inherited chromosomes, bear-
ing genes that are composed of the DNA mentioned earlier, are located in
the nucleus. These are the blueprints for making more cellular factories.

A  vacuole occupies  a  large  part  of  the  volume  of  most  plant  cells.
Although the word vacuole means “empty space,” it is a membrane-bound
inner sac containing much of a cell’s stored water and serves as a repository
for excess mineral nutrients as well as toxic waste products from the cell’s
metabolism.

Each  cell  is  designed  to  function  most  of  the  time  as  an  independent
unit. Yet their metabolism and other activities are enhanced when groups of
cells act in concert by the exchange of foods and other materials by way of
interconnecting stands of cytoplasm, called plasmodesmata (Greek: desmos,
“chain”).

CELL WALLS

The protoplasm of each cell is surrounded by a rigid cell wall that protects
the living contents. Between adjacent cell walls the substance pectin forms a
thin layer, a middle lamella (a sheet), which binds the cells together. This

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 19

Cells and Seeds

19

a

b

c

d

e

Schematic diagram illustrating how cell walls thicken. (a) A primary cell wall of cellulose
microﬁbrils. (b–e) A secondary wall is formed from additional cellulose layers, sequen-
tially placed inside the others. Lignin is also formed and inserted with each cellulose
layer. The protoplasm progressively shrinks and eventually dies.

same  substance,  when  commercially  extracted  from  plants  and  sold  in
supermarkets, is used to thicken jams and fruit jellies.

Collectively, cell walls give structural support to a plant, the degree of
rigidity of any part being proportional to the relative thickness of its con-
stituent cells’ walls. The lightweight, delicate structure of a leaf, for exam-
ple,  indicates  that  it  is  composed  of  thin-walled  cells,  whereas  in  woody
stems supporting heavy loads, cells with extra-thick walls are developed.

When a cell is ﬁrst formed, its wall is thin and largely composed of the
substance cellulose. This is the cell’s so-called primary wall. With increased
age, the wall may thicken by addition of more cellulose and by the intro-
duction of lignin, a hardening substance. Hardwoods like oak and ash are
made up of cells with heavily ligniﬁed walls. All of these extra layers con-
stitute the cell’s secondary wall. Cellulose is laid down in microscopic threads
called microﬁbrils; lignin forms deposits on the cellulose surface. Each new
layer  of  wall  material,  produced  by  the  living  cytoplasm,  is  set  in  place
inside the previously formed layer.

Obviously,  as  walls  thicken,  the  space  occupied  by  the  living  contents
decreases  and  the  ability  of  water  and  oxygen  to  reach  the  cytoplasm  is
diminished. It is literally an act of suicide that kills the protoplasm and ends
wall  thickening.  Even  so,  the  remaining  hollow  cell  walls  continue  their
supportive roles throughout the life of the plant. Most people are surprised
to learn that, in a living tree, as much as 98 percent of its trunk and branch-
es are composed of dead cells, including those that conduct water.

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 20

20

CHAPTER 1

a

b

c

How cellulose microﬁbrils determine the direction of cell growth. (a) The side walls of a
young cell have microﬁbrils arranged in parallel formation. (b) The cell elongates when
microﬁbrils in the side walls spread apart from internal pressures within the cell; the
crisscross pattern of end-wall microﬁbrils prevents the cell from growing in width. 
(c) Having reached its maximum length, secondary wall thickening prevents further
growth in the cell’s length.

WALL STRUCTURE AND CELL GROWTH

Most cells in a plant, especially those in roots and stems, grow in a speciﬁc
direction, dictated by the way in which cellulose microﬁbrils are arranged
in the walls. If one thinks of a cell as a slightly elongated box, placed in an
upright position, the four sides are formed from microﬁbrils placed paral-
lel to one another and coiled around the box. Microﬁbrils in the top and
bottom have a very different, crisscross pattern.

When  a  cell  enlarges,  its  walls  temporarily  soften.  At  the  same  time,
cytoplasmic swelling takes place as a result of water uptake. Bonds between
side-wall  microﬁbrils  are  loosened  and  the  cellulose  threads  are  spread
apart  by  the  internal  pressures.  Because  the  microﬁbrils  in  end  walls  are
interwoven, similar stretching is not possible. That is why cells principally
grow in length, paralleling the general direction of vertical growth of stems
and roots. (Thickening of these plant parts results from a different growth
process that shall be discussed later.) Once a cell reaches a predetermined

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 21

Cells and Seeds

21

a

b

c

d

e

Mitosis, the dance of the chromosomes. The root’s apical meristem is the U-shaped area
a short distance from the tip (photograph at left). In the meristem’s cells, division of the
nuclei involves the separation of matching chromosome strands in stages named: (a)
prophase, (b) metaphase, (c) anaphase, and (d) telophase. (e) Two daughter cells.
Several of these stages are shown in the photograph of the meristem’s cells (right),
greatly magniﬁed.

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 22

22

CHAPTER 1

maximum length, the addition of secondary wall thickenings prevents fur-
ther enlargements.

GROWTH PROCESSES

Two processes taking place at a cellular level contribute to a plant’s growth.
In the ﬁrst, new cells are formed by the division of cells already in the plant
body. Each time a cell divides, two complete cells are produced. Every cell
in a plant, with the exception of the original fertilized egg, has had its ori-
gin in this process.

The most important part of cell division is providing each new cell with
a nucleus containing a complete set of genes. This is accomplished during
a process called mitosis (Greek: mitos, “thread”) in which the nuclear DNA
becomes organized into sets of threadlike chromosomes (literally, the word
chromosome means “colored body,” from the fact that they readily stain
with artiﬁcial dyes). The chromosomes go through an elaborate sequence
of movements, culminating in matched chromosome parts being segregat-
ed into the two newly developed cells.

The second growth process, in which cells undergo a limited period of

elongation in plants, was described in the previous section.

MERISTEMS

The two phases of growth occur in well-deﬁned places within a plant rather
than  as  scattered,  random  events.  Cells  divide  in  areas  called  meristems
(Greek: meristos, “divided”); close by lie regions of cell enlargement. At the
tip (apex) of each stem and root an apical meristem contributes cells to the
length of these plant organs. Such increases in stem and root length, before
thickening,  are  referred  to  as  the  plant’s  primary  growth  process.  Primary
growth ensures that leaves are quickly elevated into sunlight and roots pen-
etrate  deeply  into  the  soil.  The  rapid  growth  of  a  seedling,  after  it  has
emerged from the soil, is a familiar display of primary growth that contin-
ues as long as roots and stems lengthen.

When stems have gained moderate height, it is important that they begin
to thicken toward their bases to give added stability and support for the leaf
mass. This is called secondary growth and results from cell divisions in meri-
stems located inside, throughout the length of the stems. These lateral meri-
stems also extend into the roots of larger plants. Secondary growth in a tree
creates the slow but measurable thickening of its trunk and branches as well
as the upper portions of roots that may emerge above the soil surface.

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 23

Cells and Seeds

23

stem

root

a

b

c

Meristems, places where cells divide. 
(a) The apical meristem at the stem tip
deposits cells behind itself; it is responsi-
ble for the primary growth (growth in
length) of the stem. (b) Primary growth of
the root results from cell divisions in its
apical meristem. (c) A lateral meristem
extends the length of the stem and root; it
is actually a cylinder of cells, dividing both
inward and outward to thicken the stem
and root during secondary growth.

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 24

24

CHAPTER 1

During seasons of active growth, both the apical and lateral meristems
make their separate but coordinated contributions to the shape and size of
a plant. When one looks at trees from day to day, changes that have taken
place are hardly noticeable. Only at pruning time does the reality of plant
growth strike home. More impressive is the experience of returning to old
haunts after several years of absence and hardly recognizing once familiar
trees, now transformed by time from saplings into stately patriarchs. Cell
division  and  cell  enlargement,  the  basics  of  plant  growth,  are  simple  in
principle yet complex in their undertaking. Finding what happens during
growth in terms of the cell’s chemistry, beyond the limits of human sight, is
one of the challenges facing today’s scientists.

SEED COATS

Even before birth, animals show every indication of activity and life. Not so
with ﬂowering plants and gymnosperms making their entry into the world
as seeds that look so dry and lifeless. Actually, because there is measurable
metabolic activity in seeds that are viable—ultimately capable of germina-
tion—we say they are only dormant. Given the right conditions, a seed wak-
ens from its dormancy and enters a short period of intense activity, the likes
of which are not to be repeated at any other time during the plant’s life his-
tory. Watching the entire process of seed germination unfold within a mat-
ter of days is truly astonishing.

Seeds  are  extraordinary  objects.  They  are  compact,  easily  stored,  and
capable of survival through freezing temperatures or prolonged drought,
conditions that usually kill the parent plants. When kept dry, seeds resist
fungal attack and, although they contain rich stores of food attractive to
animals, they frequently elude predators by being a drab, brown color that
offers camouﬂage against the background of the soil.

The  skin  of  a  seed  is  its  seed  coat,  the  color,  texture,  and  thickness  of
which vary from species to species. Thickness and hardness of the seed coat
determines how fast water can penetrate it. This, in turn, relates to how
soon germination may take place after seeds have naturally worked their
way into the soil or have been planted by a gardener.

Thick seed coats must be scariﬁed; that is, the seed’s surface must ﬁrst be
etched to make minute openings through which water can cross the barri-
er that the coat presents. In nature, soil fungi and bacteria slowly decom-
pose  seed  coats;  or  a  more  rapid  method  involves  moderate  grinding  by
coarse, shifting soil particles during heavy rains. Scariﬁcation of hard seed
coats may also take place during passage of seeds through bird crops or the

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 25

Cells and Seeds

25

With the seed coat and one cotyledon
removed from a bean seed, the embryo is
seen pressed against the other cotyledon.
Complete with a pair of tiny leaves, a
short stem, and root, the miniature plant
awaits the moment of germination.

strongly  acidic  stomachs  of  large
animals.  For  some  seeds,  such  a
mode of scariﬁcation is so essential
to germination that they are pack-
aged in colorful, nutritious fruits to
attract  an  animal’s  attention  and
reward it with food for having swal-
lowed  the  seeds.  A  second  beneﬁt
seeds derive from such an unlikely
relationship  is  that  they  receive
widespread dispersal. A bird can ﬂy
a considerable distance in the time
it takes for a seed to pass through its
intestines and, at journey’s end, the
seed is deposited with some fertilizer that may prove useful in getting the
new plant started.

Gardeners who collect seeds from their plants for use the following year
may have to use artiﬁcial scariﬁcation methods. The seeds of many lupine
species are a case in point. One rather tedious method is to nick each seed
with a ﬁle or sharp knife or, alternatively, batches of seeds can be soaked for
a few minutes in concentrated sulfuric acid. Exercise caution when using
acid and be sure to thoroughly rinse the seeds in running water. Another
method is to line a small container with coarse sandpaper, rough side fac-
ing inward, put on the lid and vigorously shake the seeds until the coats are
well scratched.

FOOD-STORAGE STRUCTURES AND THE EMBRYO

Bean seeds have thin coats, easily peeled off after being soaked for a couple
of hours. The bulk of these seeds is occupied by two, kidney-shaped, food-
storage structures called cotyledons, or seed leaves (the Greek word kotyledon
means “cuplike hollow” or “concave,” as some cotyledons are). Only when
these are carefully pried apart do we ﬁnd the reason for the seed’s being—
an embryo, a miniature plant waiting for the moment of its birth. The bean

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 26

26

CHAPTER 1

embryo shows all of the character-
istics  of  a  complete  plant,  albeit
reduced  in  size:  a  root,  or  radicle
(Latin: radicula, “small root”) as it is
called  at  this  stage;  a  short  stem;
and  a  pair  of  pale  leaves  that  bear
evidence of veins within them. The
ﬁne details of a plant embryo, like
those of an unborn child, are won-
derful to behold.

During germination, the embryo
is  the  seed  part  that  grows  into  a
seedling, or young plant. At root and
stem  tips,  apical  meristems  quickly
respond to the germination stimu-
lus and launch themselves into the
primary  growth  process  described

Germination begins with the embryo’s
rapidly growing root bursting through the
seed coat.

While the
seedling’s stem
pushes its way
toward the light,
the root system
branches in several
directions from the
plant’s base. At the
soil surface the
hooked stem pulls
the cotyledons and,
between them, the
stem tip out of 
the soil.

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 27

Cells and Seeds

27

When cotyledons
are free of the soil,
the bean’s stem
straightens and the
embryo leaves,
present in the seed,
begin to expand
and turn green.

Close inspection of the bean seedling shows the stem’s growing tip between the ﬁrst
pair of leaves. The cotyledons have begun to shrivel as their stored foods are used by
the developing plant.

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 28

28

CHAPTER 1

endosperm

cotyledon

embryo

Inside a corn grain

earlier. The embryonic leaves don’t expand until they are carried out of the
soil by the lengthening stem.

Cotyledons are attached to and are a part of the embryo, but their role
is  entirely  different.  Rather  then  growing,  they  progressively  shrink  as
stored  foods  are  transferred  to  the  seedling.  In  bean  plants,  this  can  be
watched because expansion of the lower part of the stem, called the hypocotyl
(hypo-, “below”) elevates the cotyledons a short distance above the soil sur-
face where, within a few days, they shrivel and eventually drop from the
plant; the cotyledons’ food supplies have been spent. When plants elevate
their cotyledons in this manner, it is called an epigeous mode of germination
(epi-, “above”; ge-, “earth”). For many seeds, including the pea, the cotyle-
dons remain buried in the ground during hypogeous germination.

The  seeds  of  ﬂowering  plants  contain  either  one  or  two  cotyledons.
Botanists  use  this  characteristic  to  subdivide  the  angiosperms  into  two
major  groups—the  dicots (di-,  “two”)  and  the  monocots (mono-,  “one”).
Compared with dicots, monocots are believed to be the more recent prod-
ucts of plant evolution and include grasses, cereal grains (wheat, oats, bar-
ley, rice, rye), sugar cane, bamboo, palms, lilies, irises, and orchids. Dicots,

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 29

Cells and Seeds

29

the larger group, encompass everything from roses and rhododendrons to
ash trees and asters. In addition to cotyledon numbers, other features, to be
described later, characterize these two groups of angiosperms.

A corn grain is actually a seed surrounded by a thin fruit wall to which
the seed coat is tightly bonded. The seed contains an embryo, one cotyle-
don  (corn  is  a  monocot),  and  a  second  food-storage  structure  called  the
endosperm (endo-, “within”; sperma, “seed”) that also nourishes the seedling
during germination. The soft, white pulp in each grain of fresh corn-on-
the-cob is endosperm.

The size of the food-storage structures in a seed determine the maxi-
mum depth to which it can be planted and successfully germinate. If, for
example,  a  small  seed  is  set  too  deeply,  the  seedling  will  use  the  reserve
foods before it reaches the soil surface. Seed packages give speciﬁc instruc-
tions on depth of planting, but a useful rule of thumb is to bury a seed no
deeper than its length. Too shallow is generally better than too deep.

Seed size varies with species of plant, a familiar large seed being that of
a coconut. It is the part inside the hard, stony shell that is part of the fruit
wall. The white, edible meat of a coconut is seed material, and the rich-tast-
ing juice in a fresh coconut is endosperm that has turned to liquid during
seed maturation. Gardeners are best acquainted with seeds of less grandiose
proportions, including mustard seeds that have been used as ﬁgurative sym-
bols of diminished size. Some of the smallest seeds, produced by orchids,
are like particles of dust and contain only a rudimentary embryo structure.

SEED GERMINATION

Equipped with everything needed to make a new plant, a seed simply waits
until three vital environmental conditions have been met: an ample supply
of water, optimum temperature, and situation in a well-aerated soil or other
location.

Throughout the months or years of its dormancy, the embryo is held in
a state of suspended animation by the dehydrated condition of its cells. Less
than 2 percent of a seed’s weight is water, compared with about 95 percent
water in a mature herbaceous plant—one that is green and soft textured. It is
the low water content that protects a seed against damage at low tempera-
tures. When water freezes it expands; in cells, ice crystals can tear the pro-
toplasm apart. Yet if a seed becomes completely dry, it loses its viability, its
capacity to germinate.

The length of time seeds remain viable varies with species and conditions of
storage.  Low-temperature  storage  is  used  in  seed  banks  being  established

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 30

30

CHAPTER 1

throughout the world to protect many plant species against possible extinction
due to the destructive activities of humans. This method of preservation was
validated by a report of successful germination of arctic lupine seeds taken from
frozen tundra soils and found to be at least 10,000 years old by radioactive-car-
bon dating methods. Even when stored at room temperature, however, some
seeds  remain  viable  for  fairly  long  periods.  Mimosa  seeds,  discovered  in  the
Natural History Museum in Paris, germinated after 221 years of storage.

A seed, like a dry sponge, can soak up sizeable quantities of water. Water is
initially absorbed by the process of imbibition in which water molecules ﬁt into
spaces between cellulose, proteins, and other substances in the dry cell walls
and  protoplasm.  As  the  cell  components  absorb  more  water  they  soften  and
swell, comparable to what happens when dry gelatin granules are soaked in a
drop of water; they too imbibe the liquid.

When fully imbibed, most seeds will be about double their original volume.
Since seed coats expand to a lesser degree than their contents, the coats split;
thus allowing more rapid water uptake by the embryo and cotyledons and also
giving them full access to oxygen in the soil atmosphere. Oxygen is needed for
the chemistry of what takes place next in the germination process.

Without going into the details of those chemical events, the end result is
that  large  food  molecules—starch,  protein,  and  fats—in  the  cotyledons  and
endosperm, if present, are broken down to smaller, easily transportable units
such as sugars and amino acids. Having been sent to the embryo, these sub-
stances are used to construct new cells in the seedling’s meristems and supply
the growth processes with energy. Both plants and animals use exactly the same
process (cellular respiration) to extract energy from foods by burning them in the
presence of oxygen. The gas simply diffuses into plants from their surround-
ings,  including  from  pores  in  loose-textured  soils.  Higher  animals  including
humans make a more deliberate effort to get oxygen when they breathe.

When sufﬁcient food is available for the embryo, its root pushes into the
soil, there to anchor the new plant, take up needed minerals, and absorb water
by another, more important, method called osmosis. (The process of osmosis will
be described in chapter 8.) Soon, it becomes the turn of the embryonic shoot
to grow. When it does, the stem tip is curved downward in a hook that pulls the
young  leaves  through  the  soil,  the  apical  meristem  being  protected  between
them.

Throughout its early stages of growth, the seedling is completely dependent
upon  food  supplies  from  the  storage  structures  of  the  seed—cotyledons  and
endosperm. Such a reliance on fully formed foods from a different source is the
hallmark  of  heterotrophic  nutrition (Greek:  hetero-,  “different”;  trophic,  “nutri-

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 31

Cells and Seeds

31

tion”). Animals and fungi (mushrooms and molds) are heterotrophic organisms.
Plants that photosynthesize use autotrophic nutrition (auto-, “self”). Only when a
seedling’s ﬁrst leaves are lifted into the light does the plant become autotroph-
ic. It is a major switch in behavior from being dependent on foods provided by
the seed to becoming an independent organism. Once begun, photosynthesis
will produce all the food that the plant will ever again need.

Germination  officially  ends  when  the  shoot  emerges  from  the  soil.
Subsequent seedling development includes stem growth, complete expansion of
the ﬁrst leaves—the minute pair, ﬁrst seen inside the bean seed—and, under-
ground, proliferation of the root system by repeated branching.

OTHER GERMINATION REQUIREMENTS

The basic needs of water, ideal temperature, and a loose-textured soil to pro-
vide oxygen are familiar to anyone who has grown plants from seeds. Perhaps
less well known are the special, added requirements of some seeds before they
will germinate. Among these are pretreatments with cold or heat, the need for
thorough  washing,  illumination  with  red  light  or,  most  surprising,  being
scorched by ﬁre.

After they are shed from their fruits, some seeds will not germinate until
they have completed a period of after-ripening. This seems to be a time when
the embryo matures and all systems in the seed are being readied for the big
event. In a batch of seeds from one plant, or a group of related plants in a com-
munity, all may not germinate at the same time. As annoying as this may be to
the horticulturist, in nature staggered germination over several months or years
is advantageous to a species’ survival. If every seed in a population germinated
at the same time, the risk of having all seedlings perish in a late frost or unsea-
sonal drought is increased. While a seed is the stage in a plant’s life cycle most
resistant to environmental extremes, the seedling is most vulnerable. The sys-
tem of staggered germination maintains an emergency supply of viable seeds in
the soil at all times and is achieved by members of a seed population having dif-
ferent rates of after-ripening or variable rates of scariﬁcation due to different
seed coat thicknesses.

Another impediment to germination may be the presence of chemicals that
inhibit the process. These are generally located in the seed coats and have to be
washed away by heavy rains that also wet the soil with enough water to ensure
seedling establishment. It is an ingenious way to coordinate germination with
periods of adequate rainfall and not have the seeds fooled by passing summer
showers. Occasionally, germinated seeds may be found inside a grapefruit. But

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 32

32

CHAPTER 1

in most fruits special chemicals or simply a high potassium concentration pre-
vent this from happening. If seeds are to be collected from ﬂeshy fruits, they
should be thoroughly washed and dried before planting.

An interesting case of chemical inhibition of germination is one in which a
plant may prevent the establishment of others of its own or different species
within  its  growth  territory.  This  effectively  eliminates  competition  for  space
and resources in short supply. It is called allelopathy (Greek: “mutual suffering”)
and  is  accomplished  by  saturation  of  the  surrounding  soil  with  chemicals
washed out of fallen leaves and twigs from the defensive plant. In a few cases,
roots  are  believed  to  excrete  allelochemicals,  which  explains  the  inability  of
farmers  to  grow  other  crops  near  walnut  trees.  Allelopathy  is  an  interesting
phenomenon that could be used in developing natural weed killers and in the
selection of crops for mixed interplanting.

Although seeds may seem to be asleep as they lay in the soil, they are fully
responsive  to  changes  in  their  environment.  For  seedlings  to  become  well
established during the most favorable season for growth, seeds of native plants
from  Earth’s  temperate  zones—places  where  cold  winters  are  normal—must
germinate in spring, after the last snows have melted. It would be wasteful for
seedlings to start growth late in the year because none could survive winter. To
avoid such an outcome, the seeds must be stratiﬁed before they can germinate;
that is, they must be moistened and given an extended period of low tempera-
tures. In nature, this happens in the course of the normal seasonal cycle. Seeds
are produced in late summer, moistened by autumn rains, chilled throughout
the winter, and are ready to germinate in the mild, sunny days of spring. Seeds
possessing  this  requirement  can  be  artiﬁcially  stratiﬁed  by  placing  them
between layers of moist paper in a refrigerator for a month or two. Another
remarkable mechanism to ensure the germination of some seeds in a speciﬁc
season involves the perception of changing day lengths by a chemical system
activated after the seeds have imbibed water.

Seeds of any plant that grows best in bright, direct sunlight are at a disad-
vantage  when  they  germinate  in  the  shade  of  other  plants.  Some  sun-loving
plants produce seeds that cannot germinate under such unfavorable conditions,
responding instead to illumination with only red light. Sunlight is composed of
various colors (wavelengths) that we see separated in the bands of a rainbow.
When sunlight passes through a leaf, chlorophyll captures the red wavelengths.
Below  a  dense  leaf  canopy,  in  a  forest  of  broad-leaved  trees  in  summer,  for
example, the ﬁltered light is short on red. In a forest of deciduous trees (ones that
lose  their  leaves  in  winter),  light-sensitive  seeds  remain  dormant  until  early
spring  when  the  leaf  canopy  has  not  yet  regrown  but  temperatures  and  soil
water conditions are favorable for seedling growth. In evergreen tropical rain

001-033_Botany  11/8/04  11:21 AM  Page 33

Cells and Seeds

33

forests, germination may be delayed for years until the collapse of a large, old
tree creates an opening where full sunlight can reach the ground and stimulate
the waiting seeds.

Another unusual requirement for germination of some seeds is the need to
be scariﬁed by ﬁre. Obviously, such extreme measures apply only to seeds with
very thick coats and is most common among species where periodic lightning-
caused ﬁres are a part of the balance of nature. In Mediterranean-type climates,
including  the  American  Southwest,  a  group  of  plants  is  classiﬁed  under  the
name chaparral. These are low-growing shrubs bearing small, leathery leaves,
rich in highly ﬂammable resins. Their leaf litter and dry branches make perfect
tinder for fast-moving ﬁres, especially on the steep slopes where chaparral nor-
mally grows. Seeds from these plants survive the ﬁres with nothing more than
a scorching, but it is sufﬁcient to ready them for water uptake during subse-
quent rains. The aboveground parts of parent plants are reduced to ash, which
recycles nutrients back to the soil, nutrients that have been uselessly locked in
dead branches for years. Regrowth of chaparral shrubs takes place from under-
ground root crowns. It is more vigorous growth than that which it replaces and
more palatable to animals that ﬂed the ﬁres but soon return to start a new life.
In the blackened, nutritious soils, seedling growth is rapid and, with the leaf
canopy removed, many species of sun-loving plants, especially annuals, occupy
formally unfavorable sites, at least temporarily.

When attempting to grow several species of desert wildﬂowers, I found that
their freshly collected seeds germinated best when heated in an oven at 120°F
(49°C)  for  one  week  before  planting.  Such  a  harsh  treatment  is  believed  to
reﬂect  a  heat  pretreatment  requirement  for  germination  in  the  wild.  It  is
accomplished during the summer months when desert soils and their shallow-
ly buried seeds may reach those temperatures. Germination and plant growth
are then assured for the winter months, when annual rains are most likely to
occur and cooler temperatures prevail.

Plants favored for horticultural and agricultural use share several character-
istics; among them are ease and reliability of their seed’s germination. Native
plant species having unusual germination requirements, such as those described
above, are given scant attention and are generally of interest only to profes-
sional botanists and the most dedicated garden enthusiasts. But the charm and
simple beauty of wildﬂowers make the extra challenges of growing them in the
garden worthwhile. For those who are interested, native plant societies in your
region can provide useful information on wildﬂower propagation.

034-052_Botany  11/8/04  11:24 AM  Page 34

CHAPTER 2

Roots and Shoots: How Plants Mature

ROOT SYSTEMS

Except for the roots of vegetable crops such as carrots, beets, turnips, and
radishes, the underground parts of plants receive little attention from gar-
deners. It is not so much a matter of roots being “out of sight and out of
mind,” but, understandably, they do lack the aesthetic appeal of ﬂowers and
the attractiveness of leaves. And, perhaps, their pallid, subterranean ways
make them slightly incomprehensible. Only when a plant is dug up or a
pot-bound plant is transferred to a larger container do most gardeners sud-
denly become conscious of roots and how much they have grown. Despite
our lesser regard for these organs, roots are worthy of study.

Actually, roots have a certain elegance, largely because of their simplici-
ty. Without sporting eye-catching appendages or putting on a spectacular
show, their streamlined structure enables them to do three things, and do
them well: They anchor the plant in the soil; absorb water and minerals;
and store excess food for future needs, underground where animals are least
likely to ﬁnd it.

Roots anchor the plant in one of two ways or, sometimes, by a combina-
tion of the two. The ﬁrst is to occupy a large volume of shallow soil around
the plant’s base with a ﬁbrous (or diffuse) root system, one consisting of many
thin, profusely branched roots. Because these grow relatively close to the
soil surface, they effectively control soil erosion; grasses are especially well
suited for such a purpose. Fibrous roots capture water as it begins to per-
colate into the ground, drawing their mineral supplies from the surface soil
before the nutrients are leached to lower levels.

34

034-052_Botany  11/8/04  11:24 AM  Page 35

Roots and Shoots

35

A comparison of ﬁbrous (left) and tap root systems.

A tap root system sends one or two rapidly growing, sparsely branched
roots straight down into the soil to draw from deep water tables and min-
eral  supplies.  Tap  roots  are  especially  good  anchors  in  shifting  soils  or
windy locations. A few species simultaneously grow both root systems, oth-
ers adopt one form or the other, depending on soil and water conditions—
ﬁbrous roots when the surface soil is moist, tap roots when it becomes dry.
Because a speciﬁc root system is inherited, it is often used as a distinguish-
ing characteristic of a plant family.

Food is stored in both root types, with tap roots having the greater stor-
age capacity because they enlarge in diameter as well as length. A carrot is
an excellent example of a tap root adapted for food storage and, of course,
it is the presence of those foods that makes the root a desirable item in our
diets. When the tops of biennial and perennial plants die back in winter or
leaves drop and stems become dormant, it is the use of foods stored in their
roots that enables such plants to quickly regenerate new foliage the follow-
ing spring.

The extent of ﬁbrous root growth varies with plant species and avail-
ability  of  soil  water,  with  a  tendency  to  stay  near  the  surface  in  lightly
watered  soils.  Lawns,  for  example,  should  be  well  soaked  at  infrequent

034-052_Botany  11/8/04  11:24 AM  Page 36

36

CHAPTER 2

intervals rather than being given daily sprinkles to encourage deep root sys-
tems less subject to surface drying and insect attacks on tender root tips. To
get an idea of the extent of a well-developed ﬁbrous root system, the roots
of  an  adult  rye  plant  were  once  counted  and  measured.  It  bore  approxi-
mately 14 million root segments totaling an unbelievable 380 miles (630
km) in length.

Unexpectedly, some large trees have only shallow roots, but because they
are spreading and matted, the roots form a broad base for support of the
trunks. This form of root system is common among trees in tropical rain
forests, where even the forest giants, as much as 180 feet (60 m) tall, have
roots penetrating little more than 3 feet (1 m) into the soil. The advantage
gained  by  such  root  systems  is  that  they  are  able  to  collect  nutrients,
released from rotting vegetation on the forest ﬂoor, before they are washed
away by heavy rains in runoff from the shallow soils.

In temperate zones, conifers are generally anchored by deep tap roots
that develop large, horizontal branches. Although the roots of most trees
grow to moderate lengths, they rarely exceed the height of their uppermost
stems. Forest trees, ornamentals, and fruit trees frequently distribute their
roots in a wide circle, where water-absorbing root tips occupy a drip zone, an
area  beyond  the  leaf  canopy  to  which  rain  is  channeled  from  the  foliage
above. This pattern of root growth should be recalled when irrigating and
fertilizing garden trees.

Most  horticultural  and  agronomic  plants  have  relatively  shallow  roots
ranging from 1 to 6 feet (0.3 to 2 m) in depth. The limited root growth of
hybrid roses, for example, simpliﬁes transplanting them either in root balls
or  by  bare-root  methods.  But  among  wild  plant  species,  tap  roots  with
lengths of 30–45 feet (10–15 m) are not uncommon. Those of some desert
shrubs grow to a vertical depth of more than 90 feet (30 m). Cacti, on the
other  hand,  have  shallow,  spreading  ﬁbrous  roots  to  intercept  the  small
amounts of rain penetrating hard, baked desert soil surfaces.

ROOT GROWTH

Because the main purpose of roots is to probe the soil for water and min-
erals at a distance from the center of the plant, primary growth (increase in
length)  is  their  most  important  growth  process  and  apical  meristems  are
their key to success. Most new cells produced by an apical meristem are laid
down behind the growing tip. There they augment the length of the root
and  when  the  cells  subsequently  elongate,  the  root  tip  pushes  its  way

034-052_Botany  11/8/04  11:24 AM  Page 37

Roots and Shoots

37

through the soil with considerable force. Since a damaged meristem cannot
be  regenerated,  for  protection  the  meristem  also  produces  cells  ahead  of
itself forming a root cap. Root cap cells are readily rubbed off but are quick-
ly replaced from within, much like our skin when it dries and peels from the
surface. When root cap cells are ruptured by sharp soil particles, their pro-
toplasm  forms  a  slimy  coat  lubricating  the  root  tip  as  it  works  its  way
through the soil and around large objects. Rocks shattered by growing roots,
often seen in road cuttings and other excavations, offer impressive testimo-
ny to the power of living cells that appear so fragile under a microscope.
Their slow, persistent growth was all it took to accomplish such a feat.

ROOT HAIRS AND BRANCHES

All  of  the  root’s  primary  growth  activities  are  concentrated  in  a  region
about 1⁄4 inch (5 mm) long at its tip. Consequently, water absorption takes
place a short way back, in an area where a fuzzy band appears around the
root. This band is formed by thou-
sands  of  projecting  root  hairs.  Root
hairs  are  extensions  of  the  outer
root  cells  and  increase,  by  several
hundred-fold,  the  organ’s  absorp-
tive  surface  area.  Their  presence
increases  the  rate  of  water  uptake
proportionally. Root hairs are easily
broken when a root is dug from the
soil  but  can  be  seen  on  seedlings
(radish  is  ideal)  grown  on  a  moist
paper  towel  in  a  covered  dish  for
about  ﬁve  days.  The  width  of  the
root  hair  zone  remains  constant.
During continued root growth, new
hairs  form  just  above  the  growing
tip while old ones, at the top of the
group, shrivel and die.

Branching begins in the slightly
older  root  sections,  some  distance
from the tip. Branch roots originate
deep  inside  the  parent  root  (see
chapter 4) and tend to grow at right

Well-developed root hairs, as on this
radish seedling, absorb most of the water
that enters the root. New root hairs are
formed toward the growing root tip, while
older hairs die back at the top of the root
hair zone.

034-052_Botany  11/8/04  11:24 AM  Page 38

38

CHAPTER 2

angles to it, better to explore other regions of the soil around the plant.
Each branch is an exact copy of the root that produced it, with an apical
meristem, the same methods of growth, a set of root hairs, and the capac-
ity to form branches of its own.

PRIMARY GROWTH IN STEMS

A leaf has been
removed to reveal
the apical bud of
this avocado shoot.
Within the pale,
tightly wrapped
bud, some of the
plant’s most 
important growth
processes occur.

A shoot system consists of the plant’s principal aerial stems, their branches,
and attached leaves. All have their origins in the stem’s apical meristem. A
stem’s growing tip, its apical bud, is much more complex than that of a root,
both in structure and activity. It is involved in making the stem grow longer
by the normal processes of cell division and elongation, initiates the order-
ly arrangement of leaves on the stem, and makes provision for the eventu-
al  development  of  branches—all  of  this  within  the  uppermost  1⁄10 inch
(about  1  mm)  of  the  stem.  Details  of  these  remarkable  undertakings  are
readily visualized when an apical bud is viewed through a microscope.

The apical meristem forms a dome of actively dividing cells. On either
side, earlike lobes represent the ﬁrst stages of leaf formation, which in this
early period of growth are called leaf primordia. These primordia fold over
the meristem to protect it against desiccation by sun and wind. At the base
of  each  leaf  primordium,  a  small  bulge,  an  axillary  bud  primordium,  is  the
beginning  of  a  potential  branch.  Whereas  branches  form  internally  in
roots,  those  of  stems  arise  from  external  buds  located  in  the  angle  (axil)
between a leaf and the stem, hence their name. Axillary buds remain dor-

034-052_Botany  11/8/04  11:24 AM  Page 39

Roots and Shoots

39

apical meristem

leaf primordia

axillary bud primordium

internode

node

A greatly enlarged view inside an apical
bud.

Compared with the simplicity of roots, in 
a stem tip the apical meristem has to 
precisely establish appendages at regular
intervals down the length of the stem.

034-052_Botany  11/8/04  11:24 AM  Page 40

40

CHAPTER 2

Arranged in alter-
nating directions at
nodes and spaced
by the elongating
internodes, a
coleus’s leaves are
prepared to inter-
cept as much light
as possible.

mant until the plant stimulates them to grow. When they do, the primary
growth of each branch mimics that of the main stem with an apical bud,
leaves, and its own axillary buds for further branching of the shoot system.
(In angiosperms the formation of a single ﬂower or group of ﬂowers also
take place, in miniature, at the extreme tip of a stem or its branches.)

When the stem is being formed, it divides into short sections called nodes
where leaf and axillary bud primordia develop. These alternate with clear
stem sections, the internodes (inter-, between). When the stem grows, intern-
odes  stretch  and  spread  the  leaves  (and  axillary  buds)  apart.  The  result
ensures that each leaf is given maximum exposure to sunlight and air circu-
lation and that branches, once formed, are well spaced.

To further reduce crowding of leaves on a stem and their competition for
light, the meristem places successive leaf primordia in different directions
from those it previously made. Three basic leaf arrangements are shown in
the  illustration—alternate,  opposite,  and  whorled (arranged  in  a  ring  around
the stem). Note that, in most plants, pairs of opposite leaves and individual

034-052_Botany  11/8/04  11:24 AM  Page 41

Roots and Shoots

41

After this eucalyp-
tus tree was cut
down, new shoots
grew from dormant
buds buried inside
the bark.

alternate leaves point in different directions as one traces their arrangement
down the stem. To see how effective such an arrangement is in exposing
leaves to direct light, look down onto the top of a leafy stem. Despite their
numbers, a signiﬁcant area of each leaf can be seen. The principal function
of stems is to support leaves in such a way that maximum amounts of light
can be captured for photosynthesis.

Shoot systems are generally capable of producing unlimited numbers of
branches. Only a small percentage of their axillary buds grow at any one
time;  the  remainder  lie  dormant,  perhaps  for  years,  to  act  as  points  of
reserve growth in case apical buds are destroyed by disease, frost, wind, or
animals.  They  are  also  there,  ready  to  grow,  after  gardeners  prune  their
plants. New growth may appear even from tree stumps, arising from buds
long hidden inside the bark.

Some plant groups do not form axillary buds, relying instead on one api-
cal bud. It may seem a chancy strategy, because damage to the single stem
tip  eliminates  all  possibility  for  future  growth.  Most  palms  follow  this

034-052_Botany  11/8/04  11:24 AM  Page 42

42

CHAPTER 2

As each new leaf is formed, it points from the stem in a different direction, thereby
avoiding as much shading of the lower leaves as possible. Fatsia’s leaf blades (top) are
also spaced by elongation of their petioles compared with agave, the leaves of which
are directly attached to the stem.

034-052_Botany  11/8/04  11:25 AM  Page 43

Roots and Shoots

43

a

b

c

Leaf arrangements: (a) alternate, (b) opposite, (c) whorled.

Axillary buds, the
stem’s potential
branches.

034-052_Botany  11/8/04  11:25 AM  Page 44

44

CHAPTER 2

trees

shrubs

A comparison of tree and shrub forms

growth pattern, although a few species may sprout new shoots from their
bases, but not higher up on established trunks or upright stems.

On an herbaceous stem an axillary bud (sometimes more than one) is
generally visible at each leaf base. To prevent the plant from becoming top
heavy,  axillary  buds  normally  grow  into  branches  toward  the  base  of  the
shoot  system,  thereby  maintaining  a  low  center  of  gravity.  But  the  soft
structure of herbaceous stems limits the number of branches, leaves, and
ﬂowers they can support. Only when, in the course of evolution, was wood
introduced into the stems of so-called woody species was supportive capac-
ity improved.

Woody perennials generally bearing large numbers of branches are clas-
siﬁed as either trees or shrubs. What is the difference? By deﬁnition, trees
have one or a small number of main trunks to support their leaf crowns;
shrubs are  smaller  plants  with  many  woody  stems  branching  close  to  the
ground.  Obviously,  such  a  distinction  is  not  always  clear-cut  since  large,
treelike shrubs or small, shrublike trees are common. Whereas human def-
initions  would  like  to  clearly  separate  black  from  white,  nature  tends  to
work in shades of gray.

DEVELOPMENT OF A WOODY TWIG

Surrounded as they are by soil, roots do not have the same supportive role
as stems. In most trees, older parts of roots thicken and develop a core of
wood as a consequence of their age and in conjunction with the thickening
of trunks and branches. In so doing, the roots maintain their important role

034-052_Botany  11/8/04  11:25 AM  Page 45

Roots and Shoots

45

as  anchors  and  transport  ever-increasing  amounts  of  water  to  supply  the
needs of aboveground parts.

In some species, as stems grow longer they simply spread across the soil
surface, giving their leaves only minimal support. Such is the case with the
runners of some grasses, ivy, and other plants we call ground covers. Since the
development of wood in these stems is unnecessary, the plant can devote its
valuable building materials, food, and energy to primary growth processes,
the development of leaves and, perhaps, ﬂowers.

Of  course,  there  are  advantages  in  having  leaves  elevated  on  upright
stems, such as greater access to direct sunlight and reduced chances of shad-
ing. But growth in height demands improved methods for physical support,
most often by stem thickening through the introduction of wood during
the plant’s secondary growth processes. Having built wooden houses, fur-
niture, and ships for thousands of years, people have learned that this mate-
rial is nature’s unsurpassed product for structural and supportive purposes.
However, its production by a plant is costly in terms of distribution of the
organism’s budget of available food and energy. What the plant spends on
making wood must be taken from the development of roots, reproductive
structures,  and  the  leaves  where  foods  are  synthesized  in  the  ﬁrst  place.
Such allocations of energy budgets between plant parts are of greater inter-
est  to  scientists  than  gardeners.  But  even  the  most  casual  consideration
gives us another view of the enormous complexity of plants that we take so
much for granted.

FEATURES OF A WOODY TWIG

At the tips of twigs, where primary growth is taking place, the stem is typ-
ically herbaceous. A short way down the stem, the transition into a woody
form  can  be  recognized  by  changes  in  color,  from  green  to  brown,  and
hardness.  Several  features  of  woody  twigs  are  worth  noting  and  are  best
seen on a winter twig, one from a deciduous tree following annual leaf loss.
The point on a stem where its color turns to brown is the place where a
coat of bark is beginning to form. At ﬁrst, the bark is smooth and glossy
but, with age, it thickens and the surface dries and cracks. The outer bark,
called cork, continually ﬂakes or peels off most woody plants but is replaced
from within.

Scattered bumps that may look like scale insects on the smooth, young
bark of a winter twig are actually breathing pores, called lenticels, through
which gases, including oxygen, pass to and from the living cells of the inner
bark. At nodes on the twig are axillary buds and, below them, leaf scars, left

034-052_Botany  11/8/04  11:25 AM  Page 46

46

CHAPTER 2

Lenticels, breathing pores in the young
bark of a woody stem.

Leaf scars remain on a stem after the
leaves have fallen. The circles within each
scar are the severed ends of food- and
water-conducting bundles. Scattered
lenticels dot the stem between leaf scars.

as reminders of foliage that fell in autumns past. Inside each leaf scar small
dots can be seen—bundles of food- and water-conducting cells that once
exchanged these materials between stem and leaf when the two were unit-
ed. At the time of leaf separation, the entire leaf scar is covered by a thin
layer of cork to seal it against fungal invasion and water loss.

The winter twig’s growing tip is encased by overlapping bud scales to form
a tight apical (or terminal) bud. The apical bud begins to form in autumn, at
the time of leaf fall, as part of the tree’s preparations for entry into its annu-
al period of dormancy. Being able to escape the ravages of winter, the well-
protected bud is ready to respond to the ﬁrst signs of spring.

Terminal bud scales are pushed aside when the new leaves start their vig-
orous growth. After the scales drop off, several concentric rings of scars are
left, recalling the tree’s period of winter dormancy. Because one set of ter-
minal bud scale scars is left on the stem each spring, their numbers reveal
the twig’s age. Evergreen trees and shrubs do not enter winter dormancy
and,  therefore,  lack  the  bud  scale  scars’  chronological  record.  Leaf  scars
may  be  found  on  evergreens’  stems  but  usually  toward  their  base  where

034-052_Botany  11/8/04  11:25 AM  Page 47

Roots and Shoots

47

A dormant bud is encased in glossy bud
scales for the winter’s duration.

The new growth of spring pushes aside
the bud scales.

leaves have dropped off as a result
of  normal  aging  processes  rather
than  the  coordinated  event  of  an
annual leaf fall.

LEAVES

None of the wonders of our tech-
nological age can match the mirac-
ulous  awakening  of  a  tree  from
winter  sleep,  to  put  on  its  spring
attire  of  rich,  green,  fresh  new
foliage—a spectacle of regenerative
power  that  only  nature  is  capable
of performing.

Leaves  are  elegantly  crafted  to
harvest light, the energy source for

Rings of terminal bud scale scars indicate
where the stem suspended growth for a
winter season.

034-052_Botany  11/8/04  11:25 AM  Page 48

48

CHAPTER 2

food manufacture in photosynthesis (see chapter 8). This is typically ful-
ﬁlled by the expansion of sheetlike blades, which must be thin and translu-
cent to allow light to penetrate to their innermost cells. They must also be
held in outstretched positions without the assistance of wood in their con-
struction, since wood is opaque and heavy. The blade is frequently attached
to the stem by a leaf stalk, or petiole, one of the advantages of which is to
rotate the leaf blade to track the sun’s changing position over the course of
the day. A petiole also provides greater ﬂexibility to the leaf in winds and
heavy rains and contributes to the spacing of blades for maximum exposure
to direct sunlight. The descriptive term, petiolate leaf, meaning one with a
petiole, is contrasted with a sessile leaf in which the blade is directly attached
to the stem (Latin: petiolus, “stalk”; sessil, “sitting on”).

Leaf blades develop as single units in so-called simple leaves or are divid-
ed  into  smaller  units,  or  leaﬂets,  in  compound  leaves.  Some  leaves  undergo
double  or  triple  compounding  in  which  the  leaﬂets  are  subdivided  into
smaller  and  smaller  segments.  The  greater  the  number  of  divisions,  the
more feathery the appearance of the leaf. A major advantage of compound
leaves  over  simple  leaves  is  that  they  permit  light  to  pass  between  the
leaﬂets to lower ranks of leaves. They also tend to be lighter in weight and,
therefore, require less support from their stems. The leaﬂets of a pinnately
compound leaf (from Latin for “featherlike”) are arranged along a central axis;
those of a palmately compound leaf arise from one point at the tip of the peti-
ole, like ﬁngers of an outstretched hand.

Similar descriptions are given to vein patterns within leaf blades: pinnate
venation and  palmate  venation,  in  addition  to  a  parallel arrangement  that  is
most  common  in  the  leaves  of  monocots  (grasses,  palms,  and  irises,  for
example). Multiple branching of the veins in pinnate and palmate patterns
give an overall netlike (reticulate, from Latin for “net”) appearance, espe-
cially when the softer leaf tissues have rotted away in what is known as a
cleared leaf.

Other features of leaves include overall shape of the blade, shape of the
leaf apex and base, and type of leaf margin (lobed, wavy, toothed, and so
forth). Samples of leaf forms are shown in the accompanying illustrations.
All of these distinctions are used by botanists for taxonomic (classiﬁca-
tion) purposes, to describe differences between species and groups of relat-
ed species, called genera. Knowledge of such technicalities is not necessary
to appreciate the fact that it is the unlimited diversity of leaf form and color
that make most houseplants and many garden plants so attractive. We still
do  not  understand  how  plants  achieve  such  an  amazing  variety  of  leaf

034-052_Botany  11/8/04  11:25 AM  Page 49

Roots and Shoots

49

petiole

axillary bud

a

blade

midrib

blade

axillary
bud

b

leaﬂet

Leaf parts: 
(a) simple, petiolate leaf 
(b) sessile leaf
(c) compound leaf

petiole

stipule

c

shapes  during  the  course  of  their  development—from  primordia  that  all
start out looking very much the same to each species’ distinctive leaf pat-
tern. A leaf’s unique features slowly emerge as blade and petiole expand to
their full measure of growth.

Damage to most leaves can never be repaired. If an insect severs a vein
the ends may be sealed over to prevent water loss, but the hole will not ﬁll
with new cells. Grass blades are something of an exception. Everyone who
has  grown  a  lawn  knows  how  the  grass  keeps  growing  after  it  has  been

034-052_Botany  11/8/04  11:25 AM  Page 50

50

CHAPTER 2

a

d

b

c

f

e

Vein patterns and leaf types. Simple leaves: (a) pinnate venation, (b) palmate venation,
(c) parallel venation. Compound leaves: (d) pinnately compound, (e) bipinnately com-
pound, (f) palmately compound.

034-052_Botany  11/8/04  11:25 AM  Page 51

Roots and Shoots

51

a

b

c

d

e

f

g

h

i

j

k

l

m

n

o

Margin patterns: (a) entire, (b) sinuate, (c) crenate, (d) serrate, (e) dentate, (f) lobed, 
(g) double serrate. Leaf shapes: (h) linear, (i) oblong, (j) ovate, (k) hastate, (l) sagittate,
(m) deltoid, (n) spatulate, (o) peltate.

Grass leaves grow from an intercalary meristem, located between the blades and the
horizontal stem at the approximate position indicated by the arrow.

034-052_Botany  11/8/04  11:25 AM  Page 52

52

CHAPTER 2

In a cleared leaf the soft tissues have rotted away, leaving the intricate network of veins
in a reticulate pattern. Branching from the leaf’s midrib, veins carry water and food to
and from every part of the blade.

mowed. Few gardeners notice that the pointed tip of each blade, once lost,
is  not  regenerated.  Instead,  the  blades  continue  growth  from  near  their
bases,  from  what  are  known  as  intercalary  meristems,  areas  of  cell  division
inserted between the blade and the stem. The evolution of intercalary meri-
stems enabled various types of grasses to survive in prairie habitats in asso-
ciation  with  herds  of  grazing  animals—deer,  antelope,  bison  and,  later,
domesticated cows. As long as the animal’s teeth simply snip the tops off
the grass blades, as a lawn mower does, the leaves continue to grow indef-
initely.

The  ability  to  grow  is  one  of  the  characteristics  of  living  things.
Although plants respond best when pampered in our homes and gardens,
they  grow  remarkably  well  in  natural  conditions  that  are  rarely  ideal.  In
some habitats they may be forced to temporarily suspend growth then rean-
imate themselves as the seasons change. Whatever their secrets for survival,
plants  have  existed  for  millions  of  years  and  prospects  for  the  indeﬁnite
continuation of a plant kingdom look good.

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:37 AM  Page 53

PART II

Organization

In  the  world  of  government  and  private  business,
organization is said to be the key to efﬁcient operation and ultimate success.
At  a  level  far  more  humble  yet  much  older  than  these  institutions,  the
maxim applies equally well to the maintenance of a well-run garden. In the
garden, decisions are made on where to locate plants for optimum growth
and how available space can be used to best advantage. Thought must be
given to when fertilizers should be applied to best nourish the plants; orders
sent in a timely way to procure new seed supplies, roses, bulbs, and other
catalogue purchases. There are pruning schedules and periodic skirmishes
with insect pests to be remembered; tools to be returned to places where,
later, they will be handy for use. Organizing the many activities involved in
maintaining a plant collection is one of gardening’s pleasures.

Plants themselves live highly organized lives. Recall how growth takes
place, not in a haphazard way but systematically from meristems. A cell can
only divide successfully if it proceeds without variance through the orderly
stages of mitosis. And the sequence of events in seed germination is a mas-
terpiece of organization. Throughout every moment of a plant’s life, activ-
ities of inconceivable complexity take place beneath a deceptive facade of
effortlessness and tranquility. Like well-rehearsed professionals, plants give
the appearance of ease because their systems of growth, metabolism, adap-
tation, and reproduction have been time-tested and reﬁned over the mil-
lions of years of evolution.

When contemplating the intricacies of the human body, its various parts,
and what each does, it is not possible to separate form from function. For
example, a heart is not simply one of many organs but a specialized structure

53

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:37 AM  Page 54

54

PART II

for  pumping  oxygenated  and  food-bearing  blood  to  each  living  cell.
Similarly, the parts of a plant must be understood not simply in terms of
their appearance but, more importantly, for what each is intended to do.

In the previous section I explained that roots are anchoring and absorb-
ing organs, photosynthesis is the principal function of leaves, and leaves are
lifted into the light by supportive stems. Now journey with me inside these
familiar parts and, with the aid of a microscope, see how each is precisely
constructed from different types of cells. This aspect of botany, one few gar-
deners have an opportunity to explore, is a part of the scientiﬁc specialty of
plant anatomy.

In the fascinating and beautiful microscopic world within a plant, organ-
ization can be seen at its best. A plant is composed of countless cells having
various dimensions, shapes, and individual characteristics such as cell wall
thickness, being alive or dead at maturity, or having chloroplasts present or
absent. These special features determine the speciﬁc function of each cell.
Distinctive  cell  types  are  not  randomly  arranged  in  leaves,  roots,  or
stems but in groups called tissues. Collectively, the cells carry out their spe-
cialized  activity  more  effectively  than  do  individual  cells.  For  example,
transportation of large volumes of water through a plant is performed by
groups of specialized cells, organized into a xylem tissue (from the Greek for
“wood”;  pronounced  “zí-lem”).  Water  conduction  occurs  only  in  an
upward direction. Another tissue, the phloem (Greek: phloe, “tree bark”; pro-
nounced “ﬂó-em”) conducts food molecules in opposite directions between
leaves and roots. There are tissues devoted to food storage, photosynthesis,
support, and protection, in addition to one that simply packs the center of
many stems.

Newly divided cells in apical meristems have identical shapes but soon
undergo  changes  resulting  in  their  recognizably  different  appearances  in
tissues. How this process of cell differentiation takes place is still not precisely
understood. Nor is it known how tissues assume the unique patterns char-
acterizing the anatomies of roots, stems, and leaves. These are only some of
the many unresolved mysteries of developmental processes in plants.

The organizational hierarchy found in a plant actually begins at a much
lower level than its component cells—at the invisible level of atoms. Of the
approximately one hundred kinds of atoms or, as more commonly known,
elements, that compose all matter, only about twenty are employed in plant
construction. Elements such as carbon, oxygen, nitrogen and iron funda-
mentally  exist  as  atoms  but  are  usually  combined  in  various  proportions
into molecules. For example, a water molecule is composed of two hydrogen

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:37 AM  Page 55

Organization

55

atoms and one oxygen atom—H2O, as it is written in the chemist’s short-
hand form. Common table sugar is a crystalline collection of sucrose mol-
ecules  having  twelve  carbon,  twenty-two  hydrogen,  and  eleven  oxygen
atoms  in  each  (C12H22O11).  Proteins,  in  turn,  are  even  larger  molecules
made from hundreds of atoms of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, and
sulfur. It is important to note that every distinct type of molecule possesses
a unique elemental composition and structure.

The next most complex level of organization occurs in living organisms
in which countless numbers and types of molecules congregate to form the
visible structures of cells, including the organelles described in chapter 1.
Cells, in turn, are united into tissues; tissues make up the next larger struc-
tures  of  organs (roots,  stems,  leaves,  ﬂowers),  while  they  are  parts  of  the
whole organism, the plant.

Coordination of all living activity is maintained between the component
parts at each of these levels, as well as between the different levels. But it is
the laws of physics and chemistry governing the interaction between atoms
that ultimately control the organism and unify it into a single entity. From
air, water, and the dust of the earth, atoms unite, albeit temporarily, into liv-
ing, functioning plants and animals. And when, inevitably, the spark of life
is lost, it is back to those primal forms that the elements return.

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:37 AM  Page 56

CHAPTER 3

Inside Stems

HERBACEOUS STEMS

The  soft,  ﬂexible  tissues  of  an  herbaceous  stem  are  products  of  primary
growth processes and are organized into six clearly deﬁned areas. The outer
boundary of the stem is a single layer of cells, called the epidermis (Greek:
epi-, “upon”; derma, “skin”). The cuticle is a layer of waxy cutin superimposed
on and impregnating the outer walls of epidermal cells. It reduces evapora-
tive water loss and protects the stem against invasion by molds. Stems may
remain smooth, or glaucous (Greek: glauco, “bluish gray,” from the presence
of wax), or become hairy, or pubescent (Latin for “downy”), when numerous
epidermal  hairs grow  from  their  surfaces.  Epidermal  hairs  deter  attack  by
small insects, especially when, as in some species, they exude droplets of
sticky liquid in which the bugs are snared.

Inside the epidermis, several layers of cells constitute a cortex (Latin for
“shell”).  The  green  color  of  herbaceous  stems  results  from  chloroplasts
located in cortex cells. At the stem’s center, a large pith seems to be con-
nected to the cortex due to the similarity of their constituent cells.

The most obvious features of a young stem are bundles of vascular tis-
sues, held in place by the surrounding pith and cortex. The word vascular is
derived from the Latin vasculum, “little vessel,” and refers to the fact that
water, minerals, and food molecules are transported through ductlike cells
in plants. The inner half of each vascular bundle consists of large, water-con-
ducting  cells  of  xylem  tissue;  toward  the  outside  are  food-conducting
phloem  cells  that  are  smaller.  These  vital  tissues  form  pipelines  of  ﬂuid
transport, connecting leaves, stems, and roots.

56

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:37 AM  Page 57

Inside Stems

57

epidermis

cortex

pith

Tissues of an herbaceous stem

primary
phloem

primary
xylem

Compare this inside view of a stem with the diagram identifying the various tissues. The
most obvious features are the large, central pith and surrounding, red-stained vascular
bundles.

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:37 AM  Page 58

58

CHAPTER 3

The  most  difﬁcult  tissue  to  identify  in  a  stem  is  a  single  row  of  cells
between xylem and phloem in each bundle. This same tissue also separates
cortex and pith in the areas between bundles. This is the vascular cambium
(Latin: cambium, “barrier”), a meristematic tissue whose cells divide lateral-
ly (toward the side) and so result in an increase in the stem’s diameter dur-
ing  its  secondary  growth  processes.  Early  in  the  development  of  many
perennial  species,  activity  of  the  vascular  cambium  changes  their  stems
from  herbaceous  to  woody  structures.  Plant  stems  that  are  herbaceous
throughout  their  lives  either  lack  a  vascular  cambium  or  have  a  lateral
meristem that remains inactive.

All tissues in an herbaceous stem are established by the apical meristem
during primary growth. Thus, they are called primary tissues. The food- and
water-conducting  tissues  in  the  vascular  bundles  are  designated  primary
phloem and primary xylem to distinguish them from tissues formed later by
the vascular cambium, namely the secondary phloem and secondary xylem.

Primary tissues assume patterns in stems that are almost the same in all
species of ﬂowering plants. Keep in mind that the views of tissues shown in

A close-up view of two vascular bundles. Phloem tissue in the upper half of each bundle
consists of tightly packed food-conducting cells. Rows of large, water-conducting cells
constitute the xylem. A row of ﬂat cells between xylem and phloem is the vascular cam-
bium.

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:37 AM  Page 59

Inside Stems

59

A representation of the vascular bundles
in an herbaceous stem; they are held in
place by pith and cortex tissues. Both
xylem (white) and phloem (black) branch
into the attached leaves.

the accompanying photographs are only thin slices through their cells. In
the three-dimensional structure of a stem, the epidermis, cortex, and vas-
cular  cambium  form  concentric  cylinders  around  a  central  core  of  pith.
Vascular bundles form ribs extending the length of an herbaceous stem and,
as such, also function as supportive members; rather like reinforcing steel
rods in concrete pillars of modern buildings. But the stem’s soft pith and
cortex cells endow it with great ﬂexibility, allowing it to sway in a breeze
without snapping. The arrangement of xylem and phloem in small bundles
allows them to branch into leaves and, when axillary buds have grown, into
branches of the shoot system.

STEM THICKENING

For  a  study  in  contrasts,  compare  a  tree  trunk  with  an  herbaceous  stem
growing beside it. Although it is easy to forget that the tree, in its seedling
stage, was also an herb, its early herbaceous heritage persists at branch tips
where  new  growth  is  green  and  soft-textured.  How  did  the  tree  trunk
undergo changes of such magnitude? The answer lies in the activity of two
lateral meristems—vascular cambium, mentioned above, and, after the stem
has begun to thicken, a cork cambium. The cork cambium is responsible for
the formation of cork, the outer tissue of the tree’s bark.

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:37 AM  Page 60

60

CHAPTER 3

A two-year-old woody stem. Two concentric rings of secondary
xylem (light pink) surround the central pith. Secondary phloem
(dark pink) forms a band around the xylem and, on the outside, red-
stained cork covers the stem.

A close-up view of a young woody stem. A single row of vascular cambium cells forms
the dividing line between wood (light area) and bark (dark-stained tissues). The inner
bark consists of pink-stained ﬁber cells alternating with light layers of food-conducting
cells in the secondary phloem. Epidermal cells slough off the stem’s surface, being
replaced by several layers of red-stained cork. The cork cambium is located immediately
below the cork in the blue-stained area.

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:37 AM  Page 61

Inside Stems

61

Vascular cambium cells (shaded) divide in three directions. The long rows of vascular ray cells
also originate in the vascular cambium.

When cells of vascular cambium divide, they do so in three directions,
resulting in different fates for their products. New cells laid down on the
inner side of the cambium layer develop thick, ligniﬁed walls and their pro-
toplasm dies. They are thereby destined to become water-conducting cells
of the secondary xylem, better known as wood cells. When the vascular cam-
bium divides in an outward direction, secondary phloem is formed. Many
secondary  phloem  cells  have  thin  walls,  remain  alive,  and  conduct  food;
others develop thick walls and give physical support to the ﬂimsier food-
conducting  tissue.  The  third  direction  in  which  cambium  cells  divide  is
sideways—to add more cells to the meristem as it increases its circumfer-
ence around the growing core of wood.

The vascular cambium forms the dividing line between wood and bark.
The  inner  portion  of  bark  is  secondary  phloem,  the  outer  part  is  cork.
Because inward divisions of the vascular cambium are more frequent than
divisions in the opposite direction, a tree trunk’s wood (secondary xylem) is
always thicker than its bark. On a woody stem, cork replaces the epidermis
as a protective tissue. Cork is several cell layers thick and is formed by out-
ward divisions of the cork cambium. The latter arises when the epidermis
is  lost  from  the  original  herbaceous  stem.  When  the  surface  cork  of  a
woody trunk dries, cracks, and sloughs off, it is replaced by new tissue from
within, thereby maintaining a uniform thickness. The color and pattern of

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:37 AM  Page 62

62

CHAPTER 3

Each tree species has its own characteristic bark pattern and color. Here, the smooth
cork of sycamore (left), which ﬂakes off in interesting patterns, is contrasted with the
deeply cracked cork of pine.

A cross-section through a tree trunk clearly shows the division between wood and the
darker bark. The wood (secondary xylem) and the inner bark (secondary phloem) have
been laid down by the vascular cambium between the two. Several layers of cork form
a rough, protective coat on the tree trunk. Light-colored streaks in the wood are called
vascular rays.

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:37 AM  Page 63

Inside Stems

63

The bark, vascular cambium, and
annual rings of wood are con-
nected between a tree trunk and
its branches. The base of a
branch is deeply buried in the
trunk. Knots in lumber are slices
through the branch bases.

the cork of many woody plants is both an attractive feature for which such
plants are grown in landscapes and a distinctive species characteristic.

Corks used in wine and other bottles are plugs cut from the thick, soft
cork of cork oak trees, natives of Mediterranean regions. The porous nature
of cork tissue plays a signiﬁcant role in the physiology of a tree, for it per-
mits the exchange of gases—such as oxygen and carbon dioxide—between
the inner, living tissues of the bark and the atmosphere. This same quality
makes cork a peerless material for allowing bottled wines to breathe during
their maturation. In addition, cork cells are naturally water-proofed with a
substance called suberin (Latin: suber, “cork”) that prevents evaporative loss-
es from the bottles.

Simultaneous  with  the  activities  of  vascular  cambium,  cork  cambium
and, at branch tips, apical meristems are making their contributions to the
tree’s overall growth. When branches grow, they thicken in the same man-
ner as the main trunk. The base of a branch becomes deeply buried in the
trunk as woody tissues grow around it. Knots in lumber are actually slices
through these buried branches. Xylem, phloem, the two cambia, and cork
are all present in, and connected between, a tree trunk and its branches.

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:37 AM  Page 64

64

CHAPTER 3

Branches arise
from axillary buds.
As they thicken
with deposited
wood, the bark 
tissues slowly
mature.

Maintenance of this tissue continuity is of critical importance if a gar-
dener is to make a successful graft. Grafting involves the permanent union
of a branch (called a scion; from an early English word meaning “offshoot”)
taken from one plant, with another plant (a stock; Old English for “stump”)
that bears roots. In some cases, rose grafting being a typical example, the
scion may be no more than an axillary bud attached to a sliver of bark and
some wood cells. Alignment of the vascular tissues of stock and scion per-
mits free exchange of nutrients, food, and water during the period when the
tissues  of  the  two  parts  fuse  together.  Grafts  can  only  be  made  between
closely related species of plants, with incompatible organs being rejected.

OTHER FEATURES OF WOOD

The outcome of secondary growth is dramatically revealed in the stump of
a felled tree. The obvious line separating bark and wood is the location of
the vascular cambium. The thick, woody core is secondary xylem. The most
recently formed wood, closest to the cambium, conducts water up the tree
trunk and is called sapwood. Frequently, sapwood is a lighter color than the
inner area, the heartwood, the cells of which are plugged with chemical sub-

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:37 AM  Page 65

Inside Stems

65

The bark has been peeled off this tree trunk section at the vascular cambium. A clear
contrast is seen between the dark heartwood and more recently formed sapwood.

stances and cellular debris. One occasionally sees a large tree still growing
after its heartwood has been burned out by a forest ﬁre. This is possible
because only sapwood is needed to sustain the tree’s life.

Along with materials essential to the plant’s well-being, metabolic activ-
ities in living cells unavoidably create some waste products. When deposit-
ed in the heartwood, such substances discolor the tissue. The rich color of
naturally  stained  heartwood  from  some  tree  species  makes  it  particularly
desirable for the manufacture of ﬁne furniture. The same waste substances
also  act  as  chemical  toxins  that  protect  fence  posts  made  of  heartwood
against fungal attack.

Waste substances are passed into the heartwood from the inner bark by
way of narrow rows of cells called vascular rays, which are easily recognized
in the accompanying photographs. When the vascular cambium adds cells
to  the  secondary  vascular  tissues,  it  also  adds  cells  to  the  progressively
lengthening rays. When improperly dried lumber cracks in raylike patterns
in the cross-grain, it does so along lines of structural weakness in wood—
the vascular rays.

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:37 AM  Page 66

66

CHAPTER 3

Secondary xylem (wood) is traversed by vascular rays, narrow rows of cells that trans-
port waste materials from living cells in the bark to the inner tissues of the heartwood.
Here the wood is divided into two annual rings, in each of which large xylem cells of the
springwood merge with smaller cells of summerwood.

One of the most interesting features of wood from many species is its
pattern  of  concentric  annual  rings,  so-called  because  each  represents  one
year of growth. When a log is cut into lumber and other wood products,
annual rings, sliced in different directions, form the varied grain patterns
that give wood its special aesthetic appeal. Veneers, used in the manufacture
of plywood, display the grain’s sinuous shapes best of all.

Annual ring formation is so regular that the age of a tree may be accu-
rately calculated simply by counting the rings. Because the vascular cambi-
um suspends its activity during fall and winter when the tree becomes dor-
mant, ring growth occurs only during spring and summer. Each annual ring
consists of several layers of large xylem cells, referred to as springwood, fol-
lowed by progressively smaller cells, the summerwood. To satisfy the demands
of rapidly growing, new foliage, larger cells in spring conduct more water
that is readily available and abundant in the soil following winter rains and
snow melt.

The widths of annual rings vary from year to year, depending on differ-
ing annual climatic conditions, especially average annual rainfall. The nar-
rowest  rings  indicate  years  of  drought,  while  wide  rings  were  formed  in

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:37 AM  Page 67

Inside Stems

67

years  of  abundant  moisture.  Thus,  unsurpassed  weather  records,  dating
back thousands of years in bristlecone pines, redwoods, and giant sequoias,
are permanently locked into tree trunks. Such records are used by meteo-
rologists  to  study  rainfall  cycles,  and  ring  patterns  in  pieces  of  wood,
matched with those in living trees at archeological sites, offer clues to the
mysterious disappearances of early civilizations. It is nearly inconceivable
that a bristlecone pine (Pinus aristata), still alive today, emerged from its seed
1000 years before Moses led the Children of Israel out of Egypt and that it
was “old” when Columbus arrived in the Americas. Barring major climatic
changes  or  natural  catastrophe,  the  future  of  such  living  wonders  rests
entirely in human hands. Our ancient trees must be protected at any cost.
In contrast to the trees of temperate zones, in those of tropical regions
the vascular cambium is continuously active because there are no cold win-
ters to bring on dormancy. Their lack of annual rings prevents botanists
from learning the exact age of these trees. A variety of studies indicate that
many jungle specimens, all angiosperms, are hundreds of years old but none
rival the astonishing longevity of the great gymnosperms.

MONOCOT STEMS

In chapter 1, I noted that the ﬂowering plants are divided into two major
groups—dicots and monocots—based on the number of cotyledons formed
in their seeds. An additional characteristic separating the two groups is the
difference  in  the  anatomy  of  their  stems.  In  a  typical  monocot,  dozens,
sometimes  hundreds,  of  vascular  bundles  are  scattered  throughout  the
stem. The bundles are surrounded by uniform masses of thin-walled cells
rather  than  distinct  cortex  and  pith  as  in  dicot  stems,  described  above.
Because vascular and cork cambia are absent, there is no secondary growth
leading to the development of wood and bark. Trunk thickening in large
monocots,  such  as  palms,  simply  results  from  repeated  formation  of  the
scattered vascular bundle pattern. Compression and drying of outer cells in
a  palm  trunk  create  a  hard  crust  that  lacks  the  characteristics  of  cork  in
other trees.

The slender trunks of many palm trees reach impressive heights in light
of the fact that they are not supported by rigid, wooden cores. This deﬁ-
ciency in forming secondary xylem becomes an asset to native trees in trop-
ical  regions  where  winds  of  hurricane  force  shatter  trunks  and  branches
made of brittle wood. Pictures of palm trees leaning with the wind attest to
their remarkable ﬂexibility.

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:37 AM  Page 68

68

CHAPTER 3

Typical of monocot stems, a corn stem shows the scattered arrangement of its many
vascular bundles embedded in a soft tissue of large, thin-walled cells.

A palm trunk shows the same tissue organization as the corn stem, only much larger.
The light dots on the upper surface (lines in side view) are vascular bundles.

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:37 AM  Page 69

Inside Stems

69

The absence of hard, rigid wood in the trunks of palm trees allows considerable ﬂexi-
bility in heavy winds.

Grass and bamboo stems are masterpieces of structural engineering. Despite being so
thin, grass stems carry their leaves well above the ground and are quite elastic when
swayed by a breeze. Rings around each bamboo stem are nodes where leaves were
attached and where internal cross walls support the hollow structure.

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:37 AM  Page 70

70

CHAPTER 3

The stems of other monocots are made even more supple by having hol-
low centers; bamboo and many grasses are familiar examples. Their stem
tissues, including vascular bundles, are supported by large numbers of long,
narrow, thick-walled cells called ﬁbers. At nodes inside the tubelike stems,
the  cavity  is  ﬁlled  with  reinforcing  plates  to  prevent  buckling  when  the
stems bend.

A wheat stem may have a ratio of stem length to diameter of 500:1, a
giant  bamboo  100:1.  Compare  this  with  a  redwood  tree  having  a  trunk
height  to  diameter  ratio  of  only  10:1.  The  relatively  lightweight,  hollow
monocot stems can never rival the gymnosperm in actual height but they
effectively elevate their leaves without the expenditure of large amounts of
food and energy required by wood formation.

There are many lessons on superlative organization to he learned from
the structure and development of plant stems. Nature’s perfectionist touch
is  also  seen  in  the  anatomy  of  roots  and  leaves,  which  is  the  subject  of 
chapter 4.

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:37 AM  Page 71

CHAPTER 4

Inside Roots and Leaves

A ROOT’S PRIMARY TISSUES

The emergence of distinct tissues from newly formed cells occurs a short
distance from the root tip. When a thin cross-section is sliced from a young
root and examined with a microscope, several primary tissues may be rec-
ognized. On the outside is the epidermis. Root hairs, discussed in chapter 2,
are extensions of epidermal cells and so extend the surface area of roots,
thereby improving the rate of water and nutrient uptake from the soil. In
roots, the cortex occupies a larger portion of the organ’s volume than it does
in herbaceous stems. Loose packing of cortex cells permits movement of
oxygen and water in the intercellular spaces. A plant’s underground store of
reserve  foods  is  visible  in  the  accompanying  photographs  in  the  form  of
purple-stained starch grains, concentrated in the cortex cells.

Vascular tissues—primary xylem and primary phloem—occupy the center of
a root. Xylem forms an X-shaped conﬁguration; its thick-walled cells are
stained dark pink in the photographs. The smaller cells of primary phloem
occupy  areas  between  the  xylem’s  arms.  A  single  row  of  vascular  cambium
cells,  present  between  the  two  conducting  tissues,  is  difﬁcult  to  identify.
The vascular tissues are surrounded by a row of cells, called the endodermis,
through which minerals and water are directed as they make their way into
the xylem.

Immediately  inside  the  endodermis  a  row  of  pericycle cells  is  the  place
from which branch roots arise. When a branch root develops, it vigorously
pushes aside endodermis, cortex, and epidermis in its struggle to reach the
soil—a rather startling sight, as shown in the photograph. One may won-
der why branching begins inside a root and not from buds on the outside,

71

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:37 AM  Page 72

72

CHAPTER 4

Compare this photograph of a root’s
structure with the labeled diagram
(below). The cortex occupies most of the
root’s volume, with only a small area of 
vascular tissues at the center.

A close-up view of a root’s vascular tis-
sues: primary xylem (large, red-stained
cells) and four groups of primary phloem
cells. Vascular cambium is located
between the xylem and phloem. The ring
of red-stained cells is the endodermis,
immediately inside of which is the pericy-
cle, a single row of cells. The large cells of
the cortex contain starch grains.

epidermis

cortex

root cap

Primary tissues of a root

endodermis

primary phloem

pericycle

vascular cambium

primary xylem

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:37 AM  Page 73

Inside Roots and Leaves

73

A branch root, 
arising from the
pericycle, pushes
aside endodermis,
cortex, and epider-
mis cells as it
reaches for the soil.

as  in  stems.  The  location  of  the  pericycle  deep  inside  a  parent  root
undoubtedly offers protection to this important site of branch formation,
better than if it were on or near the root surface. Furthermore, extension of
the root’s vascular system into a branch root is facilitated by the close prox-
imity of the pericycle and the root’s vascular tissues. Branching normally
occurs a short distance behind the root tip. When damage occurs to the
apical meristem, the pericycle is quickly stimulated to replace the apex with
several branch roots. Thus, if a gardener breaks a few root tips while trans-
planting, the plant soon recovers—but with more than the original number
of roots.

At soil level, where root and stem systems unite, transitions between the
primary tissue patterns of the two organs must be provided for. The root’s
central core of vascular tissues divides into the peripheral bundles seen in
an herbaceous stem. Epidermis and cortex are continuous between root and
stem but, aboveground, pith is inserted between the bundles. Because peri-
cycle and endodermis are needed only in roots, they disappear in the region
where root turns into stem.

SECONDARY GROWTH IN ROOTS

Roots of older perennials thicken in much the same way as trunks and their
branches. Vascular cambium lays down wood (secondary xylem) and inner
bark (secondary phloem). Cork cambium produces cork on the outside. But
the wood in roots never thickens to the same extant as it does in a large tree
trunk.  Furthermore,  it  is  of  little  economic  value  because  roots  grow  in
irregular, contorted shapes.

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:37 AM  Page 74

74

CHAPTER 4

A clean cut through
a woody root
reveals a thin bark
and pale traces of
annual rings.

The presence of cork, with waxy suberin in its cells, greatly reduces the
capacity for water uptake from the soil by older parts of a root. Most water
enters a root in the young portion close to the growing tip, notably in the
root hair zone. How roots draw water from the soil and pass it up to the
stem and leaves will be discussed in chapter 8.

CELLULAR ORGANIZATION IN LEAVES

The anatomy of a leaf blade is like a sandwich. On either side are layers of
epidermis, and in the middle are chloroplast-containing cells where photo-
synthesis  takes  place.  The  middle  layer  is  aptly  named  mesophyll (Greek:
meso-, “middle”; phyll, “leaf ”) and is divided into two parts. Closely packed,
elongated  palisade  cells are  arranged  directly  below  the  upper  epidermis,
ready to catch light when it ﬁrst enters the leaf. Spongy cells in the meso-
phyll’s lower area are loosely packed to allow gases—carbon dioxide, oxy-
gen, and water vapor—to move freely between them. Chloroplasts in the
spongy  layer  capture  some  of  the  light  that  passes  through  the  palisade
cells.

Mesophyll cells are, at most, only a few cells removed from veins that
weave their way through the leaf blade. Each vein contains a few xylem and
phloem cells to supply the mesophyll with water and remove newly made
foods such as sugars.

After spending considerable effort to channel water from the soil to its
topmost branches, a plant must restrict water loss from its leaves or face
death from dehydration. The cuticle layer on the outer surface of both the
upper and lower epidermis provides the barrier that prevents this outcome.
Waxy  cutin  on  the  leaves  of  many  houseplants  gives  them  an  attractive,

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:37 AM  Page 75

Inside Roots and Leaves

75

upper epidermis

palisade cells 
of the mesophyll

vein

spongy cells 
of the mesophyll

lower epidermis

cuticle

Leaf tissues

guard cells surround a stoma

The anatomy of a
leaf. Tissues may
be identiﬁed by
comparing the 
photograph with
the diagram.

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:38 AM  Page 76

76

CHAPTER 4

This leaf was sec-
tioned across its
midrib with the
blade on both
sides. The midrib is
essentially a large
vein with tightly
packed xylem and
phloem cells.

Most leaves are
coated with a waxy
cuticle, but not all
are as glossy as the
Aucuba leaf
shown here.

Dense mats of epi-
dermal hairs give
the leaves of
Kalanchoe tomen-
tosa their gray
color and soft 
texture.

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:38 AM  Page 77

Inside Roots and Leaves

77

glossy  appearance.  In  contrast,  leaves  of  other  species  are  covered  with
dense mats of silver-gray epidermal hairs that help to reduce evaporative
water  losses  from  tiny  pores  in  the  leaf  surface  and  act  as  deterrents  to
insect browsers. They also reﬂect a portion of the sunlight that strikes a
leaf, as does a glossy cuticle—an important safeguard for plants growing in
deserts or high on mountains where intense sunlight will damage the struc-
ture of chloroplasts.

Photosynthesis  requires  that  the  chloroplasts  be  supplied  with  light,
water,  and  carbon  dioxide  from  the  atmosphere.  The  gas  enters  a  leaf
through thousands of microscopic pores in its surface—most often in its
lower  epidermis.  These  openings  are  called  stomata (Greek:  stoma,
“mouth”). The location of stomata in the lower epidermis keeps them from
becoming plugged with dust that normally collects on upper leaf surfaces.
Entry  of  harmful  fungal  spores  into  a  leaf  is  also  reduced  with  stomatal
openings placed only in its lower epidermis, for the same reason.

To get some idea of how many of the tiny pores perforate a leaf’s surface,
consider the following: There are approximately 39,000 stomata per square
centimeter of lower epidermis on an apple leaf (1 cm is about 3⁄8 inch); bean
leaves  have  25,000  per  square  centimeter;  orange,  45,000;  pumpkin,
27,000.  Leaves  tending  to  stand  in  more  of  an  upright  position,  such  as
those of irises, have equal numbers of stomata in both leaf surfaces. Corn
(Zea mays) has about 6000 per square centimeter in the upper epidermis and
10,000 in the lower side. Because the lower side of a water lily leaf is sub-
merged, its stomata are located in the upper epidermis. Water, periodically
splashed onto the leaf, washes it free of dust.

Stomatal openings permit gases to enter the leaf. Inadvertently, they are
also  channels  through  which  water  vapor  escapes.  Periodic  stomatal  clo-
sures are used to regulate such water losses. In most plants, stomata rou-
tinely close at night because the absorption of carbon dioxide is unneces-
sary when photosynthesis is not taking place. Stomata may also close on
hot, dry days, in heavy winds, or when the soil becomes dry. At such times
photosynthesis may be slowed temporarily. When water loss exceeds the
rate of uptake by roots, however, it is more important that a plant curb the
escape of water than manufacture foods, of which it usually has a plentiful
reserve.

Each stoma is bordered by two special guard cells that control the size of
its opening. The guard cells’ inner walls, adjacent to the stoma, are thicker
than the outer walls. In a relaxed state, the guard cells lie parallel to each
other with no opening between them. But when the leaf pumps water into

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:38 AM  Page 78

78

CHAPTER 4

Gas exchange
between the leaf’s
mesophyll tissues
and the atmos-
phere occurs
through stomatal
pores in the lower
epidermis. Two
small guard cells
border each stoma.

a

b

Regulation of stomatal opening. (a) A stoma opens when water (arrows) is pumped into
the guard cells. The thin, outer wall of each guard cell stretches more than the thick,
inner wall. (b) When water leaves the guard cells, they relax and the stoma closes.

Distinctly different
in shape from the
leaf’s epidermal
cells, pairs of guard
cells surround each
stoma.

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:38 AM  Page 79

Inside Roots and Leaves

79

the guard cells the thin walls stretch, the shapes of the cells change—curv-
ing away from each other—and the stoma opens. Loss of water from the
guard cells reverses the process and closes the stoma.

The general form and anatomy of leaves are perfectly designed to bring
together diverse ingredients for the chemistry of photosynthesis. Most leaf
blades are thin enough to permit light to penetrate to the lowest levels of
the mesophyll. In thick, ﬂeshy leaves, chloroplasts are located in cells near
the  surface;  the  centers  of  succulent  leaves  are  occupied  by  large,  water-
storage cells. Water and dissolved minerals ﬂow through the plant’s xylem,
connecting roots and stems with leaf petioles, midribs, and veins. Carbon
dioxide enters a leaf through open stomata, then diffuses into mesophyll
cells from the tissue’s intercellular spaces where the gas collects. Finally, in
the chloroplasts light and raw materials converge in the process upon which
all life depends.

PLANT CELL TYPES

The  photographs  of  root,  stem,  and  leaf  anatomy  in  this  chapter  reveal
some obvious differences between cells in the various tissues. Size, shape,
and  cell  wall  thickness  are  distinguishing  features,  made  visible  by  ﬁrst
treating the plant materials with different stains. Cellulose walls are identi-
ﬁed with a blue-green dye; lignin appears bright pink.

After careful study of plant tissues, one begins to recognize several basic
cell  types.  Among  these  are  large,  thin-walled  cells,  called  parenchyma
(Greek:  para,  “beside”;  enchyma,  “an  infusion,”  “poured  in”)  surrounding
primary vascular tissues in roots and stems. Pith and cortex are regions pri-
marily composed of parenchyma cells, although other cell types may also be
present. In leaves, palisade and spongy mesophyll tissues are composed of
the  same  kind  of  cell,  their  thin  walls  permitting  entry  of  light  to  the
chloroplasts within.

Under  carefully  controlled  laboratory  conditions,  in  a  method  called 
tissue  culture,  botanists  and  horticulturists  have  successfully  grown  whole
plants  from  small  pieces  of  pith  and  even  from  single  parenchyma  cells.
Because only mitotic divisions are involved in the growth of tissue cultures,
the resultant offspring, known as clones, have the same genetic composition
as the parent plant. Compare this method of achieving genetic uniformity
with conventional methods of cross-breeding that produce hybrids having a
mixture of genes and, therefore, physical characteristics, inherited from two
parents. Cloning techniques possess great potential for the propagation of
economically  important  species,  including  uniform  populations  of  select,

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:38 AM  Page 80

80

CHAPTER 4

fast-growing,  lumber-producing  trees.  Cloning  animals  involves  a  com-
pletely different technique than the more direct methods used with plants.
In phloem tissue, long, narrow food-conducting cells are arranged end
to end in ranks. Their end walls (called sieve plates) are pierced with holes, a
characteristic giving columns of these cells the name sieve tubes. Threads of
living cytoplasm pass from cell to cell through the sieve plates. An interest-
ing  feature  of  sieve  tube  members  is  that  they  lack  nuclei,  leaving  their
cytoplasm free to transport food. Sustaining the living cytoplasm of these
cells  is  the  work  of  nuclei  located  in  adjacent  companion  cells.  This  small
detail is but one of many illustrations of how sophisticated and specialized
plant cells are.

Water-conducting cells are dead at maturity, with strong, ligniﬁed walls
and no protoplasm. Flowering plants uniquely possess cylindrical cells with
relatively wide diameters. Both end walls of the cylinders are absent and
they are arranged in ranks and columns forming continuous tubes, called
vessels, through which water is distributed to all parts of a plant. Their thick-
ened, ligniﬁed side walls are perforated with numerous pits to permit water

a

b

Water- and food-conducting cells. (a) Columns of vessels in the xylem. Numerous pits perfo-
rate the side walls; end walls and protoplasm are missing. (b) Sieve tubes (groups of large
cells) and companion cells (small cells) in the phloem. End walls of the sieve tubes are called
sieve plates; living cytoplasm connects the cells. Companion cells contain the nuclei that con-
trol the activities of both cell types.

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:38 AM  Page 81

to move between vessels. The ﬂow
of  water  through  xylem  can  be
maintained  by  diverting  it  into
adjacent  cells  should  blockage
occur in any of the vessel columns.
In gymnosperms, water-conducting
tracheids are  longer  and  narrower
than vessels but are no less effective
in  water  transport.  They  are  also
found  in  club  mosses,  ferns,  and
some angiosperms.

Inside Roots and Leaves

81

Five cell types are identiﬁable in this 
magniﬁed view of a corn stem’s vascular
bundle. The three large cells are xylem
vessels, with red stain indicating the pres-
ence of lignin in the cell walls. The phloem
tissue, with a netlike arrangement of its
cells, consists of sieve tubes and smaller
companion cells. The vascular bundle is
bordered by ligniﬁed ﬁber cells and, 
surrounding the bundle, large parenchyma
cells with typically thin, cellulose walls.

Physical support of roots is given
by  the  surrounding  soil,  whereas
shoots  must  depend  on  support
from their cellular components. To
solve  the  problem  of  holding  a
branch  or  large  leaf  in  an  out-
stretched position, yet retain sufﬁ-
cient ﬂexibility to move in a wind,
inclusion  of  ﬁber  cells is  the  ideal
solution. Fibers are long and narrow and have thick, ligniﬁed walls. Fiber
tissues are strong, supple, and lightweight. Not only are ﬁbers essential to
the  structural  engineering  of  plants,  they  are  of  considerable  economic
importance. Soft-textured ﬁbers from the stems of ﬂax plants are spun into
thread  then  woven  into  linen  cloth.  Coarse  ﬁbers  from  hemp  stems  and
from the leaves of New Zealand ﬂax and agave are used in the manufacture
of rope and sackcloth. Fibrous tissues from a wide variety of plant species
are also used in the manufacture of baskets, mats, brushes, and paper.

Cotton ﬁbers are somewhat different in composition and origin. Their
cells walls are composed only of cellulose and each ﬁber is a long extension
of an epidermal cell from the seed coat. They are used to make such diverse
products  as  paper,  string,  and  clothing.  Incidentally,  cellulose  extracted
from cotton and wood is used to manufacture some synthetic ﬁbers, most
notably  rayon.  Other  synthetics—nylon,  orlon,  and  polyesters—are  con-
coctions made from petroleum products in chemist’s laboratories. Because
petroleum  is  derived  from  the  geologic  transformation  of  ancient  fossil
plants, even synthetic ﬁbers are, indirectly, plant products.

The  hardest  plant  parts  are  composed  of  stone  cells (or  sclereids).  These
cells have irregular shapes and extremely thick, ligniﬁed walls. They form
dense,  heavy  tissues  such  as  the  pits  of  so-called  stone  fruits—peach, 

053-082_Botany  11/8/04  11:38 AM  Page 82

82

CHAPTER 4

Masses of ﬁbers,
from which rope is
manufactured, proj-
ect from the frayed
end of a New
Zealand ﬂax
(Phormium tenax)
leaf. The same leaf,
seen under a micro-
scope (left), reveals
ribs of thick-walled
ﬁber cells (stained
red) alternating
with photosynthetic
parenchyma.

apricot, plum, and cherry. Giving more than normal protection to the sin-
gle seed within, a fruit’s stone is the inner part of the surrounding fruit wall.
The precision and versatility of computer microchips and other products
of human technology are praiseworthy, but all that we have made pales in
comparison with the complex organization and functional precision of cells
and tissues in even the most lowly garden weed.

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 83

PART III

Adaptation

Earth  is  a  restless,  ever-changing  planet. Its  molten
core seeps to the surface through giant ﬁssures, spreads across ocean ﬂoors,
and guides entire continents, or parts of them, into new relationships with
one another. As if in compensation, sections of Earth’s mantle sink into the
depths and melt under titanic geologic forces. Mountain ranges—such as
the Himalayas and Alps—are thrust ever higher by collisions between enor-
mous tectonic plates. Volcanoes erupt and cover the land with ash and lava.
Ocean  boundaries  change  when  land  masses  rise  and  subside;  lakes  and
rivers  disappear  then  return  when  ice  sheets  periodically  creep  over  the
Earth and melt in retreat.

Miraculously, through all such upheavals, plants and animals manage to
survive, to reproduce and, thereby, to perpetuate genetic lines established
when life ﬁrst began. Direct descendants of Earth’s earliest creatures exist
today in the form of blue-green algae and bacteria—organisms that have
remained  virtually  unchanged  for  3  billion  years.  Other  algae  (including
seaweeds) and fungi are descended from this ancient ancestral stock, as are
mosses and their relatives, the liverworts. Vascular plants, those with vas-
cular tissues, are believed to have evolved from green algae about 400 mil-
lion  years  ago;  their  early  species  were  related  to  our  present-day  club
mosses and horsetails. Ferns and gymnosperms came next in the evolution-
ary  succession  that  culminated  in  the  advent  of  ﬂowering  plants  from
uncertain origins, approximately 150 million years ago. More than 250,000
species of angiosperms now populate one or another corner of the Earth,
and at least a few exist in all but its harshest climates.

When, in the course of the never-ending cycle of the seasons, animals
ﬁnd  their  circumstances  increasingly  difﬁcult  to  endure,  they  are  able  to

83

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 84

84

PART III

move  on  foot,  wing,  or  through  water  to  more  congenial  locales.  Some
undertake  long  migrations  in  search  of  better  food  supplies  or  desirable
places  in  which  to  reproduce.  Others,  to  avoid  seasonal  inclemencies  of
heat or cold, retreat underground for long or short periods of hibernation.
But rooted plants, lacking the ability to move, must survive under the full
impact of a changing environment.

A plant, ﬁxed for its lifetime in one location, relies on an impressive array
of survival strategies, the product of eons of evolution, to meet the contin-
gencies of a ﬁckle and untrustworthy world. Such survival strategies have
been acquired through natural selection—the slow, evolutionary process by
which  only  those  organisms  best  able  to  adapt  to  environmental  change
become  the  progenitors  of  future  generations.  Charles  Darwin  (1809–
1882), one of the authors of evolutionary theory, coined the phrase “sur-
vival of the ﬁttest” to describe that outcome.

Natural selection has led to strategies by which plants can survive virtu-
ally  every  conceivable  threat  to  their  existence—from  cold  winters  and
periods  of  drought  to  attacks  by  predators  and  competition  with  other
plants for nutrients and growing space. Many such methods evolved with
the development of roots, stems, and leaves specially adapted to perform
unusual functions. For example, the herbaceous stems of some plants were
reduced  to  compact,  frost-resistant,  underground  bulbs.  Cactus  stems
became the plant’s photosynthesizing organs, the leaves having been mod-
iﬁed into protective spines. Some roots evolved into climbing structures,
while  others  developed  aboveground  parts  to  support  heavy  tree  trunks.
The leaves of some species perform the functions of roots by collecting and
absorbing water and nutrients. And the most fascinating of all adaptations
is  leaves  that  capture  and  digest  insects  as  food  supplements  for  some
species that grow in nutrient-poor soils.

Other survival strategies are found at a molecular level, in the form of
natural pesticides—chemical substances synthesized by plants to repel ani-
mal  browsers  and  fungal  invaders.  Some  products  simply  impart  strong
odors or unpleasant tastes that deter predators, whereas others kill large or
small invasive organisms, so bold as to ingest poisonous plant parts. Such
chemicals became more diversiﬁed when advanced plant groups, especially
ﬂowering plants, evolved. The complex biochemistry of the angiosperms
may well be the basis for their remarkable ability to share diverse habitats
with an even greater diversity of animals, including almost a million species
of insects.

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 85

Adaptation

85

Although individual plants are unable to migrate, in the course of time
species do move to new locations through the widespread dissemination of
spores  and  seeds.  When  those  reproductive  units  germinate  and  plants
grow in places far removed from their parents, some of their progeny, in
turn, become established even farther from the species’ center of origin. A
species’ distributional range continues to expand until stopped by climatic
or  other  factors  antagonistic  to  growth  and  reproduction  and  to  which
members  of  the  species  are  poorly  adapted.  Formidable  barriers  such  as
mountain ranges and oceans, over which transport of most seeds and spores
is difﬁcult, may put a temporary halt to dispersal.

Over millions of years, our planet’s ﬂora has been in a state of ﬂux. In
interglacial periods, when ice sheets released their grip over large portions
of the Northern Hemisphere, plants reclaimed the uncovered land. Pioneer
species making the long, slow journey northward were descendants of ice
age survivors in regions closer to the equator, in whose ranks certain mem-
bers had a capacity to adapt to climates at higher latitudes.

The inevitable occurrence of genetic variation within a species endows a
few individuals with traits needed to occupy environments that exclude the
bulk of the population. Having thus become geographically isolated from
the main body of the species, such splinter groups ultimately give rise to
new species, especially when long-standing genetic isolation leads to mor-
phological  change.  The  ﬁnal  stage  in  the  delineation  of  a  new  species
occurs when its members are no longer able to interbreed with plants from
the ancestral, related, or any other species.

Geographic isolation, favoring speciation, is also believed to take place
when cataclysmic geologic events split plant groups into small populations;
and when, by chance, a few seeds or spores cross mountains or large bod-
ies of water, borne by migrating animals, high altitude winds, or ocean cur-
rents. The unique and diverse ﬂoras of midocean archipelagos give support
to  the  latter  hypothesis  and,  indeed,  it  was  discovery  of  the  Galapagos
Islands’ novel ﬂora (as well as its fauna) that gave Charles Darwin a vital
clue to the riddle of the origin of species.

Since evolutionary theory was ﬁrst conceived, scientists have accumulat-
ed other evidence to support the idea that, with time, plants and animals
undergo  signiﬁcant  change.  The  biological  disciplines  of  genetics  (the
study of inheritance) and cytology (cell structure), which developed after
Darwin’s time, have shed light on how genetic variation, leading to geo-
graphic isolation and subsequent speciation, takes place within cell nuclei.

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 86

86

PART III

For  example,  sexual  reproduction  produces  hybrids,  offspring  in  which
parental traits are randomly sorted into new combinations. It is not uncom-
mon  that,  compared  with  their  parents,  the  progeny’s  genetic  mixture
endows them with increased vigor (hybrid vigor) to more successfully cope
with adverse environmental conditions.

Mutation is a radical mode of genetic change occurring when the chemi-
cal  structure  of  genes  is  permanently  reorganized.  The  sun’s  ultraviolet
light is believed to be one of several natural agents that cause mutations.
Most mutations are thought to be lethal. But those that seem to enhance
survival and have been transmitted in the gene pools of plants and animals
have  profoundly  inﬂuenced  the  course  of  evolution,  especially  when,
through natural selection, they conferred greater adaptive capacities upon
their recipients.

Mutations and the outcome of natural hybridizations are among several
random  events  taking  place  at  a  chromosomal  level.  Their  randomness
points to the important fact that evolution is not a directed process; it does
not work toward predetermined goals. Yet all life is the product of this com-
plex  system.  Although  it  is  impossible  to  comprehend  evolution  in  its
entirety, the splendid things that nature has wrought with the process are
everywhere to be seen.

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 87

CHAPTER 5

Adaptations for Protection

THE GARDEN HABITAT

The gardener’s selection of individual plants for indoor or outdoor use is
done  with  a  number  of  interests  in  mind.  Most  ornamental  varieties  are
chosen for their aesthetic qualities—the visual appeal of particular ﬂowers
or leaves, bark patterns, or overall plant shapes. Plants to be used as ground
covers  and  shade  trees  are  chosen  because  they  are  fast-growing  species.
Fruit-bearing and vegetable crops are selected for their nutrient value, ease
of cultivation, and the gardener’s tastes. A plant collection may include a
few specimens for their novelty—conversation pieces among more ordinary
plant neighbors. And, all too often, decisions to purchase certain plants are
simply based on cost. Such reasons for choosing plants are founded on the
gardener’s personal preferences and bank balance. They have no relevance
to natural selection, the fundamental principle determining the composi-
tion of ﬂoras in the wild.

A  garden  is  an  artiﬁcial  habitat  in  the  sense  that  it  is  the  product  of
human judgment—but no less enjoyable because of its artiﬁciality. Gardens
are among our most exemplary accomplishments and, large or small, are
unique communities in which introduced plants, having evolutionary ori-
gins  on  different  continents,  are  mingled.  Under  natural  circumstances
such geographically mixed congregations would never exist.

Although much of a garden’s design is within the gardener’s control, one
important factor reveals how nature is the ﬁnal arbiter in all plant matters.
Namely, the inherent suitability of species for both the geographic locale
and the part of the garden where one would like to grow them. For exam-

87

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 88

88

CHAPTER 5

ple, attempts to raise tropical species outdoors in Canada would be as futile
as planning an alpine garden in Florida. Desert plants in Denmark? Yes, but
only  in  hothouses.  Shade-loving  forest  ferns  on  a  warm,  sunny  patio?
Emphatically no. In other words, the gardener’s choices are restricted to
species  whose  native  habitats  bear  some  resemblance  to  the  garden  or
greenhouse environment.

Experienced  gardeners  instinctively  recognize  such  relationships.
Reference books provide information on optimum conditions in which to
grow  most  horticultural  species.  Some  authors  conveniently  assign  com-
monly grown varieties to climate zones into which different parts of the world
have been divided. Among other variables, such zones are determined by
latitude,  elevation  above  sea  level,  rainfall  patterns,  known  temperature
extremes, and frost potential.

In  mute  testimony  to  the  persistence  of  genetic  legacies,  each  species
displays optimum growth only within precisely deﬁned environmental lim-
its, established long ago during ancestral evolution. No matter how many
generations removed a plant may be from those ancient ties, it is genetical-
ly programmed to respond to a speciﬁc range of temperature and other cli-
matic and soil conditions. The gardener should be aware of local conditions
not meeting those requirements.

More mysteriously, many plant species also respond to seasonal transi-
tions in day length occurring at latitudes north and south of the equator;
for example, some species respond to the change from short days of spring
to  longer  days  of  midsummer.  Known  as  photoperiodism,  this  unexpected
requirement coordinates plant reproductive cycles with seasons most favor-
able to growth (see chapter 7). The inviolate rule of gardening is that ful-
ﬁllment  of  photoperiod  and  other  environmental  requisites,  having  been
dictated by nature, take precedence over the less consequential concerns of
humans for appearance, size, or plant cost.

ENVIRONMENTAL MODIFICATION

Thousands of years ago, in parts of Africa, Asia, the Americas, the Middle
East, and Mediterranean regions, early peoples established centers of agri-
culture in which selected native plant species were cultivated for local use.
At ﬁrst, only those crops having food value were propagated, but at some
later period species having ornamental appeal gained people’s attention. As
a consequence of human migrations, commerce and, in recent times, rapid
means of transportation, an unprecedented diversity of produce and plants
is now available for us to enjoy. Supermarkets, nurseries, ﬂorist shops, and
gardens are veritable melting pots of plants, formerly from many lands.

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 89

Adaptations for Protection

89

An essential part of agricultural and horticultural practice is to modify,
in part, the ﬁeld or garden environment to better suit the inherited require-
ments of selected species. This we do through irrigation, tilling and fertil-
izing the soil, pest control, and removing competitive weeds. Some former
deserts  and  other  inhospitable  places  have  been  turned  into  productive
agricultural regions by such methods, and many rough, unfertile patches of
land have been so transformed into gardens.

In greenhouses, limited control of climate is also possible but productive
capacity is restricted by space. Under glass, plants may be protected against
frost,  snow  cover,  wind  damage,  intense  sunlight,  and  the  dehydrating
effects of low relative humidity. And, as a token of human ingenuity, opti-
mum growing conditions for almost any species may be artiﬁcially created
in  controlled-environment,  plant-growth  facilities  built  for  research  pur-
poses.  But  therein  lies  the  extent  of  our  ability  to  control  the  elements.
Outdoors, plants are pitted against each and every aspect of the environ-
ment,  the  most  destructive  forces  being  those  most  critically  testing  the
organisms’ capacities to endure.

LIMITING FACTORS

The progress of a plant’s growth is a summation of its responses to separate,
but interacting components of the environment in which it is living. The
plant may be favored with adequate water and optimum temperatures but
be limited in its ability to photosynthesize by inadequate illumination, per-
haps because of shading from taller plants or buildings. Another plant may
receive  full  sunlight,  plentiful  irrigation,  and  sufﬁcient  fertilizer,  but  still
not  express  its  growth  potential  because  prevailing  temperatures  are  too
high or too low. Even if climatic and soil conditions are ideal, stunting may
occur because pathogenic fungi or predatory insects have invaded the plant.
Microorganisms and animals are, indeed, environmental factors to be reck-
oned with. Other life forms, being ordained components of habitats occu-
pied by plants, exercise both beneﬁcial and harmful effects, as do tempera-
ture, rainfall, and sunlight.

It becomes obvious that, of a host of interacting environmental factors,
only one need challenge a plant’s tolerances in order to limit its growth.
The greater the number of unfavorable conditions acting in concert, the
more profound the effect. That is why, in nature, where so many variables
are at work, plants rarely reach their full potential. Happily, in a garden,
one has the opportunity to improve on a few factors limiting plant devel-
opment  and,  consequently,  to  cultivate  larger,  healthier  specimens  than
usually exist in the wild.

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 90

90

CHAPTER 5

CENTERS OF ORIGIN OF AGRICULTURE 

AND SOME OF THEIR FIRST CROPS

CHINA
(probably the earliest center
of agriculture)

apricot (Prunus)
cherry (Prunus)
cucumber (Cucumis)
eggplant (Solanum)
orange (Citrus)
peach (Prunus)
soybean (Glycine)
sugarcane (Saccharum)
tea (Camelia)
walnut (Juglans) 

INDIA, MALAYSIA, 
AND INDONESIA 
banana (Musa)
coconut (Cocos)
ginger (Zingiber)
mango (Mangifera)
mustard (Brassica)
orange (Citrus)
radish (Raphanus)
rice (Oryza)
tangerine (Citrus)
yam (Dioscorea)

MIDDLE EAST 
AND CENTRAL ASIA 

MEDITERRANEAN
REGION

apple (Malus)
cantaloupe (Cucumis)
carrot (Daucus)
cotton (Gossypium)
ﬁg (Ficus)
garlic (Allium)
grape (Vitis)
leek (Allium)
oat (Avena)
pear (Pyrus)
rye (Secale)
spinach (Spinacia)
turnip (Brassica)
wheat (Triticum)

ETHIOPIA

bean (Phaseolus)
coffee (Coffea)
okra (Hibiscus)
pea (Pisum)

asparagus (Asparagus)
celery (Apium)
lettuce (Lactuca)
olive (Olea)
onion (Allium)
parsnip (Pastinaca)
rhubarb (Rheum)
turnip (Brassica)

CENTRAL AND SOUTH
AMERICA

avocado (Persea)
bell pepper (Capsicum)
cashew (Anacardium)
corn (Zea)
lima bean (Phaseolus)
papaya (Carica)
peanut (Arachis)
pineapple (Ananas)
potato (Solanum)
pumpkin (Cucurbita)
sweet potato (Ipomoea)
tomato (Lycopersicum)

PLACES OF ORIGIN OF SOME GARDEN PLANTS

(genera given when different from common name)

CHINA

JAPAN 

Camellia
China aster (Callistephus)
chrysanthemum (Dendranthema)
Clematis
day lily (Hemerocallis)
Forsythia
Gardenia
hollyhock (Althaea)
Hydrangea
peony (Paeonia)

azalea (Rhododendron)
bleeding heart (Dicentra)
Japanese iris (Iris)
Wisteria

AUSTRALIA

Acacia
bottle brush (Callistemon)
strawﬂower (Helichrysum)

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 91

PLACES OF ORIGIN OF SOME GARDEN PLANTS

(genera given when different from common name)

Adaptations for Protection

91

UNITED STATES AND CANADA 
black-eyed Susan (Rudbeckia)
California poppy (Eschscholzia)
Clarkia
columbine (Aguilegia)
Coreopsis
lupine (Lupinus)
Michaelmas daisy (Aster)
Penstemon
Phlox
sunﬂower (Helianthus)

MEXICO
Cosmos
Dahlia
frangipani (Plumeria)
marigold (Tagetes)
poinsettia (Euphorbia)
Zinnia

SOUTH AMERICA 

Fuchsia
gloxinia (Sinningia)
morning-glory (Ipomoea)
nasturtium (Tropaeolum)
Petunia
Portulaca
Salpiglossis
Verbena

AFRICA

African violet (Saintpaulia)
bird-of-paradise (Strelitzia)
calla lily (Zantedeschia)
Freesia
Gladiolus
Impatiens
Lobelia
Nemesia
Pelargonium
plumbago (Ceratostigma)

MEDITERRANEAN REGION 

candytuft (Iberis)
carnation (Dianthus)
grape hyacinth (Muscari)
hyacinth (Hyacinthus)
oleander (Nerium)
snapdragon (Antirrhinum)
sweet alyssum (Alyssum)
sweet pea (Lathyrus)

EUROPE

bellﬂower (Campanula)
checkered lily (Fritillaria)
Crocus
forget-me-not (Myosotis)
foxglove (Digitalis)
lily-of-the-valley (Convallaria)
pansy (Viola)
polyanthus (Primula)
primrose (Primula)
rose (Rosa)
scabious (Scabiosa)
snowdrop (Galanthus)
stock (Matthiola)
wallﬂower (Cheiranthus)

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 92

92

CHAPTER 5

Plants  generally  die  when  too  many  limiting  factors  overwhelm  their
physiological capabilities for survival. Or, they may simply succumb to old-
age  processes,  principally  to  a  genetically  programmed  deterioration  of
cells  and  tissues,  called  senescence (Latin  for  “to  grow  old”).  Once  this
process has been initiated, even the best care cannot save a plant. In annu-
al species, senescence takes place within one year of growth; in biennials, in
the  second  year.  In  perennial  species,  senescence  of  a  localized  nature
occurs in older organs before they die and are discarded; it takes many years
before the process ﬁnally consumes the entire organism.

PROTECTION IN EXTREME ENVIRONMENTS

When a plant becomes dormant, it prepares for the approach of seasons
when  combined  adverse  environmental  conditions  are  bound  to  limit
growth or threaten death. Entry into dormancy entails a reduction of phys-
iological activities to the minimum level needed for survival. At that time
the plant may also discard vulnerable parts, such as leaves prone to damage
from frost or the effects of drought. Thus, dormant biennial or perennial
temperate-zone species are well prepared to face winter’s low temperatures,
strong winds, cloudy days, and snow cover. Some desert perennials under-
go the same dormancy processes to withstand the long, hot, dry months of
summer.

Typically,  a  dormant  plant  has  well-protected  meristems—the  sites  of
renewed  growth  when  environmental  conditions  improve.  Vascular  and
cork  cambia  are  surrounded  by  cork  tissue,  which  is  not  only  a  superior
insulator but, because its cells are impregnated with suberin, also prevents
evaporative water loss. Apical meristems, at stem tips and in axillary buds,
are encased in layers of bud scales (described in chapter 2). These are mod-
iﬁed leaves, adapted to withstand prolonged periods of cold or dehydration.
Although  annual  plants  die  before  the  arrival  of  seasonal  temperature
extremes or drought, their species survive the worst climatic conditions in
the form of dormant seeds, the hardiest structures of higher plants. Among
lower plants such as mosses, spores are the units of survival. This type of
adaptation is called an avoidance strategy, entailing the passage of a small por-
tion of a plant into the dormant state. The complete organism is genetical-
ly programmed to exist only during the most favorable period of the year.
The  most  taxing  problem  arising  from  an  avoidance  strategy  is  the
accomplishment  of  both  vegetative  growth  and  reproduction  within  the
relatively  short  life  span  of  an  annual  plant.  This  is  especially  true  in
deserts, where the growing season for annual species is only of two to four

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 93

Adaptations for Protection

93

Turning the normally parched desert into a springtime riot of color, annual wildﬂowers
crowd around wizened perennial shrubs.

Perhaps more beautiful for its small size, a daisylike Eriophyllum spp. is one of hun-
dreds of desert ephemeral species that abundant winter rains call forth from long-
dormant seeds.

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 94

94

CHAPTER 5

months’ duration. If the desert is blessed with abundant year-end rains, fol-
lowed by mild temperatures and plentiful sunlight, conditions are favorable
for the completion of life cycles, from seed germination to seed production.
The early arrival of summer’s heat brings an end to the entire crop of annu-
al plants. Of necessity, vegetative growth is minimal. Perhaps four or ﬁve
leaves, a short stem, and a single tap root are all that late-germinating annu-
als have time to develop—sufﬁcient to provide physical support for a few
miniature blossoms and the food necessary for seed development. Despite
their  diminutive  size,  these  short-lived  plants,  understandably  called
ephemerals, are exquisite gems in the desert ﬂora.

Only occasionally do the several environmental conditions necessary for
the  growth  of  annual  species  coincide  in  the  desert;  but  when  they  do,
almost overnight the normally bleak landscape becomes carpeted with mul-
ticolored ﬂowers in one of nature’s most astonishing displays. In less fortu-
nate circumstances the seeds merely wait in the soil, year after year, perhaps
for decades, for the opportunity to fulﬁll their destinies.

Environmental extremes of a different and opposite nature dictate small
plant size among native species of the arctic tundra and high on mountains
in  the  alpine  zone,  generally  above  timberline.  Most  of  these  plants  are
perennials. Their low, compact form provides protection against the crush-
ing  weight  of  snow  covers  in  winter  and,  after  the  snows  have  melted,
against  the  impact  of  strong  winds  in  their  exposed  habitats.  Another
advantage to low growth is that leaves and ﬂowers are positioned close to
the ground, in a shallow layer of air warmed when the sun’s heat is reﬂect-
ed from the soil. The development of low-growing plants is favored in tem-
peratures a few degrees higher than that of the ambient air, and when pol-
linating insects ﬂy from ﬂower to ﬂower they enjoy warm havens and plen-
tiful food supplies.

In  their  short  season  of  development  between  dormancies,  alpine  and
arctic tundra plants photosynthesize foods that are stored in roots, ready for
use late the following spring when growth is resumed as the last snows melt.
Yearly production of ﬂowers and seeds are not as critical events in these
perennials as they are in annuals because reproduction can be attempted in
subsequent,  favorable  years  when  conditions  allow  completion  of  the
process.

Many arctic and alpine perennials are evergreen, although minimal pho-
tosynthesis occurs during winter. Because their growing season is short, the
plants can ill afford the time and expenditure of food reserves needed to
make a completely new set of leaves each spring.

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 95

Adaptations for Protection

95

At timberline, warmed by the summer sun, alpine lupine (Lupinus spp.) ﬂourishes in
soils left moist by melting snows.

Although reduced in size, alpine species bear the hallmarks of their better-known rela-
tives at lower elevations. An alpine willow-herb (Epilobium spp.) enjoys a brief growing
season.

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 96

96

CHAPTER 5

Leaf cells are prevented from freezing by the presence of high sugar con-
centrations  acting  as  antifreeze  in  the  protoplasm.  Dissolved  sugars  and
other cellular substances depress the freezing point of water, as do solutions
of specially prepared chemicals sold to protect automobile cooling systems
in winter. In some respects, plants have been ahead of human invention by
several million years.

Perennial  species  in  hot,  dry  deserts  face  a  different  set  of  problems.
Some  shed  their  leaves  during  periods  of  drought  to  reduce  the  loss  of
water  vapor  through  open  stomata  (see  chapter  8).  Among  evergreen
species, the leaves tend to be small, both to expose less heat-absorbing sur-
face to the sun and to reduce stomatal numbers. Other leaf modiﬁcations
include  the  presence  of  extra-thick,  water-retaining  cuticles  and  mats  of
epidermal hairs that slow the evaporation of water and reﬂect some of the
intense light striking the leaf surfaces.

Plants in any habitat constantly struggle to adjust to the changing envi-
ronment. But none are tested by so many potentially destructive factors, in
radical seasonal shifts from one environmental extreme to another, as are
the native species of deserts and alpine-tundra regions. Perhaps it is their
ability to survive Earth’s harshest climates that makes these hardy species
relatively easy to care for in the garden, provided the basic conditions of
their native habitats are fulﬁlled. For warm climate desert perennials such
as cacti and succulents, abundant light, infrequent watering, and absence of
prolonged periods of freezing temperatures are important. Alpine species
may only be grown in temperate zones where cold winters, plentiful rain-
fall, and long summer days are assured. The special beauty of alpine and
desert plants may be enjoyed at exhibits sponsored by alpine plant societies
and organizations of cactus and succulent plant enthusiasts.

PROTECTION AGAINST ANIMALS

It  is  inevitable  that  photosynthesizing  plants  should  be  the  target  of
destruction by animals because, in the ecosystem, the former are primary
food-producers and animals are the principal consumers. Obviously, it is
disadvantageous for a plant’s well-being, especially its leaves and stems, to
be too nutritious and inviting to predators. Some fruits attract animals and
provide food as a reward for swallowing and dispersing the seeds, but that
is an exception. Injury from any source reduces plant growth and jeopard-
izes the chance of reproduction—consequences obviously counter-produc-
tive  to  species  survival.  Thus,  species  having  effective  defenses  against

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 97

Adaptations for Protection

97

predatory  animals  are  especially
favored  by  natural  selection  and,
conversely, the most vulnerable run
a greater risk of extinction.

Anyone  who  has  carelessly
brushed against a rose bush, cactus,
or hawthorn tree, knows how well
some  plants  defend  themselves.
The  protective  structures  these
species  bear  are  classified  by
botanists into four categories, each
an  adaptation  of  a  familiar  plant
part.  Thorns are  modified  short
branches grown from axillary buds
and  terminating  in  sharp,  hard
points;  among  other 
species,
hawthorn 
spp.)  and
blackthorn  (Prunus  spinosa)  are  so
equipped.

(Crataegus

Cactus leaves evolved into protective
spines, the stem being the organ of photo-
synthesis.

Spines are  modified  leaves  or
parts of leaves, such as projections
from  the  margins  of  blades.  For
example, some cactus spines are evolutionary remnants of rigid petioles and
midribs,  well  sharpened  for  protective  purposes.  In  the  absence  of  leaf

A thorn is a modi-
ﬁed short branch.
Note that this pyra-
cantha thorn has
grown from an axil-
lary bud and, at
least temporarily,
bears a few leaves.

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 98

98

CHAPTER 5

Marginal spines on holly leaves are
extensions of the major veins.

Rose prickles are woody epidermal out-
growths growing randomly in internodes.

blades,  photosynthesis  occurs  in
cactus  stems.  Some  cacti  are  cov-
ered with masses of spines to absorb
and reﬂect excessive sunlight, as do
dense mats of epidermal hairs. And
spine  tips  act  as  places  where  dew
may condense, drip to the soil, and
provide moisture for the plant. On
the  leaves  of  some  species,  holly
(Ilex spp.) being an example, major
veins terminate in marginal spines at
the blade’s edge. Other spines may
be adapted from accessory leaf parts
called stipules, located in pairs at the
base of petioles. Because thorns and
many spines are modiﬁed branches
or leaves, they develop at nodes on
stems.

The recurved thorns of bougainvillea func-
tion both as protective structures and sup-
portive hooks for the long branches.

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 99

Adaptations for Protection

99

Correctly, a rose stem’s protective structures are not thorns but prickles,
arranged in irregular patterns within internodes. Prickles are short, woody
outgrowths, arising from the epidermal tissue of stems, leaves, and some
species of fruit. Many prickles are recurved, having tips pointing downward.
Such  a  shape  effectively  hinders  the  progress  of  small  animals  trying  to
climb a stem to reach the leaves. And when present on the long stems of
climbing  roses  and  brambles,  for  example,  the  recurved  prickles  become
hooked on supports, including other branches of the same plant. This sec-
ondary,  supportive  role  played  by  some  prickles  also  applies  to  recurved
thorns such as those of bougainvillea.

Matted epidermal hairs on pilose leaves (bearing long hairs; Latin: pilos,
“hair”)  and  pubescent leaves  (having  short  hairs;  Latin:  pubesc,  “downy”)
undoubtedly offer protection against many small herbivorous animals, such
as caterpillars, by being difﬁcult to eat. The mouthparts of such animals are
adapted to chew on the more substantial tissues of leaves and herbaceous
stems. The special epidermal hairs on stems and leaves of Urtica, the sting-
ing nettle, protect in a different manner. When these glandular stinging hairs
are touched, the tops break off, penetrate skin, and inject a chemical that
causes a painful rash. People and other animals soon learn to avoid such
plants.

PROTECTION BY CAMOUFLAGE

Essential to the perpetuation of gymnosperm and ﬂowering plant species is
the survival and ultimate germination of a part of their annual seed crop.
But because most seeds are small, easily digested, and rich in stored food,
they are highly desirable items in the diets of many types of animals, from

Five “living stones”
are camouﬂaged
among pebbles in
this small section of
a succulent garden.
Two of the plants
bear dry ﬂower
remains.

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 100

100

CHAPTER 5

ants  to  birds,  rodents,  and  humans.  In  nature,  after  seeds  are  shed  from
their parent plants, they may lie on the soil surface for long periods before
becoming buried. Very small seeds have the advantage of being better able
to drop into soil crevasses as well as being less visible to the keen eyes of
predators. Larger seeds may be protected by thick, hard seed coats or sim-
ply  rely  on  their  dull  gray-brown  color  to  disguise  them  against  the  soil
background.

There are many examples of cryptic (hidden from view) coloration among
animals;  chameleons  actually  change  their  skin  color  to  match  the  sur-
roundings. But few plants are camouﬂaged to protect them against preda-
tors. Several cryptically colored plant species are classed under the popular
title “living stones.” These belong to the genera Lithops, Mesembryanthemum,
and Conophytum—natives of the rocky deserts of South Africa. Only the top
of the living stone’s single pair of ﬂeshy leaves projects above the soil; their
rounded form and speckled, gray color gives them a convincing, rocklike
appearance.  Light  penetrates  to  chloroplasts,  deep  inside,  through  semi-
transparent windows at the top of each leaf. Botanists believe that the liv-
ing  stones’  camouﬂage  is  no  mere  coincidence,  but  that  their  uniquely
evolved morphology provides a selective advantage for survival in a habitat
where succulent plant tissues are at a premium among thirsty animals.

PROTECTION BY ANTS

One normally thinks of plants defending themselves against animals, but
some fascinating examples have been studied of plants harboring colonies
of ants as defensive agents. Frequently, such plants provide both shelter and
food for their protectors. The resident ants live inside hollow stems, cup-
shaped leaves, or large, hollow thorns, as is the case with the Mexican bull-
horn acacia (Acacia sphaerocephala). Some species produce a nutritious liquid,
from specialized glands, on which the ants feed. Any unusual disturbance of
these plants causes the ferocious residents to swarm out of their nests, ready
to attack, giving other insects little chance of encroachment on the ants’
territory. Throughout the world, several hundred plant species are known
to possess this type of protection.

A  mutually  beneﬁcial  relationship  between  two  different  species  of
organisms is referred to as a symbiosis (Greek: sym, “together”; bios, “life”).
There  are  countless  plant-animal  symbioses,  including  the  important
dependency that many ﬂowering plants have upon insects, birds, and bats
for the distribution of their pollen (see chapter 9). But none are as unusual
as the association between plants and protective ants.

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 101

Adaptations for Protection

101

WOUND HEALING

Epidermis and cork, the surface tis-
sues  of  plants,  act  as  barriers
between  a  plant’s  interior  and  the
external  environment.  Cutin,  pro-
duced by and superimposed on epi-
dermal  cells,  prevents  water  loss
from  leaves  and  herbaceous  stems,
and bars entry to fungal spores and
mycelium—the  threadlike,  cellular
fungus  body.  Suberin,  a  substance
in  the  walls  of  cork  cells,  inhibits
water  loss  from  woody  stems,
whereas  tannin,  another  chemical
present  in  cork,  acts  as  a  natural
fungicide and insecticide. Injury to
either the epidermis or cork results
in uncontrollable water loss and the
formation  of  openings  through
which  unwelcome  organisms  ﬁnd
ready access to the plant’s interior.
Thus,  rapid  wound  healing  in  plants  is  as  important  in  the  ﬁght  against
infection as it is in animals.

Wounds left when this tree was shorn of
its branches are almost completely cov-
ered with corky wound tissue.

An opening made in herbaceous tissues is initially sealed by the exposed
cells on the wound surface, which collapse and die. Subsequent deposition
of  waxy  substances,  similar  to  cutin  and  suberin,  complete  the  healing
process. On young twigs, a cork layer may also bridge the injured area.

Scars  on  tree  trunks  and  branches  with  well-established  secondary
growth are ﬁrst covered with callus, a parenchyma tissue arising from the
division of cells near the wound surface. Cork then slowly encroaches from
the area around the injury. A few years after branches have been trimmed
from a tree or shrub, cork development may have completely obliterated all
traces of the work. For healing to be effective, it is important that woody
branches be cut as close as possible to the supportive trunks because it is
difﬁcult for cork to grow over projecting stumps.

Grafting  techniques  that  gardeners  employ  unavoidably  create  scars.
When a graft takes hold, proliferation of callus tissue establishes the ﬁrst
connection between the stock and scion. Some of the callus cells then dif-
ferentiate into vascular and cork cambia, uniting those same tissues in the

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 102

102

CHAPTER 5

White latex oozes
from a wound in a
euphorbia stem. It
will quickly dry to
seal the damaged
tissues.

graft partners. Finally, newly formed cork and secondary xylem and phloem
enclose the graft union.

An injured plant cannot escape being contaminated by the countless fun-
gal spores ﬂoating in the atmosphere and settling on plant surfaces. Because
the spores quickly germinate among the newly exposed cells of a wound,
isolation of infected areas is necessary to protect healthy tissues. In as much
as  phloem  forms  an  ideal  channel  through  which  fungus  mycelium  can
grow, the vascular tissue provides ready access to every part of the plant by
way  of  its  connected,  food-laden  sieve  tubes.  Injured  phloem,  therefore,
rapidly responds with the formation of a substance called callose and a spe-
cial protein that plugs sieve plate pores (see chapter 4), to seal broken sieve
tubes near the wound. Meanwhile, foods are diverted from the injured tis-
sue to functioning phloem in adjacent areas. Another isolating defense sys-
tem entails discarding infected leaves, thereby transferring the pathogens to
the soil where they assist in the decomposition of the leaf litter. Even before
an  infected  leaf  separates  from  its  stem,  a  tannin-containing  cork  layer
forms across the soon-to-be-exposed leaf scar to secure it against the spread
of microorganisms.

In many species, exudates form effective barriers between injured and
healthy tissues. For example, most conifers produce sticky, aromatic resin
that  oozes  from  specialized  resin  canals  when  they  are  broken.  Resin  is
formed in all parts of a conifer tree, is insoluble in water, and hardens on
exposure to air. Although gums are different from resins in their chemical
composition and are water-soluble, viscous liquids, they also dry to form

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 103

Adaptations for Protection

103

hard coats on wounds. Gums are commonplace products of several species
of woody ﬂowering plants, including Acacia, the source of gum arabic.

Latex (from Latin for “ﬂuid”) is a white or colorless exudate produced by
several  species  of  angiosperms,  notably  members  of  the  fig  family
(Moraceae) and spurge family (Euphorbiaceae), including poinsettia. Latex
contains, among other components, particles of rubber that effectively seal
small scars. Latex, resins, and some gums are known to have bactericidal,
fungicidal, and anti-herbivore properties.

These  plant  products  have  considerable  economic  importance.  Resins
are  used  in  the  production  of  turpentine,  rosin,  lacquer,  varnish,  and
incense. Gums are used as sizing agents, food thickeners, and stabilizers in
emulsions—such as chocolate milk, in which the gum holds chocolate par-
ticles  in  suspension.  Latex  is  the  source  of  natural  rubber,  almost  all  of
which is obtained from one tropical tree species, Hevea brasiliensis. Chewing
gum is manufactured from another type of latex, called chicle, tapped from
the bark of the chicle tree (Manilkara zapota), a native of Central America.

CHEMICAL PROTECTION

Fundamentally,  evolution  takes  place  at  the  gene  level.  Genetic  change
leads to modiﬁcations in the organism’s biochemistry, which, in turn, are
reﬂected in observable variations in morphological features and physiolog-
ical response.

There are two parts to the biochemistry of plants. One involves the life-
sustaining chemistry of basic metabolism and includes photosynthesis; the
extraction of energy from foods by cellular respiration; and the construc-
tion of cellulose, starch, fats and proteins. Most important among the pro-
teins are those forming the structure of enzymes—catalysts that enable the
chemistry of cells to function with great efﬁciency. Biochemical pathways
branching from these essential processes lead to the synthesis of countless
secondary products, including those that function as chemical defenses.

Basic metabolism, the remnant product of early evolution, is essentially
the same in all photosynthetic plants. And, as support for the concept that
all  living  organisms  evolved  from  the  same  ancestral  ﬁrst  cells,  several
aspects  of  basic  metabolism  are  common  to  both  plants  and  animals.
Secondary products, on the other hand, are the biochemical markers dis-
tinguishing plant species, families, and higher orders in the taxonomic hier-
archy. A few of these chemical substances deserve our attention.

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 104

104

CHAPTER 5

The secondary compounds called tannins are a diverse group of mole-
cules characterized by their ability to bind with proteins. In such a role, tan-
nins quickly inactivate enzymes and thereby cause cells to die. Tannins are
produced by many species of higher plants—especially angiosperms, gym-
nosperms, and ferns—and are generally absent from lower forms.

Tannins are found in leaves, unripe fruits, bark, heartwood, and roots. In
living cells, these substances are safely stored in special structures to pre-
vent them from disrupting normal metabolic activities; when such cells are
broken, however, the tannins are released. In dead tissues, such as wood and
cork,  tannins  are  present  in  the  cell  walls.  The  protein-binding,  enzyme-
inactivating capacity of tannins make them superior deterrents to insects and
other herbivores, and substances effectively inhibiting fungal and bacterial
growth. For example, heartwood’s greater resistance to invasive insects and
microorganisms, compared with sapwood, is directly attributable to a ﬁve-
to ten-fold difference in tannin content between the two tissues.

During fruit ripening, tannin molecules disintegrate and are replaced by
increasing amounts of sugar. The presence of tannins in plant tissues is eas-
ily detected by the astringent (dry, puckering) sensation that they cause in
one’s mouth. A green apple or strong brew of tea bear convincing evidence
of that fact. The dryness is due to salivary proteins being bound together
by the tannins and, thereby, reducing their lubricating action. Interestingly,
it is that same astringency that lends appeal to such beverages as tea, wine,
and cocoa.

The name tannin was originally given to those plant extracts responsible
for  turning  raw  animal  skins  into  leather  during  the  tanning  process—a
procedure that has been known since the dawn of civilization. The word tan
has its origin in the old English word meaning oak bark. Bark from various
species of oak, chestnut, pine, spruce, and black locust are still among the
important  sources  of  commercially  used  tannins.  When  animal  skins  are
soaked  in  a  concentrated  tannin  solution,  the  chemical  permeates  and
attaches itself to the protein ﬁbers and gives the leather the same degree of
resistance to microorganisms as that of cork.

One of the most interesting groups of secondary plant products is the
alkaloids. These nitrogen-containing substances generally possess alkaline-
like qualities (hence, their name) and, when introduced into animals, have
wide-ranging  physiological  effects.  The  function  of  alkaloids  in  plants  is
not known, although they may protect against predators, in part, because of
their bitter taste. But there are some insects that protect themselves against
larger predators, such as birds, by making alkaloid-containing plants a reg-

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 105

Adaptations for Protection

105

ular  part  of  their  diet.  The  chemicals  are  stored,  without  harm,  in  the
insect’s bodies.

Some authors believe that alkaloids are merely end products of randomly
evolving biochemical pathways, for which the producer plants have no use.
The distribution of alkaloids in the plant kingdom is conﬁned to several
species of fungi and club mosses and a limited number of ﬂowering plant
families, including: Amarylidaceae (amarylis), Apocyanaceae (dogbane), Ber-
beridaceae (barberry), Fabaceae (pea), Papaveraceae (poppy), Ranunculaceae
(buttercup), and Solanaceae (nightshade).

From the ﬁrst use of plants in folk medicine to the development of our
present  pharmaceutical  industry,  alkaloid-containing  plant  species  have
played  a  prominent  role  in  human  medicine.  Extracts  of  alkaloids  are
employed as pain relievers, cardiac and respiratory stimulants, muscle relax-
ants,  blood  vessel  constrictors,  cures  for  malaria,  and  pupil  dilators  used
during eye examinations.

Some alkaloids have mild or strongly addictive side effects: caffeine in
coffee and tea; nicotine from tobacco; cocaine from the leaves of the trop-
ical coca plant; morphine from the opium poppy. Heroin, a synthetic deriv-
ative of morphine, is an even more powerful narcotic than the parent chem-
ical.  Many  of  the  so-called  psychedelic  drugs  are  alkaloids,  including
mescaline from the peyote cactus and psilocybin from a species of mush-
room.  Such  plants  have  been  used  for  centuries  in  the  rituals  of  several
American Indian tribes. The hallucinogen LSD, is a chemically modiﬁed
form of natural lysergic acid—an alkaloid from ergots, which are abnormal
fungal growths on grasses.

Social problems arising from drug abuse have, unfortunately, given some
plant products a bad reputation. But that should not detract from the fact
that human welfare has been vastly improved by the many wonderful chem-
icals that plants alone are able to produce. One-fourth of the prescription
drugs sold in the United States in the latter part of the 20th century had
their origins in plants.

Alkaloids are among many secondary plant products, known as phytotox-
ins, that are poisonous to animals (phyto is derived from a Greek word for
“plant”). A large number of angiosperm species contain one or more such
substances.  Some  phytotoxins  are  distributed  throughout  entire  plants,
whereas others are found only in speciﬁc organs. It is not explainable why
rhubarb petioles may be safely eaten, when their attached leaf blades con-
tain sufﬁcient oxalic acid to cause muscle and kidney damage, coma, even
death. The roots and shoots of a tomato plant, but not its fruit and seeds,

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 106

106

CHAPTER 5

contain the violently toxic alkaloid solanine, possibly to fend off herbivores
but not harm animals that help disperse the seeds.

All  parts  of  poison  hemlock  (Conium  maculatum)  are  charged  with  the
alkaloid  coniine.  The  most  famous  victim  of  this  poison  was  the  Greek
philosopher Socrates who, having offended the Athenian government and
according to the custom of the times, was forced to drink a hemlock brew.
Ricin, one of nature’s most lethal substances, is present throughout castor
bean (Ricinus communis), especially in its attractive seeds. Only one to three
seeds, if eaten, can be fatal to a child; two to eight can kill an adult. In the
preparation of castor oil, the ricin is removed.

Fortunately,  many  phytotoxins  cause  vomiting,  a  reaction  that  purges
them from the body of an animal before their more sinister work is under-
taken. Some plant species possess repellent odors as a warning to animals
that poisons are present. And, it has been suggested, the purple-black color
of some toxic fruits, such as those of nightshade (Solanum spp.), give a clear
“do not eat” signal to birds and other vertebrates.

MODE OF OPERATION OF CHEMICAL PROTECTANTS

When eaten, most plant poisons inhibit digestive processes or strike direct-
ly at the functions of the heart, liver, kidney, or central nervous system. Less
harmful species, such as poison ivy (Toxicodendron radicans), simply produce
substances that, on contact, cause skin irritations.

Secondary plant products having a subtler mode of operation are those
affecting the reproductive behavior and life cycles of animal predators. For
example, some plant substances resemble animal hormones in their molec-
ular structure. When introduced into an animal’s diet, they change repro-
ductive  cycles  in  females  or  cause  growth  abnormalities  and  sterility  in
males.  Other  plant  products  disrupt  the  larva-to-adult  metamorphosis  of
certain  insects  and,  hence,  interrupt  the  completion  of  life  cycles.  All  of
these, over time, can potentially reduce the number of herbivores in the
local environment.

The antibiotic penicillin is synthesized by various species of the fungus
Penicillium, a common, blue-green-colored mold on rotting fruits and pres-
ent  in  blue  cheese.  Penicillin  and  other  antibiotics,  both  natural  and 
synthetic in origin, destroy microorganisms in one of several ways: They
interfere with cell wall formation, affect the functions of cell membranes,
or  disrupt  the  synthesis  of  proteins  and  other  vital  cellular  substances.
Although  none  of  the  biochemical  products  of  higher  plants  function

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 107

SOME POISONOUS HOUSE AND GARDEN PLANTS

PLANT 

TOXIC PARTS  

Adaptations for Protection

107

amaryllis (Hippeastrum puniceum) 
anemone (Anemone tuberosum) 
apple (Malus sylvestris) 
apricot (Prunus armeniacea) 
asparagus (Asparagus ofﬁcinalis) 
azalea (Rhododendron spp.) 
buttercup (Ranunculus spp.) 
caladium (Caladium bicolor) 
croton (Croton spp.) 
crown-of-thorns (Euphorbia milii) 
daffodil (Narcissus pseudonarcissus) 
datura (Datura spp.) 
eggplant (Solanum melongena) 
foxglove (Digitalis spp.) 
gloriosa lily (Gloriosa spp.) 
holly (Ilex spp.) 
hyacinth (Hyacinthus orientalis) 
hydrangea (Hydrangea spp.) 
iris (Iris spp.) 
ivy (Hedera helix) 
lantana (Lantana spp.) 
larkspur (Delphinium spp.) 
lily-of-the-valley (Convallaria majalis) 
lobelia (Lobelia cardinalis) 
lupine (Lupinus spp.) 
mistletoe (Phoradendron spp.) 
monkshood (Aconitum ssp.) 
morning-glory (Ipomoea tricolor) 
mountain laurel (Kalmia latifolia) 
narcissus (Narcissus spp.) 
oleander (Nerium oleander) 
peach (Prunus persica) 
philodendron (Philodendron spp.) 
poinsettia (Euphorbia pulcherrima) 
potato (Solanum tuberosum) 
privet (Ligustrum japonicum) 
rhododendron (Rhododendron spp.) 
rhubarb (Rheum rhabarbarum) 
sweet pea (Lathyrus spp.) 
tobacco (Nicotiana spp.) 
tomato (Lycopersicon lycopersicum) 
Virginia creeper (Parthenocissus quinquefolia) berries  
wisteria (Wisteria spp.) 

bulbs  
entire plant  
seeds, leaves  
seeds, leaves  
berries  
entire plant  
entire plant  
entire plant, especially leaves, tubers  
seeds  
entire plant  
bulbs  
entire plant, especially seeds, leaves  
leaves, stems  
entire plant  
entire plant, especially tubers  
berries  
bulbs  
entire plant  
leaves, rhizomes  
berries, leaves  
entire plant, especially berries  
entire plant  
entire plant  
entire plant  
entire plant  
entire plant, especially berries  
entire plant, especially roots, seeds  
seeds  
entire plant  
bulbs  
entire plant, especially leaves  
leaves, seeds  
entire plant  
leaves, stems, milky sap  
leaves, stems, green tubers, sprouts  
leaves, berries  
entire plant  
leaf blades  
entire plant, especially seeds  
entire plant  
leaves, stems  

pods, seeds  

Adapted from E. M. Schmutz and L. B. Hamilton, 1979. Plants that Poison. Northland Press, Flagstaff, Arizona.

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 108

108

CHAPTER 5

exactly in the manner of antibiotics, there are several substances known to
have  speciﬁc  antimicrobial  activity.  Some  of  these,  called  phytoalexins
(Greek: alexi, “to ward off”), are synthesized only at the site of pathogen
invasion. Others are present at all times, throughout plants, ready to be
mobilized to injured tissues.

OTHER METHODS OF DEFENSE

A slightly different use of a phytotoxin is found in the popular houseplant
Dieffenbachia, the leaves and stems of which possess special cells containing
needle-like crystals of calcium oxalate, called raphides. If eaten, the raphides
penetrate  mouth  and  throat  tissues  causing  painful  swelling,  difﬁcult
breathing, and loss of speech—symptoms that may last for a week or more.
Understandably, the species’ common name is dumbcane.

The secondary products of some plant species impart unpleasant, acrid
odors;  stinging  sensations  in  the  eyes;  or  hot,  peppery  tastes  that  deter
many animal predators. These same odors and tastes, however, stimulate
the taste buds of many people.

Plants  may  ﬁnd  chemical  protection  in  alternate,  less  costly  ways  in
terms of energy and nutrient utilization than through the synthesis of nox-
ious substances. Some species simply accumulate minerals from the soil—
copper, lead, cadmium, manganese, selenium, and nitrates—that are toxic
to animals. Lignin deposits in cell walls of ﬁbrous and woody tissues, pri-
marily used for support, make plant organs both indigestible and coarse in
texture.

The most elementary method for protecting leaves and stems is for the
plant to deplete them of all food substances, except those needed for imme-
diate  use.  Nutritionally  poor  shoots  are,  at  least  temporarily,  protected
because  animals  selectively  eat  plant  species  or  parts  having  the  highest
food value from among those that are available. But, for the success of this
protective strategy the possession of special, underground structures where
reserve foods may be stored is a necessity. Such adaptations are discussed in
the following chapter.

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 109

CHAPTER 6

Adaptations to Fulfill Basic Needs

COMPETITION BETWEEN PLANTS

In nature’s balance the blessings the environment bestows on living things
outweigh  the  afﬂictions  capable  of  destroying  them.  Thanks  to  such  a
slightly favorable balance of good fortune, life is sustained on planet Earth.
Among the beneﬁts plants enjoy are light, water, minerals from the soil, and
gases from the atmosphere—precious commodities exploited by plants in
both ordinary and extraordinary ways.

In return for what they take from the environment, plants contribute to
its improvement. Spreading roots stabilize soils against erosion; vast vol-
umes of liberated water vapor cool and moisten the air; leaf canopies offer
shade; trees act as windbreaks; and the ground is enriched with decompos-
ing leaf litter. And to the human mind, which responds not only to physi-
cal experience, plants bring pleasure by transforming a bleak world of rock,
soil, and urban development into a more pleasant place in which to live.

Paradoxically,  an  abundance  of  light,  water,  and  minerals,  especially
when  combined  with  favorable  climate,  adds  to  rather  than  reduces  the
problems of plant development. Such conditions encourage an abundance
of plants, pitted against each other in competition for available resources
and growing space.

Most garden landscapes are well stocked with plants. Unlike in natural
habitats, however, species competition is controlled by the gardener’s con-
scientious  pruning,  thinning,  and  spacing  of  specimens.  Plants  are  set  in
such a way as to avoid casting shadows or grouped to create needed shade.
Plentiful and uniformly distributed supplies of water and fertilizer meet the
needs  of  each  plant.  Below  ground,  roots  may  encroach  on  neighboring

109

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 110

110

CHAPTER 6

plants’  growing  space,  but  can  be  controlled  if,  in  so  doing,  they  cause
noticeable harm.

In the wild, competition between species can be ﬁerce—a fact seemingly
contradicted by the apparent tranquility of a cool, shady forest. Especially
when limited resources are at stake, plants in densely crowded populations
are engaged in a life-and-death struggle to obtain their share.

A direct solution to the problem of sharing limited resources is the use
of  chemical  means  to  eliminate  competitors  of  the  same  or  unrelated
species. Such is the case with allelopathy described in chapter 1, which is
only  effective  in  regions  of  low  rainfall  where  germination-inhibiting
chemicals are able to accumulate in the soil around the defending plant.

In communities of mixed species, some inevitably assume dominant roles
because of the relatively large space they occupy, their greater use of soil
water  and  mineral  supplies,  and  their  interception  of  most  of  the  direct
light. But dominant species pay a price for such favors when they receive
the full impact of the environment’s destructive forces, especially the dam-
aging effect of wind. Subdominant species, adapted to existing with a lesser
share of community resources, enjoy the protection given by their more vig-
orous competitors.

Despite  being  subdominant  in  a  community,  some  species  overcome
competitive pressures by use of modiﬁed stems, leaves, and roots—organs
cleverly adapted to reach bright light, absorb and store water in unusual
ways, or exploit unconventional sources of minerals. Many such structures
are familiar parts of horticultural species.

REACHING TOWARD THE SUN

Outstretched like arms and ﬁngers, stems spread leafy mantles to intercept
light,  the  vital  energy  source  for  photosynthesis.  Endowed  with  the
strength  of  abundant  secondary  tissues,  trees  reach  great  heights  where
leaves are free of shading. Low-growing shrubs and herbs fare poorly in the
presence  of  tall,  overhanging  competitors,  unless  they  are  shade-tolerant
species, that is, they have the capacity to photosynthesize in low light inten-
sities. Shade-tolerance is a well-established physiological characteristic of
many species, so much so that their exposure to direct sunlight can be fatal.
In such species, bright light destroys the intricate, ﬁne structure of chloro-
plasts and brings an end to photosynthesis.

The case of most sun-loving species is equally calamitous when attempt-
ing to grow in heavy shade. The seedlings develop spindly stems, lacking

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 111

Adaptations to Fulfill Basic Needs

111

the strength to support themselves and the weight of their leaves. The seeds
of many sun-loving species have adapted to avoid germination under a leaf
canopy by responding to light quality differences between direct sunlight
and that which passes through the shading leaves (see chapter 1). But such
a  system  restricts  sun-loving  species  to  places  devoid  of  larger  plants  or
periods  when  surrounding  deciduous  trees  have  lost  their  foliage.  In  an
effort  to  grow  the  shortest  distance  to  the  brightest  available  light,  the
stems  of  some  sun-loving  species  grow  away  from  shade  in  a  horizontal
position;  in  other  species  the  stems  grow  vertically  but  use  nearby  rigid
objects as supports.

SPREADING STEMS

When stems recline on the soil surface or grow below ground, they have no
need  to  spend  energy  or  nutrients  on  the  construction  of  metabolically
expensive strengthening tissues. Thus, they are able to direct all of their
resources into a burst of rapid, primary growth that carries the leaves into
more favorable illumination.

Horizontal  stems  growing  aboveground  are  called  runners,  or  stolons
(Latin for “shoot”); those growing underground are rhizomes (Greek: rhi-
zoma,  “root”).  From  nodes  on  stolons  and  rhizomes,  roots  and  upright
shoots develop, the latter from axillary buds. Roots arising from the sides
of  stems,  as  these  do,  are  described  as  adventitious  roots (Latin:  adventicius,
“coming  from  outside”).  In  a  broad  sense,  the  word  applies  to  any  root
emerging in an unusual position, such as those that grow on stem or leaf
cuttings.

Stolons generally emerge from near the crown of a plant, bend under
their own weight, touch the soil, and develop plantlets at their tips. These,
in  turn,  send  out  more  runners  in  a  stepwise  fashion  claiming  an  ever-
widening circle of ground. Thus, a strawberry patch may grow from a sin-
gle, spreading plant by this natural method of vegetative propagation. It is
this same stoloniferous habit that makes some ornamental species well suit-
ed for use as ground covers.

The proliferation of underground rhizomes is less apparent, but no less
effective, in the occupation of large surface areas of soil. As long as favor-
ably lit places are open for encroachment, the relentless advance of peren-
nial stoloniferous and rhizomatous species may continue indeﬁnitely. A gar-
dener who has cleared a bed of such species knows how persistent they are
when, for years after his labors, fragments of broken stems send up sprouts.

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 112

112

CHAPTER 6

a

b

c

(a) A stolon, or runner. (b) A rhizome (an underground stem). (c) A sucker (an upright
shoot, arising from a horizontal root).

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 113

Adaptations to Fulfill Basic Needs

113

Another  propagative  method,  found  in  blackberry  and  raspberry,  for
example, is the development of suckers. A sucker is an upright shoot arising
from a horizontal root. Because of its unusual place of origin, a sucker is
classiﬁed  as  an  adventitious  shoot.  A  common  problem  with  grafted  hybrid
roses  is  the  growth  of  suckers  from  adventitious  buds  located  below  the
graft union. Suckers of this type must be removed because they bear the
unwanted characteristics of the root stock and deprive the scion of nutri-
ents and water.

CLIMBING STRUCTURES

Most species are unable to elevate leaves high above the ground on thin,
herbaceous stems. But not so with climbing vines that make deft use of their
specially adapted organs and the strength of suitable supports to accomplish
such a feat. The stems of some vines grow in a spiral manner around upright
objects such as small trunks of shrubs or saplings, fence posts, and telephone
poles.  Stems  displaying  such  characteristic  growth  are  called  twiners.  The
higher a twining stem grows, the more tightly it hugs its support.

Bean plants lift their leaves into the light
on coiling twiners.

The terminal leaﬂets of sweet pea’s com-
pound leaves are modiﬁed into grasping
tendrils.

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 114

114

CHAPTER 6

Virginia creeper
(Parthenocissus
spp.) clings to a
wall with adhesive
disks at the tips of
specialized
branches.

Other  species 

form  special
grasping  tendrils
that  are  either
modiﬁed  leaf  parts  or  short  stems
derived from the growth of axillary
buds.  Tendrils  coil  around  small
objects with which they come into
contact—the  stems  of  other  plants
or  garden  stakes,  fence  wires,  and
string  supports.  Once  anchored,
the principal stem grows upward a
short  distance  before  sending  out
more  tendrils.  Leaf  tendrils are
adapted from leaﬂets of compound
leaves  (sweet  pea,  for  example),
stipules  (green  briar),  or  petioles
(clematis).

Adventitious climbing roots growing from
the side of an ivy stem are able to pene-
trate tiny crevices in a supportive surface.

In other species, climbing struc-
tures  include  short  branches  with
adhesive  disks  at  their  tips.  With
such  devices,  Virginia  creeper
(Parthenocissus
spp.)  clings  tena-
ciously to the walls of buildings. Or
the climbing stems of ivy, for example, form adventitious roots that pene-
trate and expand in cracks in tree bark, wooden fences, and masonry. With
age, some climbing stems become woody and bear heavy leaf loads; but by
then, they are so securely anchored it is extremely difﬁcult to separate them
from their supports.

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 115

Adaptations to Fulfill Basic Needs

115

LIANAS AND EPIPHYTES

Commonly seen in tropical rain forests are long-stemmed, woody, creeping
vines known as lianas (French) that festoon tall trees. These species begin
life from seeds in the deep shade of the forest ﬂoor but rapidly grow to hun-
dreds of feet in length to reach the light. They spread their leaves as the
stems  work  their  way  through  the  treetops,  hang  suspended  from  out-
stretched branches, or become looped to adjacent trees. Liana stems form
aerial walkways along which arboreal animals travel great distances; and the
vines are an indispensable mode of transport for movie Tarzans.

Other species, growing in wet forest habitats from the tropics to tem-
perate zones, are epiphytes (Greek: epi, “upon”; phytum, “plant”), plants that
spend their lives clinging to tree branches. In such elevated locations their
leaves  receive  optimum  illumination.  Epiphytes’  roots  are  used  more  as
grasping rather than absorbing organs; few ever reach the soil. Some of the
special adaptations epiphytes possess to obtain water and nutrients are dis-
cussed  below  (see  Special  Methods  of  Water  Uptake).  Many  epiphytes  grow
from windblown seeds or spores, or from seeds deposited on the tree’s bark
by animals. The most precarious aspect of the epiphytes’ existence is that
they must share the fate of their supports. Collapse of the host tree gener-
ally results in the death of the plant squatters.

SUPPORTIVE ROOTS

In the soft, wet soils and crowded conditions of tropical rain forests, some
trees have added supports around their bases, thereby gaining a signiﬁcant
competitive edge in the struggle to reach light at ever greater heights. The
underground  portions  of  the  tree  roots  are  shallow  and  spreading,  but
aboveground, huge, wedge-shaped buttress roots may extend 10–15 feet (3–5
m) up the sides of the trunk and for an equal or greater distance away from
the tree. Buttress roots are common features of several arborescent species
of ﬁg (Ficus). Other tropical species, including screwpine (Pandanus spp.),
mangrove  (Rhizophora spp.,  Laguncularia spp.,  among  others),  and  banyan
(Ficus benghalensis) form prop roots (or stilt roots) for support. These adventi-
tious roots arise some distance up the trunk or from branches, from whence
they  grow  downward  to  the  ground.  For  the  same  supportive  purpose,
series of prop roots also grow from nodes around the base of corn (Zea mays)
stems when they become top-heavy with their leaf and fruit loads.

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 116

116

CHAPTER 6

Prop roots growing from the base of a
corn (Zea) stem.

In the soft, rain-soaked soils of its tropical
habitat, screwpine (Pandanus spp.)
depends on well-developed prop roots
for support.

Buttress roots support the trunk of a ﬁcus tree.

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 117

Adaptations to Fulfill Basic Needs

117

Water is stored in a bromeliad’s cup-shaped leaf rosette.

SPECIAL METHODS OF WATER UPTAKE

Most terrestrial plants absorb water from the soil through their roots. In a
few species, water condensed from fog on leaf surfaces is drawn through
open  stomata.  Although  little  water  is  absorbed  by  most  leaves,  they  are
instrumental in channeling rain to the roots, either down petioles and stems
or directly from the blades to the soil. The leaves of many tropical rain-
forest species ensure rapid drying of their surfaces (to discourage growth of
fungi, lichens, or mosses) and direct the ﬂow of water by having smooth
blades  terminating  in  pointed  drip  tips.  The  leaves  of  the  popular  house-
plant,  heart-leaf  philodendron  (Philodendron  scandens),  a  native  of  tropical
America, illustrate this type of modiﬁcation.

The bromeliads, an interesting family of plants, mostly from the New
World,  include  many  epiphytic  species,  especially  in  the  genus  Tillandsia.
Living high on the branches of supportive host trees, their principal source
of water is rain collected by the leaves. In some species, cupped leaf rosettes
form tanks from which water is absorbed by special cells on the leaf surface.
These leafy reservoirs are refuges for many species of small, amphibious
animals, as well as breeding pools for mosquito larvae. Animal wastes, com-
bined with rotting vegetable matter and dust collecting in the bromeliad
tanks supply mineral nutrients to the plant.

Several other bromeliad species have leaves covered with mats of epi-
dermal hairs that trap and absorb rainwater as it streams down the plants.

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 118

118

CHAPTER 6

Of these, the best-known species is
Spanish  moss  (Tillandsia  usneoides),
so-called  for  its  mossy  appearance
as it hangs from its host’s branches.
Some species of tropical, epiphytic
orchids  possess  aerial  roots able  to
collect water vapor from the atmos-
phere as well as rain. The moisture
is  absorbed  through  a  soft,  white,
spongy  tissue,  called  velamen,  that
covers  the  roots  and  gives  them  a
silvery appearance.

ADAPTATIONS FOR WATER
STORAGE

All but the green tip of an orchid’s aerial
root is covered with a spongy, white vela-
men through which water vapor is
absorbed from the atmosphere.

To  obtain  water,  perennial  species
in  arid  regions  either  develop  a
long tap root to reach underground
sources  or,  as  is  common  among
many species of cactus, spread horizontal mats of ﬁbrous roots (chapter 2)
just  below  the  soil  surface.  Although  shallow  roots  become  parched  and
lifeless in the heat of summer, they quickly return to growth and full meta-
bolic activity within hours after rain has soaked the soil. Having taken full
advantage  of  infrequent  and  unpredictable  water  supplies,  many  desert
plants survive periods of drought by using water stored in leaves or stems.
The  succulent  leaves  and  stems  of  such  genera  as  Mesembryanthemum,
Sedum, Crassula, and Echeveria contain enlarged water-storage cells capable
of supplying the plants’ basic needs for many months. Stem succulents such
as cacti and cactuslike euphorbias, sometimes store sufﬁcient moisture to
last for years. As much as 95 percent of the total volume of succulent plants
is devoted to water storage. And although most small succulents die by the
time half of the stored water is used, some species of cactus have been found
to  survive  a  60–70  percent  moisture  loss  without  damage  or  signiﬁcant
impairment of physiological functions.

The ﬂat, leaﬂike stems of Opuntia cactus, called cladodes, function both as
water-storage  organs  and  light-collecting  surfaces.  When  branching
occurs, cladodes are oriented with their ﬂat sides facing in different direc-
tions.  Thus,  in  the  course  of  a  day,  only  a  portion  of  the  cladodes  are 

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 119

Adaptations to Fulfill Basic Needs

119

The spherical stems of barrel cacti function as organs of water-storage and photosyn-
thesis. With its parallel ribs, only a portion of each stem is exposed to direct light.

The ﬂat stems (cladodes) of Opuntia cactus (left) and tubular stems of a euphorbia store
large quantities of water for the plants’ use during dry seasons.

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 120

120

CHAPTER 6

subject to the sun’s full intensity at one time. In like manner, the ribs and
protuberances that are common features of the barrel-shaped and cylindri-
cal stems of other cactus and euphorbia species, help to shade a part of the
plants’ surface as the sun changes position. Those same pleats and ribs also
enable succulent stems to undergo accordion-like expansion and contrac-
tion between times of maximum water storage and periods when reserves
are depleted.

Water storage on a grand scale occurs in a few tree species possessing
unusually  large  trunks,  specially  adapted  for  that  purpose.  Baobab
(Adansonia)  trees  of  the  dry  savannas  of  east  Africa  can  store  as  much  as
25,000  gallons  (95,000  L)  of  water  in  trunks  attaining  circumferences  of 
90 feet (27.5 m). Most plant enthusiasts are likely to encounter such species
only when visiting botanical gardens.

UNDERGROUND FOOD- AND WATER-STORAGE ORGANS

Compared  with  perishable  vegetables  such  as  lettuce  and  celery,  onions,
potatoes, and fresh ginger are ideally suited to long-term storage, with lit-
tle  change  in  either  food  value  or  water  content.  Classed  among  several
types of modiﬁed, underground stems, these organs are adapted to enter
dormancy to withstand drought or cold temperatures when, under natural
circumstances, they remain in the soil. Fortiﬁed with moderate amounts of
stored water and abundant reserve food, such stems are ready to grow into
full-ﬂedged plants when environmental conditions permit. The high con-
centrations of food molecules within their cells acts as antifreeze that pre-
vents frost damage (see chapter 5).

An onion is a typical bulb. It is a compact shoot, consisting of numerous
layers  of  colorless,  ﬂeshy,  scalelike  leaf  bases  mounted  on  a  small,  disk-
shaped stem. The outermost scale leaves are thin and brown, protecting the
bulb against invasion by soil microorganisms and insects. A central apical
bud contains immature foliage leaves that eventually emerge from the bulb.
Until  the  foliage  leaves  begin  photosynthesis,  food  reserves  in  the  ﬂeshy
scale leaves sustain growth.

Axillary  buds,  developing  between  the  bulb’s  scale  leaves,  enlarge  to
become new bulbs. Garlic cloves are formed in such a manner. In perenni-
al bulbs such as daffodils, ﬂowers develop from axillary buds, leaving the
apical  bud  free  to  develop  foliage  leaves  in  successive  years.  Whereas  in
tulip, an annual bulb, the apical bud grows into the ﬂowering stem, thus
ending apical growth; so each year’s crop of tulip ﬂowers is formed from
new bulbs.

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 121

Adaptations to Fulfill Basic Needs

121

foliage leaves

ﬂower bud

scale leaves

ﬂeshy, food-storage leaves

daughter bulb (developed 
from an axillary bud)

stem

roots

An onion bulb consists of layered, ﬂeshy
leaf bases attached to a short stem.
Numerous adventitious roots arise from
the underside of the stem.

Parts of a tulip bulb

Adventitious roots arise from the
bulb’s  ﬂat  stem.  In  some  species,
when  root  tips  become  firmly
anchored to the soil, the upper root
region contracts by the shortening
and thickening of cortex cells. Such
contractile roots serve to pull the bulb
to an appropriate depth in the soil
for protection.

Horticulturists  propagate  bul-
bous species by digging up the old
bulbs and splitting off newly formed
bulbs  for  individual  planting.  And
the loose scales of lily bulbs may be
broken  apart  and  placed  under
moist, humid conditions where they
develop one or more small bulbs at
the base of each scale.

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 122

122

CHAPTER 6

Vegetative 
reproduction of a
gladiolus corm

Gladiolus corms
are short, swollen
stems bearing dry
leaf bases. Ridges
on the corm’s sur-
face are nodes.

dry leaf bases

daughter corm

cormel

mother corm 
(from previous year)

contractile root

Although corms resemble bulbs in their external appearance, they are dis-
similar in structure. Crocus and gladiolus are cormous species. Corms are
short, swollen, underground stems, surrounded by the remains of the pre-
vious year’s leaf bases; regular roots and contractile roots emerge from the
underside of the stem. Parallel lines seen on a defoliated corm are nodes,

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 123

Adaptations to Fulfill Basic Needs

123

The ﬂeshy iris rhi-
zome, a modiﬁed
stem for food and
water storage,
bears adventitious
roots.

A potato tuber is a
modiﬁed ﬂeshy
stem bearing axil-
lary buds, the eyes.

separated  by  broader  internodes.
Growth  of 
leaves  and  flowers
occurs at the expense of the corm’s
total 
food  reserves.  Following
ﬂower formation, one or more new
corms develop above the old organ,
which  eventually  withers.  In  addi-
tion, several small corms, or cormels,
may  form  around  the  stem’s  base;
these  must  grow  to  their  full  size
before producing ﬂowers.

Another  underground,  food-
and water-storage stem, formed by
ginger, bamboo, calla lily, and cer-
tain  species  of  iris,  for  example,  is

A dahlia’s root tubers store large amounts
of food.

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 124

124

CHAPTER 6

an enlarged  ﬂeshy  rhizome. Typical of all stems, rhizomes have internodes
and  nodes  bearing  leaves  and  axillary  buds.  Flower  stalks  develop  from
some of the buds. Rhizomes are anchored by adventitious roots arising at
nodes; several rhizomatous species produce contractile roots.

The white (Irish) potato is another stem adaptation. Called a stem tuber,
it is the swollen tip of a rhizome, not of the ﬂeshy type. Like rhizomes, stem
tubers display the characteristics of the organ from which they are adapted:
Axillary buds (the “eyes”) are located at nodes; the areas between the eyes
are internodes. When the buds develop into shoots, adventitious roots and
rhizomes form below them; the rhizomes ultimately bear more tubers. The
food reserves of a tuber are completely exhausted by such growth process-
es.  Root  tubers (or  tuberous  roots)  are  formed  by  such  species  as  dahlia,
tuberous begonia, and sweet potato. These enlarged organs bear adventi-
tious shoots, which, in turn, form adventitious roots that expand to become
tubers.

Rhizomes, and stem and root tubers are used extensively by horticultur-
ists as propagative organs because they can be cut into pieces and planted.
However, the gardener must be sure that at least one axillary bud (or adven-
titious bud in the case of root tubers) is present on each piece. As with all
methods of vegetative propagation, the offspring are clones of the parent
plant and, therefore, possess identical characteristics.

SAPROPHYTES AND PARASITES

Moist  soils  are  alive  with  fungi  and  bacteria.  Unlike  photosynthesizing
plants that produce and store their foods, soil microorganisms absorb food
molecules  from  dead,  rotting,  organic  (plant  and  animal)  matter  and  use
them directly in growth and reproductive processes. Based on their mode
of  food  acquisition,  such  organisms  are  classiﬁed  as  saprophytes (Greek:
sapros, “rotten”; phyton, “plant”). Saprophytes are essential to the decompo-
sition of organic matter and, as a result, contribute to the improvement of
soil  fertility  by  releasing  mineral  nutrients  back  to  the  soil  for  recycling
through the roots of higher plants.

Other species of fungi and bacteria play harmful roles when they invade
living tissues in search of food. These are the parasites, aptly named from the
Greek word meaning “to eat at another’s table,” which they do in a ruthless
manner.  Unable  to  make  their  own  food,  parasites  steal  from  unwilling
organisms  called  hosts,  perhaps  facetiously.  Many  parasites  penetrate  the
host plant’s tissues with a special structure called a haustorium. In fungal par-
asites, the haustorium is an extension of the mycelium.

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 125

Adaptations to Fulfill Basic Needs

125

Mistletoe’s leathery
leaves and white,
sticky fruits.
Mistletoe is a hemi-
parasite.

The effects of parasitism range from mild disruption of the host’s metab-
olism to its untimely death. Bacterial parasites cause numerous plant dis-
eases, including crown gall, cucumber wilt, ﬁreblight, canker, and soft rot
of  ﬂeshy  storage  organs.  Diseases  of  fungal  origin  include  powdery  and
downy mildews, rusts, smuts, peach leaf curl, apple scab, late blight of pota-
toes, and damping-off of many species’ seedlings. Other plant diseases, let-
tuce mosaic, tomato spotted wilt, and maize dwarf mosaic, for example, are
caused by viruses that display a type of parasitic behavior when they invade
living cells to reproduce. Because viruses are not composed of cells, they are
not considered living organisms in the same way as bacteria. Experienced
gardeners are well aware of the problems of plant disease and the stringent
measures necessary to control the pathogens—one of the less pleasant gar-
dening activities.

A few species of ﬂowering plants evolved rootlike haustoria with which
they  pursue  a  parasitic  lifestyle.  Some,  called  hemiparasites (Greek:  hemi,
“half”) or water parasites, principally invade their hosts to obtain water and
mineral nutrients. Because they possess chlorophyll, they are able to syn-
thesize  most  of  their  required  food.  Mistletoe  (Phoradendron spp.)  is  one
such species attacking many broad-leaved trees and some conifers. Its sticky
berries,  dispersed  by  birds,  attach  to  and  germinate  on  the  host’s  bark.
Control  of  mistletoe’s  growth  is  difﬁcult  because  its  haustoria  penetrate
deeply into the host’s wood. Witchweed (Striga spp.), a hemiparasite attack-
ing  the  roots  of  corn,  many  grasses,  and  some  broad-leaved  species,
deprives the host of so much water and minerals that its presence is fatal.
Death of a host results in death of the parasite; but by then, the interloper
has reproduced and its seeds have been spread to other victims.

Angiosperms that are true parasites are completely dependent on their
host’s food, water, and mineral supplies. Among such species is broomrape

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:58 AM  Page 126

126

CHAPTER 6

Orange-yellow stems of the parasite dod-
der (Cuscuta spp.) hang like spider webs
on an unwilling host. Seen in cross sec-
tion under a microscope, the parasite
(near right) sends haustoria into the 
vascular tissues of a host’s stem (far
right).

(Orobanche spp.) that lives attached to the roots of such crop plants as toma-
to, eggplant, and sunﬂower. The orange-yellow stems of parasitic dodder
(Cuscuta spp.) grow in tangled webs on the branches of trees, shrubs, and
herbaceous  hosts  such  as  alfalfa,  clover,  sugar  beet,  and  some  vegetable
crops.  Removal  and  destruction  of  all  infected  plants  is  usually  the  only
effective method of eliminating the parasites.

MYCORRHIZAE AND ROOT NODULES

Mycorrhizae (Greek: mykes, “fungus”; rhiza, “root”) are certain beneﬁcial soil
fungi  that  form  symbiotic  relationships  with  the  tender,  young  roots  of

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:59 AM  Page 127

Adaptations to Fulfill Basic Needs

127

White mycelium of a mycorrhizal fungus
surround the root of a higher plant.

Unable to photosynthesize foods,
Sarcodes sanguinea (snowplant) obtains
nourishment from the roots of nearby
trees by way of a symbiotic mycorrhizal
fungus.

many species of higher plants, including corn, peas, apples, citrus, poplar,
oak, rhododendron, birch, and pine and other conifers. The fungus pene-
trates the root tissues, surrounds the roots, and extends into greater vol-
umes of soil than the plant’s root hairs are able. The nutrients the fungus
mycelium taps, especially phosphorus and nitrogen, are used both for its
own beneﬁt and that of the host plant. In return, the higher plant supplies
the fungus with photosynthesized foods, including sugars.

The  beautiful,  bright  red  snowplant  (Sarcodes  sanguinea),  a  springtime
inhabitant of pine forests in western North America, is an angiosperm lack-
ing the ability to photosynthesize. It survives through the intercession of a
mycorrhizal fungus that transfers food from the roots of nearby trees. The
fungus also supplies itself and the other two members of the trio with soil
nutrients. Another species having the same, complex symbiotic relationship
is the white, waxy-looking Indian pipe (Monotropa spp.).

Another  symbiosis,  mutually  beneﬁcial  to  the  two  participating  organ-
isms, is that of the soil bacterium Rhizobium and the young roots of many
species of angiosperms, especially members of the pea family (Fabaceae, for-
merly Leguminosae). All living things require a constant supply of nitrogen,

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:59 AM  Page 128

128

CHAPTER 6

Wartlike nodules on
a bean’s roots har-
bor colonies of
nitrogen-ﬁxing bac-
teria in one of
nature’s most
important symbiot-
ic relationships.

especially for the synthesis of cellular proteins. An abundance of the ele-
ment occurs in the atmosphere in the form of nitrogen gas (N2), yet few
organisms can convert the gas into a form they can use. Rhizobium (and sev-
eral species of blue-green algae, or cyanobacteria) are able to perform such
a biochemical trick by a process called nitrogen-ﬁxation. The bacteria invade
the higher plant’s roots, causing them to enlarge in groups of warty root nod-
ules. There the microorganisms absorb nitrogen from the soil atmosphere,
ﬁx it into valuable ammonium ions (NH4+), and pass the product to the
root’s cells. The host plant’s roots supply the bacteria with carbohydrates.
As a consequence of nitrogen-ﬁxation, peas, beans, clover, soybean, and
alfalfa plants, for example, are especially rich in nitrogenous substances and
become a highly desirable mulch when dug into nutrient-poor soils. Clover,
soybean, and alfalfa are also nutritious species for forage. From an ecolog-
ical point of view, nitrogen-ﬁxation is a crucial link in the nitrogen cycle, a
worldwide process in which the nutrient is cycled and recycled between the
atmosphere, oceans, soil, and living organisms. As long as the cycle contin-
ues, nitrogen will always be available for plants and animals. The same does
not  hold  true  for  the  world’s  supplies  of  noncyclable  nutrients,  such  as
phosphorus,  potassium,  magnesium,  and  iron.  As  these  elements  slowly
wash out of the land and into the oceans they become unrecoverable by nat-
ural means and, therefore, unavailable to terrestrial plants.

INSECTIVOROUS PLANTS

The most intriguing adaptations in the plant kingdom are the specialized
leaves of insectivorous (“insect eating”), or carnivorous (“ﬂesh eating”), species
that  capture  and  digest  small  animals.  The  evolution  of  such  bizarre

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:59 AM  Page 129

Adaptations to Fulfill Basic Needs

129

Topping the tubular
trap (a modiﬁed
petiole) of a pitcher
plant (Sarracenia
purpurea), the fan-
shaped leaf blade is
covered with down-
ward-pointing hairs
that prevent the
escape of captured
insects.

Sundew’s leaves
are covered with
sticky hairs in
which small insects
become entrapped.

The leaf blades of
Venus’ ﬂytrap
(Dionaea
muscipula) have
evolved into omi-
nous traps that
snap shut on
unwary insect vic-
tims.

083-130_Botany  11/8/04  11:59 AM  Page 130

130

CHAPTER 6

behavior focuses again on the importance of nitrogen to living things and
the devious measures sometimes taken to obtain it. Unless higher plants are
favored with a symbiotic partnership with nitrogen-ﬁxing microorganisms,
most are unable to exist in habitats with nitrogen-poor soils, including the
marshes and bogs that are home to insectivorous species.

Like typical angiosperms, insectivorous plants reproduce by way of ﬂow-
ers and fruit containing seeds. They support themselves with photosynthe-
sized food materials and are capable of taking nitrogen and other minerals
from  the  soil,  when  available.  But  because  nitrogen  is  in  short  supply  in
marshes,  these  remarkable  plants  rely  on  their  leafy  traps.  After  insects
(occasionally even small birds and amphibians) have been caught, their bod-
ies are digested either by enzymes excreted from glands on the leaf surface,
bacteria present in the leaf traps, or a combination of the two.

Trapping  methods  include  adhesive  traps  in  which  numerous  sticky
glands cover the upper leaf surface. Butterwort (Pinguicula spp.) and sundew
(Drosera spp.) are examples; in the latter, leaf curling, following entrapment,
completely  engulfs  the  prey.  Pitfall  traps  are  common  among  so-called
pitcher plants (Sarracenia spp. and Darlingtonia spp., for example) into whose
tubular leaves insects fall and are unable to escape because of slippery sur-
faces or the presence of sharp, downward-pointed hairs.

Active traps are best exempliﬁed by the leaves of Venus’ ﬂytrap (Dionaea
muscipula). The two halves of each blade rapidly close on each other when
trigger  hairs,  projecting  from  the  leaf’s  inner  surface,  are  touched.  The
traps may be stimulated to close about ten times before they will no longer
respond. It takes about one day for them to fully reopen. Each trap may
catch and digest small insects on three separate occasions, although diges-
tion of a large insect results in the leaf’s death.

Carnivorous plants, which reverse roles from being consumed to becom-
ing consumers, seem better suited to the realm of science ﬁction than to life
on Earth. But what better proof can be offered that, in nature, innovation
has no bounds? Earth is blessed with a ﬂora of inconceivable diversity, the
outcome of millions of years of natural selection. There is hardly a place to
which one or more species is not adapted, and there is hardly an adaptation
that  does  not  engender  awe.  From  the  simplest  forms  to  the  complex
angiosperms and gymnosperm giants, plants are wondrously attuned to the
environment—defending themselves against its onslaughts; taking advan-
tage of good times, while they last. With only roots, stems, and leaves to
work  with,  plants  modify  them,  in  limitless  ways,  to  survive  in  environ-
ments over which they have no control.

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:05 PM  Page 131

PART IV

Functions

What uncanny sense of direction do roots and stems
employ when one tunnels through the soil in search of water and nutrients
while the other lifts leaves into the light? At predictable times of the year,
many species ﬂower in response to speciﬁc day and night lengths. Do plants
count the passing hours? Why does branching occur when stem tips are
removed?  Encouraging  the  gardener  to  prune  plants  to  stimulate  more
growth seems contrary to all reason. What leads deciduous trees to shed
their leaves in fall and awaken from sleep each spring? How do stems bend
toward light? And what induces tendrils to coil around vertical supports?
There is no end to questions on how plants function, but, unhappily, few
positive answers can be offered. Plants are reluctant to share many of their
close-guarded secrets.

The study of physiology deals with the inner workings of organisms, the
physical and chemical processes that direct how living things function. Not
content to simply accept observable phenomena, biologists seek underlying
reasons for what they see and thereby open new doors of discovery to ever-
more exciting, invisible worlds. Plant physiology is built on a solid founda-
tion of information about plant structure, established by such botanical dis-
ciplines  as  morphology,  anatomy,  and  cytology.  But  when  anatomists
describe the growth and differentiation of different types of tissues (chap-
ter  4),  physiologists  want  to  know  how those  changes  take  place  at  the
molecular  level.  For  centuries,  morphologists  (and  countless  gardeners)
have observed the sudden appearance of ﬂowers on plants that, for months
or years, have produced only leaves. What hidden biochemical events evoke
such an astonishing transformation? With powerful microscopes, cytologists

131

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:05 PM  Page 132

132

PART IV

see the miraculous internal organization of cells and their organelles. For
what purpose has nature designed each intricate part?

The key to many mysteries of how plants function lies in the chemistry
of  their  cells—the  very  reason  why  access  to  the  answers  is  so  difﬁcult.
Biochemical  processes  are  exceedingly  complex,  involving  thousands  of
simultaneous  chemical  reactions  in  individual  cells  and  tissues.  A  single
sequence  of  molecular  events  may  hold  the  clue  to  how  a  physiological
process takes place. But even with the help of modern sophisticated instru-
ments, to seek and isolate that sequence is like looking for the proverbial
needle in a haystack.

In an age when people have walked on the moon and lives are saved with
transplanted organs, it is humbling to admit that routine functions in seem-
ingly simple plants still bafﬂe us. For example, there is no completely satis-
factory  explanation  for  how  food  molecules  move  through  phloem  cells;
one of the earliest proposals was made in 1860, yet plant physiologists con-
tinue to be puzzled. Or consider cell membranes: They are visible under
electron  microscopes  and,  from  extensive  experimental  work,  have  been
observed to be highly selective about which substances they admit to the
cytoplasm. But how such selectivity is achieved remains a matter of specu-
lation. Again, it is common knowledge that certain minerals, such as boron
and molybdenum, are needed by plants, but it is not clearly understood how
they are used. Human perplexity over such matters tells us, perhaps, that
plants are not as simple as their appearance suggests.

Much of what we know of plant physiology is based on results from care-
fully  designed  experiments.  Experimental  scientists,  whether  biologists,
chemists,  or  physicists,  employ  a  common  systematic  approach  in  their
work when they follow the so-called scientiﬁc method. Research is begun
when  observations  of  particular  biological  or  physical  phenomena  are
made, both directly by the investigator and indirectly through the accounts
of other scientists (and in some cases, amateurs) in scientiﬁc and other pub-
lications.  Extensive  research  in  a  library  is  an  important  prerequisite  to
experimentation. For example, a plant physiologist interested in the Venus’
ﬂytrap and its rapid leaf closure may spend months searching the literature
to  become  thoroughly  acquainted  with  previously  reported  information
and  opinions  on  both  the  speciﬁc  and  related  topics;  in  this  case,  plant
movements in general.

The second stage of the scientiﬁc method is the formulation of a hypoth-
esis, a provisional conjecture based solely on preliminary observations of
how the phenomenon takes place. The hypothesis is then tested by a series

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:05 PM  Page 133

Functions

133

of carefully planned experiments. To be of value, such experiments must
focus on the speciﬁc objective of study by limiting the number of external
factors that may inﬂuence the outcome; and then it must be repeated sev-
eral times to determine whether comparable results are obtainable. Well-
planned experimental design, the accuracy of the techniques employed, and
the ability of other scientists to duplicate the work are crucial to the quali-
ty of scientiﬁc endeavor.

Experiments may include laboratory tests of the plant’s responses to var-
ious treatments, studies of the organism in its native habitat, microscopic
examination of cells and tissues, or a combination of these and other meth-
ods. The results of each experiment are recorded and, from time to time,
evaluated  for  their  contribution  to  an  understanding  of  the  topic  under
study.  From  analysis  of  the  accumulated  data  other  experiments  may  be
undertaken,  techniques  reﬁned,  and  different  approaches  to  the  problem
devised.

Finally, when sufﬁcient and convincing evidence has been collected for
presentation to the scientiﬁc community, conclusions are drawn that may,
or may not, support the original hypothesis. Regardless of the outcome, the
gathered information is of use to other scientists only if it is reported fac-
tually  and  without  bias  on  the  part  of  the  investigator.  Nowhere,  in  all
human knowledge, must truth be accounted for more rigorously than in the
world of science.

Plant physiology is divided into three principal areas: growth and devel-
opment,  including  chemical  and  environmental  regulation  of  those
processes; systems for the uptake and transport of raw materials from the
environment, namely water, soil nutrients, and gases; and the use of those
materials in photosynthesis and the channeling of photosynthetic products
into cellular metabolism. Within these areas many subtopics attract a fol-
lowing of interested scientists.

The persistent fact that questions about plant functions far outnumber
the answers has spurred physiology to become the fastest growing and most
intensely studied subject in botany today. From an overwhelming body of
information  on  the  subject,  topics  of  practical  interest  to  the  reader  have
been  selected  for  the  following  chapters.  With  an  understanding  of  the
basics of plant physiology and a little imagination, investigative gardeners
may wish to devise some experiments of their own. Much can be done in the
home and garden with improvised methods and equipment. To the adven-
turous there are no restraints upon the discovery of how plants function.

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:05 PM  Page 134

CHAPTER 7

Control of Growth and Development

GROWTH RESPONSES TO LIGHT

At the turn of the twentieth century, plant physiologists and biochemists
joined forces to search for the molecular controls behind the processes of
plant growth and development. For some time, it had been speculated that
plants produce special substances, similar to hormones in animals, to regu-
late such systems. (The name hormone is derived from a Greek word mean-
ing “to excite.”) In a broad sense, hormones initiate biochemical activities
resulting in observable, physiological responses.

Plant  hormones,  or  plant  growth  regulators as  they  are  sometimes  called,
proved to be different from animal hormones in chemical structure, mode
of synthesis, and function. As part of their endocrine system, higher animals
possess glands, organs specialized for the production of hormones: Insulin
is made by the pancreas, thyroxin by the thyroid. Plant hormones, howev-
er, are synthesized in the cells of general organs—stems, leaves, roots, and
ﬂowers. Five principal plant hormones have been extensively studied; oth-
ers are being discovered as research on this topic continues.

For as long as gardeners and botanists have been engaged in their affairs,
they  have  observed  the  varied  growth  patterns  of  plants  under  different
conditions  of  illumination.  In  full  sun  stems  are  short  and  thick  and  the
leaves are closely spaced, whereas shaded stems become elongated and have
poorly developed leaves. Seedlings grown in complete darkness bear little
resemblance to those reared in light. The tall, thin, colorless stems of dark-
grown plants support pale, undeveloped leaves—symptoms of a physiolog-
ical condition called etiolation. And in most species, when light strikes one

134

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:05 PM  Page 135

Control of Growth and Development

135

When grown in full sunlight (left), pea seedlings bear well-developed leaves on green
stems. Seedlings of the same age but grown in total darkness display the etiolated con-
dition.

side  of  the  stems,  they  bend  toward  the  source  of  illumination,  thereby
realigning leaves to capture the energy.

The  ﬁrst  plant  hormone  to  be  discovered  was  the  substance  causing
stems  to  grow  toward  light—the  physiological  process  of  phototropism.
Tropisms (Greek: tropos, “turn”) are growth responses to external stimuli. In
stems  illuminated  from  above,  cells  undergo  equal  rates  of  elongation,
resulting  in  vertical  growth.  But  when  lit  from  one  side,  stems  change
direction because cells on the shaded side grow faster than those toward the
light. Phototropism is a common response in sun-loving species. For exam-
ple, when such plants are placed indoors, near a window, stem curvature
takes place. In some species, leaf petioles may also be phototropic. Most
shade-loving species display little or no phototropic responses, an impor-
tant factor in their selection as houseplants.

The hormone controlling phototropism is named auxin, after a Greek
word  meaning  “to  increase.”  The  chemical  name  for  natural  auxin,  pro-
duced  by  plants,  is  indole-3-acetic  acid,  or  IAA.  Several  synthetic  sub-
stances (naphthaleneacetic acid, or NAA; 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid,

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 136

136

CHAPTER 7

Phototropism.
When plants are
illuminated from
above, auxin (rep-
resented by color)
is evenly distrib-
uted across the
stem, resulting in
straight growth.
Light striking one
side of the stem
causes auxin to
migrate to the
shaded side, result-
ing in more rapid
cell growth than in
the lighted side.

or 2,4-D), having auxinlike effects when applied to plant tissues, have been
studied and are used commercially.

Auxin’s principal function is to stimulate increases in cell length, espe-
cially near stem and root tips (chapter 2). IAA is produced in cells of the
stem’s apical meristem and moves downward into the roots; as it does, its
concentration  decreases.  In  stems,  the  extent  to  which  cells  elongate  is
directly  proportional  to  the  prevailing  concentration  of  the  hormone.
When light strikes one side of a stem, auxin accumulates in the shaded side,

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 137

Control of Growth and Development

137

causing the cells there to grow at the fastest rate. Thus, the plant growing
indoors is forced to bend toward the window because light coming from
that  direction  induces  a  redistribution  of  auxin  in  the  stem,  resulting  in
uneven growth. Although the underlying principle of phototropism seems
uncomplicated,  the  details  of  how  the  process  takes  place  are  not  fully
understood.  Plant  physiologists  are  currently  studying  how  IAA  moves
from  brightly  lit  to  shaded  cells;  and  the  complex  biochemistry  of  cell
growth, including cell wall expansion, is still under investigation.

Growth  of  stem  internodes  is  promoted  by  another  hormone,  named
gibberellin after the fungus Gibberella in which it was ﬁrst discovered. The
action of gibberellin on internode cells is also related to light intensity. In
full  sun  the  hormone’s  effect  on  growth  is  somewhat  restrained.  Thus,
while  gibberellin  promotes  sufﬁcient  internode  elongation  to  space  the
leaves, the structural stability of a squat growth form is maintained. In low
light intensities, however, gibberellin becomes more active, causing intern-
odes  to  stretch.  By  so  doing  the  upper  leaves  are  elevated  to  a  position
where they are better able to locate light, especially in competitive situa-
tions  with  surrounding  plants.  Interestingly,  shade-loving  species,  being
fully adapted to their preferred habitats, show no such reactions to low light
intensities. It appears to be a state of desperation that makes dark-grown,
etiolated plants direct all of their energies into internode elongation as they
search  for  a  vestige  of  light.  Gibberellin’s  unbridled  stimulation  brings
about such growth. But rarely does the response result in a successful out-
come as reserve food supplies are soon exhausted.

RESPONSES TO GRAVITY AND TOUCH

When roots and shoots grow in opposite directions they reﬂect contrary
responses to Earth’s gravitational ﬁeld. Geotropism (Greek: ge, “earth”), or
gravitropism, are the names given the physiological process. Most roots are
positively geotropic; that is, they grow in the direction of gravity. Stems, for the
most  part,  are  negatively  geotropic,  growing  opposite  to  the  gravitational
force. When rhizomes, stolons, and some roots grow horizontally, they dis-
play  diageotropism (Greek:  dia-,  “across”).  And  branches  from  roots  and
stems,  developing  at  an  angle  from  the  vertical  plant  axis,  are  plagiotropic
(Greek: plagios, “oblique”).

When a stem is placed on its side (perhaps a potted plant is accidentally
tipped  over),  the  apex  soon  returns  to  its  normal  direction  of  growth.
Under the inﬂuence of gravity, auxin collects in the lower side of the stem
where it stimulates the cells to grow more rapidly than those across the top.

negative geotropism in the primary stem

plagiotropism in branches

diageotropism in other branches

plagiotropism in other branches

positive geotropism in the primary root

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 138

138

CHAPTER 7

Geotropic
(gravitropic)
responses in a
plant axis and its
branches

Geotropism (gravit-
ropism) in stems.
Under the inﬂuence
of gravity, auxin
(color) accumulates
in the lower side of
a horizontally
placed stem. The
high concentration
of the hormone in
the lower cells
causes faster
growth than in cells
across the top.

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 139

The  mechanism  of  hormone
migration  to  the  underside  of  the
stem is a mystery, however, because
the weight of auxin molecules is less
than  the  smallest  objects  that  can
usually move under the inﬂuence of
gravity.

Control of Growth and Development

139

those 

Although cells in stems elongate
when high concentrations of auxin
are  provided, 
in  roots
respond  to  very  small  amounts  of
the  hormone.  In  roots  placed  in  a
horizontal position, auxin accumu-
lates in the lower side, as it does in
stems.  However,  it  is  the  lesser
amount  of  hormone  in  the  root’s
upper cells that promotes elongation
and causes the root tip to grow downward. Some studies have suggested
that  another  hormone,  produced  in  the  root  cap,  is  also  involved  in  the
geotropism of roots.

Regardless of a seed’s position during ger-
mination, the emerging shoot quickly ori-
ents itself to grow in an upward direction.
The principal root grows directly down-
ward but smaller, branch roots show less
of a positive response. Plant hormones
control such growth patterns.

Geotropism (gravit-
ropism) in a root.
Under the inﬂuence
of gravity, auxin
(color) accumulates
in the lower side of
a horizontal grow-
ing root as it
emerges from the
seed. The low con-
centration of the
hormone in the
upper cells cause
faster growth than
the cells along the
bottom.

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 140

140

CHAPTER 7

Geotropism plays an indispensable role in seed germination. In the soil,
the embryos of randomly scattered seeds point in many directions; but soon
after the root and shoot tips emerge from the seeds, their orientations are
recognized and the appropriate geotropic response sets them on the right
course. Imagine how impossible it would be to gardeners if every seed had
to be planted in a correct position for them to germinate successfully.

Geotropic  propensities  are  inherited.  But  how  do  roots  and  shoots
acquire  different  responses  to  auxin  concentration  when,  in  each  plant,
both develop from the same fertilized egg? What causes the primary stem
of a plant to grow vertically while its branches, responding in various ways
to  gravity,  point  in  many  directions?  And  what  hormonal  changes  occur
when branches growing from rhizomes change from a horizontal to a ver-
tical position? Although the answers to such questions have not been found,
there is no doubt that only through the various responses to gravity are dif-
ferent parts of a plant able to occupy the three-dimensions of their grow-
ing space.

Thigmotropism, the response to touch (Greek: thigma, “touch”), is seen in
the ability of tendrils to grasp supportive objects (chapter 6). Coiling of a
tendril  results  from  faster  growth  of  cells  on  the  outside,  away  from  the
support, compared with those making the contact. Uneven distribution of
auxin  between  the  two  sides  of  a  tendril  is  presumed  to  bring  about  the
growth differences, but how the slightest pressure can cause the hormone
to migrate to one side is yet another unsolved puzzle concerning tropisms.

OTHER GROWTH MOVEMENTS IN PLANTS

Time-lapse photography compresses hours or days into seconds or minutes
of  viewing  time.  Through  this  technique  we  can  appreciate  heretofore
unseen marvels of plant life: the germination of seeds, ﬂowers opening and
closing, and the dancelike rhythm performed by growing plants. By speed-
ing the action, stem tips are seen to wave from side to side or move in a spi-
ral manner, rather than grow in a straight line. Such nastic movements (Greek:
nastos, “pressed close”) result from cell growth at changing positions across
the stem tip, pushing the stem in alternate directions. Nastic movements
are controlled by hormones but are not direct responses to external stimuli,
as are tropisms.

The tips of twiners describe wide circles when they grow. Upon contact
with rigid objects, they simply continue to spiral around them and, there-
by, gain support. The opening and closing of ﬂowers are also nastic move-

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 141

Control of Growth and Development

141

Nastic movement of a twining stem. The
tip of a growing twiner describes wide cir-
cles until it comes in contact with a sup-
port, around which it continues to spiral.

ments. In the ﬁrst instance, cell expansion occurs in the petal’s upper sur-
face; when the ﬂower closes, cells in the lower petal surface increase in size.
Studies with the insectivorous Venus’ ﬂytrap have shown that a similar sys-
tem controls the movements of its leaf traps, the closure being an excep-
tionally rapid growth response. Each time a trap closes and opens the leaf
increases in size because changes in cell dimensions are not reversible.

HORMONES AND THE AGING PROCESS

When fruits ripen they undergo aging, or senescence (chapter 5), a process
also directed by hormones. When leaves are prepared for abscission (separa-
tion, from the Latin word for “to cut off”) from the stems, either individu-
ally or as a group in deciduous species, they also undergo the aging process.
Because senescence, once begun, is irreversible, plants must possess strict
controls  over  the  process  to  prevent  the  premature  demise  of  tissues,
organs, or the whole organism.

One of the functions of auxin, gibberellin, and another hormone named
cytokinin, is to inhibit senescence by maintaining both the functions and struc-
tural integrity of cells. Cytokinin (Greek: kytos, “container,” “a cell”; kinesis,
“movement”) is principally responsible for promoting cell divisions. Acting
antagonistically against those hormones, two other growth regulators pro-
mote  the  aging  process.  External  environmental  cues,  such  as  seasonal
changes in temperature or day length, and internal (biochemical) signals shift
the balance between the two sets of hormones. The senescence-promoting

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 142

142

CHAPTER 7

Six green persim-
mon fruits were
picked the same
day. At the end of
one week, three
that were placed in
a bag with apple
peelings—a source
of ethylene—had
ripened; the others,
stored on an open
shelf, had only
begun to change
color.

substances are ethylene, a gas, and abscisic acid, so named because it was
originally thought to promote leaf abscission in all species; later, it became
clear that most often ethylene controlled the separation process.

When fruits ripen various biochemical events take place. Color changes
result from the breakdown of green chlorophyll and an increase in yellow,
orange, and red pigments (see chapter 8). Tannins, which protect immature
fruits against predators, give way to sugars—making some fruits attractive
to  seed-dispersing  animals.  And,  primarily  as  a  result  of  ethylene’s  inﬂu-
ence, drastic changes occur in cell structure, including the breakdown of
membranes and the softening of cell walls. The outcome of such processes
is seen in the rapid deterioration of a fruit as it becomes overripe, ready to
release its seeds. Unprotected by tannins, well-stocked with carbohydrates,
and the cuticle layer degraded, the ripe fruit also becomes a perfect medi-
um on which fungi can grow. Their presence eventually leads to the fruit’s
decomposition.

Ethylene is used commercially to ripen fruits, such as bananas, that are
picked green for shipment. They are treated with the gas prior to being sold
in retail stores. At home, some unripe fruits can be hastened to an edible
condition  by  placing  them  in  a  paper  bag  with  coarsely  chopped  apple
pieces.  Injury  of  the  apple  tissues,  as  with  damage  to  most  plant  organs,
causes the cells to liberate ethylene. The bag should be closed to trap the
gas, and kept at room temperature for several days to obtain results. Not all
fruit species respond to such treatment, but it is worth trying in every case.
Leaf senescence, prior to abscission, includes the breakdown of chloro-
phyll and weakening of cell walls at the base of the petiole, in a narrow band
of cells called the abscission zone. In spring and summer, auxin produced in
the leaf keeps the abscission zone intact. But low night temperatures and
short days in autumn cue the leaves to reduce auxin production and increase

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 143

the liberation of ethylene. The lat-
ter  stimulates  an  enzymatic  break-
down  of  cellulose  walls  and  pectin
in  the  middle  lamellae—the  glue
holding  cells  together  (chapter  1).
The 
restriction  of  ethylene’s
destructive  effects,  only  to  cells  in
the  abscission  zone,  illustrates  the
precise control plants exercise over
their hormone systems.

Control of Growth and Development

143

In  evergreen  species,  sequential
abscission  in  the  oldest  leaves
occurs by way of the same series of
biochemical events. In a like man-
ner, abscission of fruits and ﬂowers
takes  place  at  appropriate  times.
During  the  development  of  some
species’ fruits, apple being an exam-
ple,  three  periods  when  abscission
can  occur  have  been  identified:
postblossom drop; June drop, when
fruits  are  still  immature;  and  pre-
harvest drop, when many mature fruits fall to the ground. The application
of synthetic auxin sprays increases yields by preventing early fruit abscission.

A microscopic view of a sectioned axillary
bud and the base of its adjacent leaf peti-
ole. The leaf’s abscission zone appears as
a dark band across the petiole.

CONTROL OF BRANCHING AND 
ADVENTITIOUS ROOT FORMATION

Gardeners know well that to make their plants ﬁll out with branches, stem
tips must be removed periodically. As long as apical buds are present they
suppress the growth of axillary buds, especially toward the top of the stems.
This  physiological  process  is  called  apical  dominance.  Axillary  buds  toward
the base of an intact stem are distanced from the effects of apical dominance
and develop into branches.

Auxin,  produced  in  the  stem’s  apical  meristem,  exerts  the  inhibitory
effect on axillary bud growth—a fact demonstrated when the apical bud is
replaced with an artiﬁcial source of the hormone that is equally effective in
bud inhibition. Trimming a plant simply eliminates the auxin source. In the
case of basal buds, the natural decrease in auxin concentration down the
length of a stem is apparently sufﬁcient to reduce its suppressive effect.

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 144

144

CHAPTER 7

An intact oleander
stem (left) shows
the normal pattern
of apical domi-
nance and sup-
pressed axillary
bud growth. With
the stem tip
removed, axillary
buds freely develop
into branches.

Horticulturists are also familiar
with  differences  between  species’
abilities to form adventitious roots on
stem or leaf cuttings. In some, root
development is promoted by auxin
naturally  present  in  the  cuttings.
Other species must be treated with
a rooting compound, a preparation
of synthetic auxin. The method of
vegetative propagation called layer-
ing, a modiﬁcation of usual cutting
techniques, involves the encourage-
ment  of  adventitious  roots  on
branches still attached to the parent
plant. The advantage is that the stem piece, or layer, is supplied with water
and  nutrients  during  the  rooting  process.  When  roots  have  formed,  the
layer is removed and grown independently. Again, auxin is involved in root
formation.

The success of propagation by stem and
leaf cuttings depends on the species’ abili-
ty to form adventitious roots. Shown here
are African violet (Saintpaulia) leaves.

OTHER HORMONE EFFECTS: SYNTHETIC GROWTH REGULATORS

In the early stages of research on plant growth regulators, it was speculat-
ed  that  each  physiological  process  is  controlled  by  a  different  hormone.
However, it soon became apparent that plants regulate numerous process-
es by employing only a few hormones, either individually or in combination
with each other.

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 145

Control of Growth and Develpment

145

In addition to the roles played by the ﬁve hormones described above, the
following  can  be  added:  Gibberellin  controls  seed  germination;  ethylene
promotes stem thickening, especially in seedlings; in some species at least,
abscisic  acid  brings  on  dormancy,  whereas  gibberellin  revives  them  from
winter  sleep.  In  some  species,  artiﬁcially  applied  gibberellin  promotes
ﬂower  formation  and  increases  fruit  size.  Ethylene  initiates  ﬂowers  in
pineapple  and  its  relatives  (the  bromeliads),  which,  according  to  some
reports, need only be enclosed in a bag with apple peelings for several days
to produce ﬂowers. Unfortunately, neither ethylene nor gibberellin is uni-
versally effective as a ﬂowering hormone.

Plant  physiologists  have  discovered  several  chemical  compounds  not
produced by plants that regulate growth when introduced into certain plant
species.  Such  substances  are  becoming  increasingly  useful  in  agriculture
and horticulture. Defoliants promote leaf abscission and are favored by cot-
ton growers, for example, because leaﬂess plants facilitate the mechanical
harvesting of cotton bolls. Disbudders cause ﬂower buds to abscise and are
sprayed  on  some  species  of  ornamental  trees  and  shrubs  to  rid  them  of
immature, unwanted, troublesome fruits. One use of growth retardants is in
the greenhouse ﬂoriculture industry for the production of dwarfed, potted
plants such as chrysanthemum and poinsettia. Such chemicals inhibit the
action  of  gibberellin  on  internode  elongation,  adding  to  the  plants’  aes-
thetic qualities and making them easier and cheaper to transport. Herbicides
are most often used as weed killers. Some, such as 2,4-D, selectively destroy
only  broad-leaved  species;  others  are  nonselective  in  their  activity.  The
search  for  plant  growth  regulators,  ﬁrst  started  as  a  subject  of  academic
interest, has grown into a multi-million dollar business.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL: TEMPERATURE

The  controls  hormones  and  other  biochemical  systems  exercise  over  a
plant’s growth and development may, in turn, be regulated by seasonal envi-
ronmental changes—especially changes in temperature and day length (pho-
toperiod). This is the case in whole-plant leaf abscission, described above.

For  millennia,  variations  in  day  length  with  each  passing  month  have
been as regular as the sun’s shifting position in the sky; and, in temperate
zones,  an  annual  period  of  winter’s  chill  can  be  reasonably  assured.  The
consistent occurrence of such events make them ideal conditions to which
the physiology of plants is adapted, using them as external cues to turn on
internal  processes.  Environmental  cues  frequently  prepare  plants  for

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 146

146

CHAPTER 7

upcoming, adverse seasons in which dormancy is the only means of survival.
But they also set in motion the ﬁrst stages of reproductive cycles.

During winter dormancy plant metabolism virtually comes to a standstill
due, in part, to low temperatures that slow chemical activity. Botanists were
surprised,  therefore,  to  discover  that  several  important  physiological
processes take place during winter and actually depend on the occurrence
of reduced temperatures. For example, dormant winter buds must experi-
ence a cool period to prepare for eventual awakening in the warmer days of
spring. The chilling process is believed to stimulate the synthesis of a hor-
mone—possibly gibberellin—needed for subsequent growth. Exposure to
days  or  months  of  temperatures  below  50°F  (10°C)  may  be  necessary  to
overcome most bud dormancy. Apple, for example, requires 1000 to 1400
hours at about 45°F (7°C). Such a requirement limits some species’ geo-
graphic distribution to cool climates. However, selected varieties of tem-
perate-zone fruits, such as peach and plum, needing only short periods of
chilling, or none at all, are now available for cultivation at latitudes where
winters are warm.

It  is  important  that  a  plant,  deep  in  winter  sleep,  not  awaken  before
spring  because  new  leaves  and  ﬂowers  are  especially  vulnerable  to  frost
damage.  To  ensure  the  correct  timing  of  dormancy’s  end,  many  species
require  a  season  of  low  temperatures  followed  by  a  period  when  day
lengths are longer than those in winter. The second of these environmen-
tal cues is probably recognized by a subtle timing system within the bud
scales (chapter 2).

In many such species springtime emergence of ﬂowers precedes that of
leaves—making the ﬂowers more visible to pollinating insects and getting
the reproductive process off to an early start. Incidentally, ﬂower buds are
initiated  before  dormancy,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  preceding  year  as  a
response to shortening day lengths. A similar situation, in which reduced
temperatures promote ﬂower development, is found in many species that
grow from bulbs. In autumn, tulip bulbs, for example, contain rudimentary
ﬂower buds. But for the ﬂowers to complete their development by spring,
the bulbs must ﬁrst experience a drop in temperature, to about 50°F (10°C),
for thirteen to fourteen weeks. A return to warmer temperatures promotes
leaf and stem development and ﬂower opening.

In temperate zones, the required temperature change occurs while the
dormant organs are overwintering in the soil; but in warmer parts of the
world, tulip bulbs must be dug up each fall and refrigerated to guarantee
flowering.  Hyacinth,  daffodil,  and  onion  have  similar  requirements,
although  the  precise  low  temperature  and  duration  of  treatment  varies

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 147

Control of Growth and Development

147

between species. Onions grown primarily for their bulbs may be prevented
from ﬂowering by maintaining the bulbs at warm temperatures throughout
the year.

VERNALIZATION

In some species, ﬂowers are formed in spring as a result of the plant, or
even the seed, being given a cold treatment, close to or at freezing temper-
atures, for several weeks. The physiological process is called  vernalization
(from Latin for “belonging to spring”).

Vernalization  was  ﬁrst  recognized  in  certain  winter  varieties  of  rye,
wheat,  and  other  cereal  grains,  the  seeds  of  which  must  be  planted  in
autumn and allowed to overwinter in the cold soil. Frequently, they germi-
nate and spend the winter as small seedlings. Winter rye so treated forms
ﬂowers within seven weeks after seedling growth begins in spring; whereas
it takes fourteen to eighteen weeks for ﬂowering to occur in plants grown
from unchilled seeds. Such a delay jeopardizes the plants’ ability to com-
plete the reproductive cycle before the end of summer.

Vernalization and bolting. (a) Cabbage, a
biennial, develops a compact head (leaf
rosette) by the end of the ﬁrst year of
growth. (b) Vernalization during the winter
results in internode elongation and ﬂower-
ing during the second year.

a

b

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 148

148

CHAPTER 7

Many biennial species require vernalization in order to produce ﬂowers
in the second of their two-year life cycle. Examples include varieties of cab-
bage, kale, Brussels sprouts, carrots, celery, and foxglove. Most often, the
vegetable  crops  are  harvested  at  the  end  of  their  ﬁrst  year  of  vegetative
growth, when cabbage, for example, is in the form of a tight head or leaf
rosette. But if left to overwinter, the plants make chemical preparations for
the burst of stem growth, called bolting, leading to ﬂower development by
late spring.

The increased temperatures and lengthening days of spring promote the
rapid internode elongation characterizing bolting, as well as the develop-
ment  of  ﬂowers  at  the  top  of  the  bolted  stem.  Such  conditions  have  no
effect on unvernalized plants, which remain in the rosette form and fail to
ﬂower.  Gibberellin  (the  internode-elongating  hormone)  is  probably  pro-
duced  during  vernalization  because  unvernalized,  but  gibberellin-treated
plants bolt.

Many  varieties  of  chrysanthemum  are  perennials  requiring  vernaliza-
tion.  During  winter  and  early  spring,  the  young  shoots,  at  the  base  of  a
chrysanthemum plant, respond to cool temperatures that must last for at
least three to four weeks. The ﬁrst, chemical stages of ﬂower development
are begun at that time but become inactive until the shoots have grown. By
late summer, when the plant is ready to complete the ﬂowering process, the
second phase is initiated by short day lengths.

The underlying biochemical systems activated by low temperatures and
preparing plants for ﬂowering are beyond the present level of understand-
ing.  To  complicate  matters,  chrysanthemum  and  many  other  species  use
such preparations merely to sensitize the plants to photoperiod, which, as
we shall see, is an even more perplexing element in the ﬂowering process.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL: PHOTOPERIOD

Photoperiodism, the response of plants to changing lengths of day and night,
was discovered about 1920 by W. W. Garner and H. A. Allard. Although
several  plant  functions  are  stimulated  by  photoperiod,  the  initiation  of
ﬂowers  is  the  physiological  process  most  frequently  associated  with  this
environmental  control  system.  When  Garner  and  Allard  recognized  that
plants are able to measure the passage of time, and thereby set in motion
reproductive processes, they concluded that plants respond to the duration
of daylight in each twenty-four-hour period. The name they coined, pho-
toperiodism, and other terminologies associated with the process, reﬂect such
a  belief.  Unfortunately,  later  studies  indicated  that  plants  measure  night

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 149

Control of Growth and Development

149

lengths, rather than the daylight hours; but, for convenience, the “photo-”
and “day” were left unchanged in the scientiﬁc vocabulary.

Angiosperms are roughly divided into three categories, based on their
photoperiod requirements: short-day plants, long-day plants, and day-neu-
tral plants. Day-neutral species simply ﬂower after some speciﬁc period of
vegetative growth and are unaffected by day length; examples include corn
(maize),  cucumber,  tomato,  grape,  kidney  bean,  viburnum,  and  English
holly.  But  consider  the  following  and  the  critical  photoperiod of  each—the
length of the daily light period necessary for ﬂowering:

SHORT-DAY PLANTS—Flower when day lengths are less than the

critical photoperiod of:

chrysanthemum (Dendranthema) 
perilla (Perilla) 
poinsettia (Euphorbia) 
strawberry (Fragaria) 
violet (viola) 

15 hours  
14 hours  
12.5 hours  
10 hours  
11 hours 

LONG-DAY PLANTS—Flower when photoperiods exceed the critical

photoperiod of:  

baby’s breath (Gypsophila) 
dill (Anethum) 
red clover (Trifolium) 
sedum (Sedum) 
spinach (Spinacia) 

16 hours  
11 hours  
12 hours  
13 hours  
13 hours 

Note that critical photoperiods vary between species. And “short-” and
“long-days” are not deﬁned by speciﬁc lengths of daylight hours, but by day
lengths being less than, or more than the species’ critical photoperiod. The
responses of short- and long-day plants are summarized in the accompany-
ing diagram.

Regardless of day and night lengths, a plant is only able to produce ﬂow-
ers when it has attained a ripeness-to-ﬂower—a minimal vegetative size nec-
essary to support the weight of the blossoms and fruits and a sufﬁcient food
reserve  to  supply  the  considerable  demands  of  developing  reproductive
organs. Having reached that size, the plant is ready to be photoinduced by the
correct day length. In perennial species ripeness-to-ﬂower can be reached
after one or more years of growth. But in annuals seed germination and
development of vegetative organs must be completed in the early part of

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 150

150

CHAPTER 7

24 hours

light

dark

critical photoperiod

short-day

plant

long-day

plant

Short-day plants ﬂower when day lengths are less than the critical photoperiod. Long-
day plants ﬂower when day lengths exceed the critical photoperiod.

the year to prepare the plants for photoinduction when critical photoperi-
ods are reached in the yearly cycle.

Most species require several successive days of photoinduction in order
to change the activity of apical meristems from leaf to ﬂower production—
an astonishing switch, the mechanism of which continues to keep botanists
guessing.  In  most  species,  once  ﬂoral  initiation  has  begun,  the  meristem
never returns to making leaves. Plant physiologists have determined that
the biochemical system measuring the passing hours of day and night, and
responding to the correct photoperiod, is located within the cells of mature
leaves. When photoinduction occurs, such a system stimulates the synthe-
sis of a ﬂowering hormone that moves from the leaves to the apical meris-
tems. At present, the timing process is imperfectly understood.

Discovering the chemical nature of the ﬂowering hormone ( ﬂorigen, as
it has been named) continues to be one of the most sought-after goals of
plant scientists. The elusive ﬂorigen moves across grafts between photoin-
duced and uninduced plants, causing both to ﬂower. It also moves between
certain grafted long-day and short-day plants; when either is photoinduced,
the other also ﬂowers. But, as with all plant hormones, ﬂorigen is effective

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 151

Control of Growth and Development

151

in extremely low concentrations and is therefore difﬁcult to detect. A pre-
vailing theory among plant physiologists is that ﬂorigen is actually a special
combination of some of the known hormones, such as gibberellin, auxin,
and cytokinin, which makes its isolation even more difﬁcult.

Whenever  blossoms  are  desired,  and  because  a  ﬂowering  hormone  to
spray on plants is unavailable, ﬂoriculturists must be content with artiﬁcial
photoinductions. Lights are used to extend natural day lengths, and heavy
blinds  are  used  to  simulate  short  photoperiods.  Several  commercially
grown  ornamental  species,  including  chrysanthemum,  are  brought  into
bloom throughout the year by such methods.

Of all the physiological processes controlling plant growth and develop-
ment,  photoperiodism  has  the  most  far-reaching  effects.  Months  after
inductive  day  lengths  had  initiated  ﬂower  formation,  reproduction  ends
with the dispersal of seeds. Because it takes time to develop ﬂowers and,
from them, fruits and seeds, ﬂoral initiation must be begun at an early date.
In many species it is imperative that reproduction be completed before the
onset of winter, or summer’s drought—conditions only seeds can survive.
Thus  one  process,  photoperiodism,  connects  two  unrelated  and  separate
circumstances—present  day  lengths  and  forthcoming  adversity.  It  seems
like plants are not only measuring the passing hours, but also anticipating
the future.

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 152

CHAPTER 8

The Uptake and Use of Water, 
Minerals, and Light

OSMOSIS: THE CELL’S WATER PUMP

Fashioned from earth, air, and water, their life-sustaining processes kindled
by the sun, plants build intricate bodies and manufacture foods to supply
their  every  need.  To  such  a  self-sufﬁcient  lifestyle,  the  name  autotrophic
(“self nourishment”) has been given. Heterotrophic (“different nourishment”)
animals, fungi, and microorganisms depend on products made by photo-
synthesizing plants or resort to eating other heterotrophs to obtain such
nutriments in second-hand form. Autotrophs have few demands: Water and
minerals that, in terrestrial species, are drawn from the soil, are added to
carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. In the presence of light, photosyn-
thesis, the single most important process on Earth, is set in motion.

The  journey  that  water  makes  from  the  soil  to  a  plant’s  leaves  begins
when, by the process of osmosis (Greek: osmos, “a push”), it crosses into the
root’s epidermal cells (chapter 4). During osmosis, water molecules attempt
to equalize their concentration on both sides of cell membranes when they
move into or out of living protoplasm.

In most soils, small quantities of salts are dissolved in large volumes of
water.  Conversely,  the  protoplasm  of  epidermal  cells  contains  lesser
amounts of water in which salts, sugars, and other substances are concen-
trated. Thus, when water moves (diffuses) from the soil, where it is most
abundant, it seeks to dilute the cells’ solutions.

The system of equalization should also apply to salts and other substances
that try to diffuse from the root’s cells to the soil. However, cell membranes
are  selective  in  their  permeability,  permitting  free  inward  movement  of
water but denying passage outward to most dissolved substances. It is such

152

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 153

Uptake and Use of Water, Minerals, and Light

153

a

b

Osmosis. (a) A cell is occupied by large amounts of dissolved substances (large dots),
thereby reducing the space occupied by water molecules (small dots). Because water is
more abundant in the dilute, external solution, it diffuses into the cell. The cell mem-
brane prevents the loss of dissolved substances from the cell. (b) Osmotic uptake of
water creates turgor within the cell when the cell membrane presses against the cell
wall. In these diagrams, the cytoplasm and vacuole are treated as one unit.

water

water

a

b

Water uptake by roots. (a) Water enters a root’s epidermal cells by the process of osmo-
sis. (b) As the vacuole becomes inﬂated, the cytoplasm is pressed against the cell wall,
creating an internal turgor pressure. At maximum turgor, water is squeezed out of the
cell at the same rate as it continues to enter. The water moves into spaces between cor-
tex cells.

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 154

154

CHAPTER 8

In turgid cells (left), chloroplasts are scattered throughout the cytoplasm that is pressed
against the cell walls by an invisible, inﬂated vacuole. In the course of excessive water
loss, the cytoplasm of plasmolyzed cells pulls away from the cell walls, forcing the
chloroplasts into tight aggregations.

The difference
between turgid and
ﬂaccid tissues in
these impatiens
shoots is obvious.

a  preferential  diffusion  of  water  across  membranes  that  makes  osmosis
work.

Water entering a cell is stored in the large, central vacuole (chapter 1),
which expands and presses the cytoplasm against the rigid cell wall. When
a cell becomes turgid (fully inﬂated), the rate of water uptake is slowed but
does not come to a complete stop. Water continues to diffuse into the cell
and  simply  displaces  a  comparable  volume—the  cell  wall,  counteracting
internal turgor pressures, squeezes water out. Turgid cells are thus equipped
with a safety valve that keeps them from inﬂating to the bursting point.

Cell turgor gives ﬁrmness to water-ﬁlled tissues. The difference between
crisp  and  wilted  lettuce  leaves  or  celery  petioles  illustrates  the  nature  of
turgid  and  nonturgid  (ﬂaccid)  cells.  Analogously,  a  bicycle  tire  has  an
expandable inner tube, inﬂated with air, that presses against the inelastic,

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 155

Uptake and Use of Water, Minerals, and Light

155

surrounding sidewall. When the tire deﬂates, the sidewall, like a cell wall,
does not soften; it simply loses internal pressure.

Most  plant  species  wilt  in  soils  in  which  signiﬁcant  quantities  of  salts
have accumulated, even when adequate water is present. Such saline soils
have a lower water content than root cells so the roots lose water as the
direction of osmotic ﬂow is reversed. In cells excreting large amounts of
water the vacuoles shrink and the cytoplasm is pulled from the cell walls, a
condition  called  plasmolysis (Greek:  lysis,  “loosening,”  of  the  cytoplasm).
Prolonged plasmolysis results in cell death. Yet, the cells of seaweeds and
angiosperms  adapted  to  coastal  and  desert  salt  ﬂats  are  able  to  thrive  in
saline conditions without suffering plasmolysis. Such an ability is attributa-
ble to these species’ capacities to store salts at even higher concentrations
than the external medium, thereby sustaining osmotic water uptake.

DEVELOPMENT OF ROOT PRESSURE

Near root tips, epidermal cells and their extensions, the root hairs (chapter
2),  draw  water  from  the  soil  by  osmosis.  When  the  epidermal  cells  are
turgid, they discharge water into spaces between cortex cells—that being
the line of least resistance for the escaping liquid. After the water works its

water

root hair

epidermis

cortex

endodermis

xylem

The path of water
across a root. The
epidermis and
endodermis func-
tion as osmotic
pumps that move
water from the soil
into the cortex and
to the xylem at the
center of the root.

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 156

156

CHAPTER 8

way  across  the  cortex,  a  second
osmotic  pump,  the  endodermis,
directs  it  into  the  hollow,  tubular
cells of the xylem at the root’s center.
Together,  the  epidermal  and
endodermal  pumps  push  water
across  the  root  and  up  the  xylem
with  a  slight  pressure,  called  root
pressure, the effect of which is seen
when  liquid  oozes  from  the  cut
stump of an herbaceous stem. Root
pressure is also responsible for the
droplets  of  water  appearing,  early
in the morning at leaf tips or on leaf
margins. Such exudations are called water of guttation (Latin: gutta, “drop”)
and emerge from special pores (hydathodes) evolved by certain species to rid
themselves of excess dissolved salts.

Water droplets formed on leaf margins are
the products of guttation, an exudation
caused by root pressure.

Although  root  pressure  may  push  water  to  the  leaves  of  low-growing
plants, it is insufﬁcient to elevate water to hundreds of feet above the soil as
in some trees. To accomplish such an engineering feat, a pulling force, gen-
erated in leaves, supplements the work done by roots.

TRANSPIRATIONAL PULL

In  leaves,  mesophyll  cells  with  high  concentrations  of  photosynthesized
sugars use osmosis to draw water from the xylem. When the water is later
discharged from turgid mesophyll, the sun’s heat turns it to vapor saturat-
ing the leaves’ internal spaces and ultimately escaping from open stomata by
a process known as transpiration (Latin: trans, “across”; spiro, “to breathe”).

Vaporized water, lost from the leaves, is replaced by liquid water pulled
by the mesophyll cells from the veins. And because water molecules move
in  unbroken  chains  through  the  connected  xylem  of  roots,  stems,  and
leaves, the drawing force of transpiration, called transpirational pull, is felt
throughout the length of the plant.

To appreciate the combined effects of root pressure and transpirational
pull, imagine a vertical tube in which water is both pumped under pressure
at its base and pulled by suction from above. The water would move at a
considerable  speed;  but  for  the  ﬂow  to  continue,  water  must  also  be
removed from the top of the system. In most plant species, about 98 per-
cent of the water entering the roots is lost in the form of transpired water
vapor from the leaves.

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 157

Uptake and Use of Water, Minerals, and Light

157

One  can  readily  perceive  the
outpouring  of  transpiration  when,
on a hot, dry day, the air beneath a
shady tree both feels cooler and is
more  comfortable  because  of  its
higher moisture content. The mag-
nitude  of  transpiration  is  impres-
sive. A single, 48-foot (16-m) silver
maple tree is estimated to transpire
as much as 58 gallons (220 L) per
hour.  A  forest  of  temperate-zone,
broad-leaved trees transpires about
8000  gallons  (30,000  L)  of  water
per  acre  per  day.  An  average-size
tomato  plant  transpires  about  30
gallons (115 L) during its growing
season;  a  corn  plant,  55  gallons
(210 L). Such quantities represent
the plants’ basic needs, to be sup-
plied via the soil by rain and irriga-
tion.

The path of water through the plant’s inter-
connecting xylem.

Although  transpiration  appears
to be a wasteful process, plants can-
not avoid losing water vapor through stomata that are opened to admit car-
bon dioxide for photosynthesis—a dilemma nature has turned to advantage.
Transpiration not only lifts vast quantities of water, against gravity, to the
topmost leaves, it is also an effective means of transporting minerals from
the soil to all parts of a plant in the xylem’s transpiration stream. Further-
more, transpiration has a signiﬁcant cooling effect on leaves exposed to full
sunlight because water vapor escaping from a warmed, moist object carries
heat with it. The cooling sensation felt when perspiration evaporates from
the skin illustrates this principle.

Plants are far from being victims of uncontrolled water loss. They
can quickly close the leaves’ stomata, especially when the quantity of water
absorbed  by  roots  falls  short  of  that  which  is  transpired.  And,  in  some
species, such features as matted epidermal hairs, the location of stomata in
depressions in the leaf surface, and the enclosure of stomata within folded
leaf blades contribute to reducing transpiration.

The  environment  profoundly  affects  transpiration  rates.  Water  loss  is
greatly  increased  by  high  daytime  temperatures,  a  problem  many  desert
species  overcome  by  opening  their  stomata  at  night  (and  storing  carbon

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 158

158

CHAPTER 8

dioxide in their tissues for use the following day). The difference in water
content between the interior of leaves, saturated with water vapor, and the
external  air  is  especially  marked  at  times  of  low  atmospheric  humidity.
Consequently, on dry days, transpiration increases and leaves quickly wilt.
And,  in  a  light  breeze,  air  movement  draws  moisture  from  the  stomata.
However, when leaves are vigorously shaken, as by a strong wind (or even
manually), the stomata close and transpiration stops.

Continuity of the water stream from the soil, through roots and shoots,
and into the atmosphere is broken when a plant is uprooted or stems are
cut. Thus, a plant should be well watered immediately after transplanting
to help it recover from the trauma of the move. Providing more-than-usual
quantities  of  soil  water  compensates  for  transpirational  losses  occurring
before the stomata have a chance to close and ensures that damaged roots
are plentifully supplied with moisture during their recovery.

The  suction  of  transpirational  pull  places  water  under  tension  in  the
xylem  of  an  actively  transpiring  plant.  Thus,  when  stems  are  cut,  air  is
drawn into the exposed vessels and blocks the ﬂow of water. In the garden,
ﬂower stems should always be cut longer than desired, and recut to the cor-
rect  length  while  holding  the  stems  under  water.  If  the  stems  are  then
quickly transferred to a vase, the transpiration stream continues uninter-
rupted,  without  the  blossoms  wilting.  Scissor-type  pruning  shears  or  a
sharp knife should be used to make clean cuts so the ends of the xylem ves-
sels remain open.

COLD HARDENING

In winter, when the leaves of deciduous species have fallen, water move-
ment comes to a standstill. If the remaining water freezes in the cells, its
expansion ruptures the delicate cell membranes—a condition from which
there  is  no  recovery.  Plants  prepare  for  winter  with  a  process  called  cold
hardening,  part  of  which  involves  the  accumulation  in  the  protoplasm  of
sugars that function as antifreeze. In another phase of cold hardening, the
permeability of cell membranes is changed, allowing water to leak into the
intercellular  spaces.  In  the  event  of  ice  crystals  forming  outside  the  cell
walls, harm to the living protoplasm is averted.

MINERAL NUTRIENT NEEDS

Gardeners  are  well  acquainted  with  nitrates,  sulfates,  calcium,  iron,  and
phosphates—some  of  the  minerals  plants  require.  And  every  gardener

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 159

Uptake and Use of Water, Minerals, and Light

159

seems  to  have  a  list  of  favored  fertilizers  to  satisfy  their  plants’  needs.
Whether such minerals are obtained from organic sources (composted veg-
etable matter, for example) or inorganic forms (commercial, crystalline, or
liquid blends of chemicals), the mineral elements are the same. The princi-
pal difference between the two sources is that decomposing organic matter
slowly releases small quantities of unspeciﬁc minerals into the soil; where-
as inorganic fertilizers are concentrations of selected elements, prepared for
immediate and clearly deﬁned uses.

Plant  physiologists  divide  the  required  mineral  elements  into  two
groups:  Macronutrients are  those  used  in  greatest  quantities  by  plants;

MINERAL NUTRIENTS NEEDED BY PLANTS

Macronutrients 
carbon 
hydrogen 
oxygen 

nitrogen 

phosphorus 

potassium 

sulfur 

calcium 

Micronutrients
magnesium 

iron 

copper 
zinc 
manganese 

molybdenum 

boron 

Chemical Symbol  Available as

C 
H 
O 

N 

P 

K 

S 

Ca 

Mg 

Fe 

Cu 
Zn 
Mn 

Mo 

B 

CO2 (carbon dioxide) from air  
H2O (water)  
O2 (oxygen gas) and CO2 from 

the air and in some of the 
combined forms listed below  

NO3 (nitrate salts such as calcium 

nitrate) or NH4 (ammonium 
salts such as ammonium sulfate)  

PO4 (phosphate salts such as 

potassium phosphate)  

potassium salts such as potassium 

phosphate  

SO4 (sulfate salts such as 

magnesium sulfate)  

calcium salts such as calcium 

nitrate  

magnesium salts such as 

magnesium sulfate  

iron (ferrous) salts such as ferrous 

chloride  

copper salts such as copper sulfate  
zinc salts such as zinc sulfate  
manganese salts such as 
manganous chloride  

molybdenum salts such as 

potassium molybdate  

borates such as potassium borate

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 160

160

CHAPTER 8

micronutrients are  used  in  lesser  amounts  and,  in  some  cases,  are  simply
introduced as impurities in fertilizer mixes or are dissolved in tap water. In
addition to those listed in the table (p. 159), some species require traces of
chlorine (Cl), aluminum (Al), sodium (Na), silicon (Si), or cobalt (Co).

The  elements  used  in  greatest  quantities  by  growing  plants—carbon,
hydrogen, and oxygen—are derived primarily from air and water. In nature,
all  other  nutrients  have  their  origins  in  Earth’s  rock  materials.  Erosion
slowly releases the minerals from rocks into the soil and then into our plan-
et’s waters.

Each  element  plays  speciﬁc  biochemical  roles,  with  those  of  the
micronutrients being difﬁcult to pinpoint because some such trace elements
function  in  minute  quantities  in  plant  tissues,  as  the  alternative  name
implies.  Clues  to  mineral  nutrient  functions  are  obtained,  in  part,  from
observable  and  predictable  symptoms  resulting  from  deﬁciencies  of  the
individual elements. For example, the characteristic deﬁciency symptom of
magnesium  and  iron  is  chlorosis—yellowing  of  the  leaves—due  to  curtail-
ment of chlorophyll synthesis. Magnesium is an integral element in chloro-
phyll molecules; iron must be present during production of the pigment.

The robust appearance of a tomato plant
grown in a solution containing all the
required mineral nutrients.

Magnesium deﬁciency results in yellowing
(chlorosis) of the older leaves

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 161

Uptake and Use of Water, Minerals, and Light

161

Chlorosis of young leaves is the ﬁrst
symptom of iron deﬁciency.

The poor growth of a nitrogen-deﬁcient
plant includes weak stems, undeveloped
leaves, and reduced root development.

Phosphorus deﬁciency retards the growth
of all plant parts, a consequence of
imperfect cell development.

Calcium deﬁciency has the most drastic
effect on growth. The element is needed
to form pectin, the substance that bonds
cell walls.

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 162

162

CHAPTER 8

Nitrogen  is  incorporated  into  the  structure  of  chlorophyll,  as  well  as
amino acids, the small molecular units from which large protein molecules
are  made.  Proteins  are  used  to  construct  cell  membranes,  chromosomes,
and  enzyme  molecules  (chapter  5),  all  of  which  are  vital  to  growth.  It  is
understandable, therefore, that nitrogen-deﬁcient plants display chlorosis
of the leaves as well as stunted development.

Reduced  growth,  resulting  from  poor  cell  development,  results  from
phosphorus  deﬁciencies.  Among  other  uses,  the  element  is  part  of  fatty
membrane components called  phospholipids. And during the production of
DNA, the substance in cell nuclei bearing the genetic code, considerable
numbers of phosphorus atoms are incorporated into the complex molecu-
lar structure. Calcium’s role in the synthesis of pectin, the glue bonding cell
walls, is vital to tissue formation in meristems. A shortage of calcium results
in rapid death, or necrosis (Greek: nekrosis, “deadness”), of stem and root tips
and leaf margins.

The functions of potassium and metals such as copper, zinc, and man-
ganese  are  too  subtle  to  be  reﬂected  in  observable  deﬁciency  symptoms.
However,  laboratory  analysis  of  plant  tissues  has  revealed  that  such  ele-
ments  are  especially  important  as  activators  of  key  enzymes  controlling
metabolic pathways.

Because  deﬁciency  symptoms,  especially  those  of  micronutrients,  vary
between  species  and  in  response  to  changing  environmental  conditions,
they are not always reliable indicators of speciﬁc plant problems. In addi-
tion, poor health may result from other factors such as overwatering (espe-
cially of potted plants), the toxic effects of accumulated salts in the soil, high
levels of air pollution, or invasion by pathogenic organisms. Or, in some
circumstances, nutrients may be plentiful but unavailable to roots because
of prevailing soil conditions (see Soils, below).

Mineral nutrients return to the soil when leaves and branches periodi-
cally fall to the ground and decay, thereby completing one of nature’s most
important  cycles.  Prior  to  leaf  abscission,  some  of  the  nutrient  elements
(including  nitrogen,  potassium,  and  magnesium)  are  released  from  their
bound form in protein, chlorophyll, and other molecules and transferred
from leaves to the plant’s growing tips for reuse. Because mineral relocation
is in progress when older leaves turn yellow, gardeners can help their plants
conserve nutrients by not removing discolored leaves for several days, until
the minerals have been transferred.

During the course of growth, changes occur in a plant’s nutrient needs—
especially the relative quantities of nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and potassi-
um (K). In the early stages of vegetative growth, greater amounts of nitrogen

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 163

Uptake and Use of Water, Minerals, and Light

163

are needed to promote vigorous shoot development, whereas modest pro-
portions  of  potassium  are  required  for  root  formation.  To  encourage
enlargement of the food-storage roots of root crops, the ratio of these two
elements may need to be changed in favor of potassium. At the time when
a plant achieves a ripeness-to-ﬂower (chapter 7), increased phosphorus and
potassium, relative to nitrogen, promote the development of reproductive
organs. Some species fail to ﬂower when, at vegetative maturity, too much
nitrogen is available, with the plant’s metabolic energies being directed into
shoot and root growth.

Such  relationships  between  nitrogen,  phosphorus,  and  potassium  and
the development of speciﬁc organs underlie the reason for printing three
numbers, the  N-P-K ratio, on packages of fertilizer. For lawn grasses and
most  houseplants,  recommended  fertilizers  have  a  proportionately  high
nitrogen content to promote leaf growth (20–5–5, being one example: 20
parts nitrogen to 5 each of phosphorus and potassium). Whereas a product
having a 0–10–10 ratio is a typical formulation designed for ﬂower and fruit
set. A fertilizer for root crops may have an N-P-K ratio of 2–12–10, and an
all-purpose mix, 5–10–5.

SOILS

The soil is one of the most important parts of a plant’s environment, the
medium in which roots are anchored and from which nutrients, water, and
oxygen  are  obtained.  Soil  is  a  complex  mixture  of  inorganic  materials,
derived from the erosion of rock, and organic matter or humus—the decom-
posed remains of plants and animals. The inorganic fraction is divided into
three classes, deﬁned by particle size (1 mm = 0.04 inch): Sand particles have
a diameter between 0.02 and 2 mm, silt ranges from 0.002 to 0.02 mm, and
clay particles are smaller than 0.002 mm. Mixtures of sand, silt, and clay are
called  loams;  a  sandy-loam,  for  example,  contains  proportionately  more
sand. In humus-loams various proportions of organic matter are mixed with
the other components.

The proportions of each material determine the water-holding capacity
of a particular soil. Water-holding capacity (or ﬁeld capacity) is deﬁned as the
water content of a thoroughly wetted soil after surplus water has drained off
by gravity. Sandy soils retain little water, whereas the addition of humus
increases the water-holding capacity, the moisture being held in tiny spaces
(capillary spaces) within and between the organic particles. Capillary water
is the principal source of moisture for roots.

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 164

164

CHAPTER 8

clay particle

The surface of a
clay particle bears
negative electrical
charges to which
water is drawn.
One side of each
water molecule is
positively charged.
The bond between
clay and water is
difﬁcult for roots to
break.

A special problem is posed by soils containing large proportions of clay,
the particles of which bear electrical charges that attract water molecules.
The bond between water and clay, comparable to the attraction between
the opposite poles of two magnets, is a difﬁcult union for roots to break.
Consequently, much of the water in a clay soil is unavailable to plants.

Another problem with clay soils is their lack of porosity. Dense packing
of  the  ﬁne  particles  leaves  little  space  through  which  gases  can  be
exchanged between the soil and the atmosphere; yet it is essential that car-
bon  dioxide  and  other  gases  escape  from  below  ground  and  that  oxygen
penetrates  to  a  plant’s  roots.  Water-logging,  the  saturation  of  spaces
between soil particles thereby excluding air, is common in heavy, sticky clay.
In  contrast,  sandy-  and  humus-loam  soils  have  a  loose,  porous  quality
favoring drainage and the diffusion of gases.

Soils have complex chemical compositions that determine, in addition to
mineral nutrient content, their relative acidity or alkalinity—the pH. The
pH scale is a numerical series from 1 to 14, with 1 being most acid and 14
being most alkaline. A neutral condition is arbitrarily assigned a pH value
of 7. Acidity decreases from pH 1 to 7; alkalinity increases from pH 7 to 14.
Most horticultural species grow favorably in soils at or close to neutral-
ity.  However,  ferns,  azalea,  rhododendron,  and  camellia,  for  example,
require an acidic pH between 4.5 and 5.5, whereas asparagus, spinach, cacti,
and other succulent species prefer mildly alkaline soils, to about 7.5 on the
pH scale. Hydrangea tolerates a wide pH range, but the ﬂower colors indi-
cate the soil pH—the ﬂowers become blue in acidic soils, pink in alkaline.

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:06 PM  Page 165

Uptake and Use of Water, Minerals, and Light

165

Most often, soils are made more acid by the addition of sulfur or organ-
ic materials such as peat moss or sawdust; limestone (calcium carbonate) is
widely  used  to  increase  the  alkalinity.  The  mineral  content  of  irrigation
water  may  alter  the  soil  pH,  particularly  when  the  water  evaporates  and
residual chemicals accumulate in the soil—a frequent, acute problem in arid
regions.

Normally, rain leaches excess minerals deep into the soil and helps to
restore the pH to more favorable conditions. But in some areas, industrial
emissions are contaminating rain and affecting soil chemistry. When the air
pollutant  sulfur  dioxide  combines  with  atmospheric  moisture,  it  falls  to
earth as a mild sulfuric acid solution called acid rain, which has a devastat-
ing effect on species ranging from simple nitrogen-ﬁxing bacteria to forest
trees.

Increased soil acidity, whether from acid rain or natural sources, causes
aluminum, manganese, and iron to be liberated from harmless, insoluble
forms in the soil to concentrations that slowly poison cells. Furthermore,
free aluminum and iron cause phosphates to precipitate and interfere with
the  uptake  of  calcium  by  roots,  thereby  adding  the  deﬁciency  of  those
macronutrients to other problems of plants in acidic soils.

At  the  other  end  of  the  pH  scale,  toxic  amounts  of  molybdenum  are
released in alkaline conditions. Alkalinity also makes phosphates and calci-
um  unavailable  to  roots  when  they  combine  to  form  insoluble  calcium
phosphate;  and  manganese  and  iron  bind  into  tight  chemical  complexes.
Because the resultant iron deﬁciency is fatal to many species, gardeners who
work  with  alkaline  soils  must  supply  the  metal  in  chelated  form.  Chelates
(soluble  organic  compounds  to  which  iron  is  bound)  make  the  element
available to plants without toxic effects. The chelate is eventually broken
down by microorganisms. Two commonly used chelating agents are known
by the acronyms EDTA and EDDHA.

THE PHOTOSYNTHETIC APPARATUS

The electron microscope was one of the great inventions of the twentieth
century. The instrument reveals tantalizing images of the intricacies of cell
structure,  at  magnifications  thousands  of  times  their  actual  size.
Chloroplasts, the site of photosynthesis, and other cellular organelles pos-
sess  such  reﬁned  details  that  it  stretches  the  imagination  to  fathom  how
each is made.

The black-and-white photograph shows two chloroplasts taken with an
electron microscope.  They are separated by the  walls  of  the  two  cells  in

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:07 PM  Page 166

166

CHAPTER 8

Magniﬁed 36,800 times their actual size, two chloroplasts are separated by the walls of
adjacent cells. Each chloroplast contains long, parallel, membranous structures connect-
ing short membrane stacks, called grana. Chlorophyll and other pigments are concen-
trated in the grana. The right-hand chloroplast contains two starch bodies (light areas).
The oval and elongated organelles, near the chloroplasts, are mitochondria, sites of cel-
lular respiration. At bottom right is a portion of the cell’s vacuole.

which they are located. Membranes enclose the organelles and also form
the parallel lines traversing the chloroplasts’ length. Several stacks of short
membranes are seen in each chloroplast. These are called grana (singular,
granum) and are the exact location of chlorophyll and the other pigments
that capture light—the primary energy source of plants and, ultimately, of
all living things.

The leaves of higher plants contain various types of photosynthetic pig-
ments. Chlorophylls exist in two forms—chlorophyll a and b—both of which
are green. Carotene is an orange-yellow pigment that is also abundant in car-
rot roots; and several xanthophylls range from shades of yellow to almost col-
orless, depending on their molecular structure.

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:07 PM  Page 167

Uptake and Use of Water, Minerals, and Light

167

In autumn-colored leaves, chlorophyll molecules break down, unmasking the yellow
carotene and xanthophylls. Some leaves, such as those of liquidambar (left), turn red
when anthocyanin pigments add the ﬁnal touch to the tree’s colorful spectacle.

The inherited color patterns of leaf variegation result from the various pigments occur-
ring separately or in combinations in mesophyll cells. Shown here are striped inch plant
(Callisia spp., left) and New Guinea impatiens.

When leaves turn yellow, they simply lose chlorophyll that had previ-
ously masked the appearance of the orange and yellow carotene and xan-
thophylls. A purple-red pigment, called anthocyanin, may also be present in
some species but does not participate in photosynthesis because it is stored
in cell vacuoles. Variegated leaves are of horticultural interest for their inher-
ited color patterns, formed by tissues in which these pigments occur sepa-
rately or in unusual combinations.

A rainbow’s spectacle reveals that sunlight is composed of several colors.
Of these, red and blue are captured by chlorophyll, whereas carotene and
xanthophylls intercept only the blue-green part of the visible spectrum. At

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:07 PM  Page 168

168

CHAPTER 8

wavelengths represented by these colors, the energy of light is transferred,
via the pigments, into the synthesis of foods.

Artiﬁcial  illumination  is  only  effective  if  it  provides  the  blue  and  red
wavelengths absorbed by chloroplast pigments. Ideally, incandescent bulbs,
which radiate abundant red, should be supplemented with selected ﬂuores-
cent  tubes  radiating  blue  wavelengths.  To  achieve  photosynthetic  yields
comparable to those in natural conditions, several lights are needed to pro-
vide high intensities, but care must be taken to control the build-up of heat.

LIGHT TRANSFORMED INTO THE ENERGY IN FOOD

Light, heat, and electricity are different forms of energy, none of which can
be stored for use by living organisms. During photosynthesis, plants absorb
light and channel its energy into the formation of chemical bonds uniting
atoms  into  molecular  structures,  as  described  in  a  previous  section.  The
large-scale storage of abundant sunlight in the form of compact, energy-
rich food molecules is the unique function of Earth’s ﬂora. Scientists are
able to transform light into electricity, but attempts to mimic photosynthe-
sis have been in vain.

Food molecules—carbohydrates (sugars and starch), fats, and proteins—
contain many chemical bonds, each representing a small package of stored
energy. When foods are used in the biochemistry of cells, the bonds are
broken and energy is released: Energy to construct other molecules, such
as  cellulose  and  lignin  needed  for  growth,  to  make  chromosomes  dance
through cycle after cycle of mitosis, to transport food in the phloem, to reg-
ulate membrane permeability, and to power countless other functions.

The process shared by all living things, of extracting energy from foods,
is  called  cellular  respiration and  occurs  in  the  cell’s  tiny  mitochondria.  In
higher animals, after food materials are digested, the energy-rich molecules
are carried in the bloodstream to the body’s cells. Among many physiolog-
ical  functions,  the  energy  derived  from  foods  makes  muscles  move  and
transfers messages through the nervous system.

Autotrophic plants hold the key to life on Earth; they alone are the inter-
mediaries between the sun and all other creatures. And it is their leaves’
microscopic chloroplasts that have the awesome responsibility of making
the system work.

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:07 PM  Page 169

Uptake and Use of Water, Minerals, and Light

169

light

carbon dioxide (CO2)

oxygen (O2)

chloroplast

water (H2O)

sugar (C6H12O6)

During photosynthesis, carbon dioxide and water molecules enter a chloroplast. Light
splits water into its component hydrogen and oxygen atoms. The oxygen atoms are
combined to form oxygen gas (O2) that escapes into the atmosphere. The hydrogen and
carbon dioxide are incorporated into molecules of sugar (glucose is shown here).

THE PHOTOSYNTHETIC PROCESS

The  harvesting  of  sunlight  by  chloroplast  pigments  leads  to  a  series  of
events  in  which  water  and  carbon  dioxide  are  used  to  synthesize  simple
molecules that, in turn, are used to build substances of increased molecular
complexity.

Photosynthesis takes place in two stages. In the light reaction, chlorophyll
b, carotene, and xanthophylls absorb and channel light energy to chloro-
phyll  a,  whose  electrons  (negatively  charged,  subatomic  particles)  are
boosted  to  a  high  energy  potential.  In  such  an  excited  (energized)  state,
chlorophyll’s electrons are diverted into a system that extracts and stores
their energy for later use in the synthesis of substances such as sugars. The
pigment’s  lost  electrons  are  quickly  replenished  with  a  fresh  supply
obtained from the breakdown of water, making the chlorophyll a ready to
be excited again and repeat the process. Splitting water molecules (H2O) to
donate electrons breaks the molecules into their component hydrogen (H)
and oxygen (O) atoms. The oxygen, in gaseous form (O2), escapes into the
atmosphere through open stomata as another important end product of the

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:07 PM  Page 170

170

CHAPTER 8

An outline of photosynthesis

reaction. Astonishingly, the sequence of events described above is complet-
ed in a fraction of a second.

During the second phase of photosynthesis, carbon-dioxide ﬁxation, carbon
dioxide from the atmosphere unites with the sugar ribulose diphosphate.
The product is split into two equal parts, hydrogen from the light reaction
is  added,  and  the  resulting  molecules  of  PGAL  (phosphoglyceraldehyde)
are then used as small building blocks for the construction of more elabo-
rate  molecular  forms,  using  the  stored  energy  from  the  light  reaction.
Although carbon-dioxide ﬁxation is slower than the light reaction, millions
of  PGAL  molecules  are  synthesized  within  minutes  after  light  enters  a
leaf’s mesophyll tissues.

The  ﬁrst  products  of  the  metabolic  construction  process  are  several
types of sugars, including ribulose diphosphate that the system regenerates,
ready to repeat carbon-dioxide ﬁxation. Other sugars include glucose and
fructose  (both  having  the  formula  C6H12O6 but  differing  in  molecular
structure); these may be combined to form sucrose (C12H22O11), common
table sugar obtained from sugar cane and sugar beets.

Thousands of glucose molecules are united into long chains, forming the
huge molecules of starch and cellulose. Although these two substances dif-

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:07 PM  Page 171

Uptake and Use of Water, Minerals, and Light

171

carbon dioxide

oxygen

food

water and minerals

Carbon dioxide and oxygen are exchanged between plants and animals by the process-
es of photosynthesis and cellular respiration. Food, the principal product of photosyn-
thesis, sustains all living organisms.

fer only in the manner in which the glucose units are joined together, they
function in completely different ways. Starch is the principal food stored in
plant cells. It can be broken into component glucose units when they are
needed as an energy source in respiration or for conversion into other plant
products by the specialized activities of enzymes. Once formed and incor-
porated into the structure of cell walls, cellulose, however, is not normally
decomposed  for  other  purposes.  Such  multiple  uses  of  glucose  illustrate
nature’s versatile but conservative mode of operation at molecular levels.

Following the production of sugars, the biochemistry of plants leads in
many  directions,  some  of  which  involve  the  introduction  of  mineral  ele-
ments  from  the  soil  (such  as  nitrogen,  sulfur,  and  phosphorus)  into  the
structure of certain molecules. Of the thousands of products thus formed,
several have been discussed in this and previous chapters. The diagrams of
photosynthesis  and  plant  metabolism  give  only  a  schematic  summary  of
what takes place during and as a consequence of photosynthesis. In actual-
ity, details of the enormously complex chemistry of plants ﬁll many volumes
in the scientiﬁc literature.

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:07 PM  Page 172

172

CHAPTER 8

GAS EXCHANGE WITH THE ATMOSPHERE

The liberation of oxygen during photosynthesis is as important to the well-
being of living organisms as the conversion of light into the energy stored
in the chemical bonds of food molecules. Cellular respiration, for example,
occurs in most species only in the presence of oxygen (aerobic respiration).
The  process  removes  oxygen  from  the  atmosphere  and  releases  carbon
dioxide as a waste product. In photosynthesis the converse is true. Thus,
through the exchange of the same gases, the two processes serve to com-
pliment each other.

It  should  be  noted  that  several  organisms  carry  on  respiration  in  the
absence of oxygen, referred to as  anaerobic respiration. Yeasts are one such
organism; they reduce sugars to ethyl alcohol (C2H5OH) and carbon diox-
ide  by  the  process  of  fermentation.  Yeast  fermentation  is  employed  in  the
production  of  alcoholic  beverages;  and  when  making  bread,  the  released
carbon dioxide is trapped in the bread dough and makes it rise.

On a global scale, oxygen is used for more than cellular respiration; all
burning and rusting processes, for example, consume the gas. An essential
role of photosynthesis, therefore, is to replenish the atmosphere’s oxygen, a
supply that would gradually diminish if autotrophs did not exist.

It has been hypothesized that, millions of years ago, photosynthesizing
plants outnumbered other forms of life and were responsible for depleting
the atmosphere of carbon dioxide to the present level of 0.03 percent. The
gas  was  used  to  construct  molecules  forming  the  plant  bodies.  After  the
ancient ﬂora died, the remains were converted into fossil fuels—coal, oil,
and natural gas—through the work of geological processes. In those forms
vast amounts of carbon dioxide were locked in underground deposits for
eons of time. That is, until our widespread use of fossil fuels as an energy
source began to undo the work nature took so long to accomplish.

The burning of fossil fuels liberates the energy of sunlight, ﬁrst captured
by plants in prehistoric times. But in so doing the ancient stores of carbon
dioxide are also released. Scientists warn of a possible “greenhouse effect,”
a  rise  in  atmospheric  temperatures  due  to  the  sun’s  heat  being  trapped
below  an  increasingly  dense  layer  of  carbon  dioxide  and  other  air  pollu-
tants.  As  happened  in  the  past,  photosynthesis  by  abundant  vegetation
could remove the carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, if left alone. But our
wholesale  destruction  of  Earth’s  great  forests  and  other  ﬂoras  in  recent
times runs contrary to natural principles and raises grave concerns for the
stability of our environment.

131-174_Botany  11/8/04  12:07 PM  Page 173

Uptake and Use of Water, Minerals, and Light

173

An outline of plant metabolism

The  advent  of  photosynthesis  opened  the  way  for  nature  to  spawn  the
magniﬁcent array of creatures inhabiting our living planet. Of these, evolu-
tion’s most complex product, the human species, owes a special debt to this
remarkable  process.  Photosynthesizing  plants  supply  materials  for  food,
clothing, and shelter; they ﬁlter the air; provide fuel for cooking and warmth;
and,  in  fossilized  form,  yield  the  energy  that  powers  marvels  of  another
kind—the inventions of human technological genius.

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:20 PM  Page 175

PART V

Reproduction

To gardeners, the botanist’s definition of a flower—
a shoot, modiﬁed for reproduction—may seem prosaic and hardly beﬁtting
the beauty of a hybrid rose or tropical orchid. But terse, factual, unsenti-
mental descriptions are a part of scientiﬁc tradition. In truth, ﬂowers are
short  branches  bearing  specially  adapted  leaves,  and  reproduction  is  the
sole function for which ﬂowers evolved; the pleasure they bring to people
is coincidental.

Flowers are also clever lures, not the innocent beauties poets would have
us believe. Casting camouﬂage aside, most ﬂowers ostentatiously advertise
their  presence.  Brightly  colored  petals  and  fanciful  shapes  ﬂash  in  vivid
contrast to subdued, leafy backgrounds, beguiling insects and other small
animals  into  close  ﬂoral  inspections.  Floral  aromas  ﬁll  the  air—whether
sweet scents attracting bees or putrid odors to which carrion ﬂies mistak-
enly ﬂock. Convenient landing platforms, formed by petals, are provided
for insects to rest from ﬂight. And when the tiny animals are tempted to
probe deeper into the ﬂower’s structure, they become unwitting assistants
in the plant’s reproductive process.

Not  all  ﬂowers  are  so  cunning.  Several  angiosperm  species,  including
grasses, bear inconspicuous blossoms that, like conifer cones, mushrooms,
and the tiny capsules on mosses, disseminate their reproductive products by
wind  rather  than  animals.  Growth  of  such  modest  structures,  compared
with  showy  but  ephemeral  ﬂowers,  takes  less  energy  and  food  from  the
plant’s reserves and eliminates the need for complicated biochemical path-
ways to produce bright pigments and exotic perfumes.

Regardless of a reproductive structure’s form or strategy, the function is
the same. Reproduction is the means whereby life, the mysterious property

175

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:20 PM  Page 176

176

PART V

of  organisms,  is  transmitted  from  one  generation  to  the  next.  Offspring
begin their lives from reproductive cells donated by parents, cells in which
genetic  instructions  map  lifetime  growth  potentials,  developmental  pat-
terns, physiological activities, and the special adaptations characterizing the
species. And, at maturity, the cycle is completed when an organism passes
the bequest of its parents to progeny of its own.

Plants produce two types of reproductive cells. The ﬁrst is the ﬁne, dust-
like particles issuing from brown spots on the underside of fern leaves or
from  inside  mushroom  caps,  for  example;  these  are  called  spores.  Under
optimum  conditions,  each  microscopic,  one-celled  spore  grows  into  a
many-celled plant by way of repeated mitotic divisions. The second repro-
ductive cell is formed during sexual reproduction, a more complicated sys-
tem for producing offspring because it requires a population to be divided
into male and female members or, at least, the development of distinct male
and female structures on individual plants. The sex cells, or gametes (Greek:
gamein, “to marry”), are incapable of growing directly into new plants, as do
spores.  In  sexual  reproduction,  a  sperm (male  gamete)  unites  with  an  egg
(female  gamete)  to  form  a  single  cell,  the  zygote (Greek:  zygotos,  “yoked,
united”). Starting with this one cell, repeated divisions lead to a multicellu-
lar organism.

The  great  problem  inherent  in  sexual  reproduction  is  the  transfer  of
sperm to eggs of the same species. Because most primitive plants live sub-
merged in water or in moist terrestrial habitats, water provides a medium
through which the sperm can swim. The egg is stationary, retained in the
reproductive structure bearing it. The male gamete’s search for a compati-
ble egg is made easier when the latter excretes a chemical attractant that is
believed to be speciﬁc for each species. In many terrestrial habitats water is
not plentiful at the time of reproduction. Thus, to ensure the success of
gamete  transfer  in  gymnosperms  and  angiosperms,  the  sperm  move
through liquid-ﬁlled pollen tubes that ﬁrst make contact with the awaiting
egg.  Reproductive  processes,  vital  to  the  future  of  each  species,  have
evolved to a state of extreme precision.

A few primitive species reproduce by spores alone; others use only sexu-
al  methods.  However,  during  the  life  cycle  of  most  plants,  gametes  are
formed  in  one  phase;  spores  in  another.  Such  is  the  case  with  the
angiosperms. Spores are the principal units by which primitive species are
propagated and dispersed to new habitats. During the evolution of gym-
nosperms and angiosperms, however, seeds replaced the spores as dispersal
and  propagative  structures.  In  their  dormant  state,  spores  and  seeds  are

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:20 PM  Page 177

Reproduction

177

equally suited to survive long periods of desiccation. But on germination,
seeds  have  a  head  start  due  to  the  presence  of  a  rudimentary  plant  (the
embryo) and storage tissues (chapter 1) that reduce the seedling’s depend-
ency on outside food and nutrient sources.

Humans  share  the  transitory  life  common  to  all  creatures.  Whether
favored with the longevity of the ancient bristlecone pines or having a life
span  of  only  one  day,  each  organism’s  end  is  as  certain  as  its  beginning.
Nature’s  great  paradox  is  that  such  creatures,  individually  having  a  ﬁnite
existence, should be chosen as vehicles to perpetuate life through eons of
time. The apparent contradiction is reconciled by reproductive processes
that range in complexity from simple cell divisions (as in unicellular organ-
isms) to the elaborate methods of ﬂowering plants, described in the follow-
ing chapters.

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:20 PM  Page 178

CHAPTER 9

From Flowers to Fruits

FLOWER PARTS AND THEIR FUNCTIONS

One of the special rewards of day-to-day work in a garden is being witness
to  the  unfolding  reproductive  cycles  of  plants.  At  ﬁrst  the  gardener  may
notice that some stem tips are “just a little different” than usual or that axil-
lary buds seem to have grown extra plump overnight. Such subtle changes
are  signs  that  reproduction  is  well  underway,  the  biochemistry  of  ﬂower
development having been initiated some time ago, perhaps by photoperiod.
In subsequent days recognizable ﬂower buds take shape. Although still
tightly enclosed by green scales, the buds swell with pent energy until, no
longer  able  to  contain  themselves,  they  burst  into  full  bloom.  As  layer
upon layer of intricate structures unfurl in each opening ﬂower, the scin-
tillating, seductive display is more than adequate recompense for the gar-
dener’s patience and labor. But such glory is short-lived. All too soon the
fragile  ﬂower  parts  wither  and  fall  away.  A  central  axis,  which  was  least
conspicuous in the blossom, now assumes the leading reproductive role as
it slowly enlarges to become a fruit—a protective container in which seeds
are nurtured.

The beauty and complexity of a ﬂower takes shape within the conﬁnes
of the bud. At the tip of the ﬂower stalk, or pedicel (Latin for “little foot”),
an apical meristem fashions the ﬂoral structures and arranges them in rings
(whorls). The stem tip bearing the ﬂower parts is called a receptacle. In a com-
plete ﬂower (having all of the customary parts), the outer whorl, the  calyx,
consists of several sepals. Most often, the sepals function as temporary, pro-
tective scales around the unopened bud. They may be shed by the opening
ﬂower  or  curl  backward  as  the  next  ring  of  modiﬁed  leaves  unfolds.

178

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:20 PM  Page 179

From Flowers to Fruits

179

Blossoms  lacking  one  or  more  of
the  usual  parts  are  referred  to  as
incomplete ﬂowers.

The corolla, composed of one or
more layers of petals, is the ﬂower’s
showpiece,  the  visual  attractant
catching  the  attention  of  passing
insects, birds, and people. Together,
the calyx and corolla constitute the
perianth of a ﬂower. The petals may
be white or brightly pigmented. In
some  species  the  sepals  may  also
possess  colors  other  than  green.
Flower  color  frequently  relates  to
the type of animal visitor the blos-
som  receives—bees  tend  to  be
attracted  to  blue  and  violet,  hum-
mingbirds to red, but not exclusive-
ly  so.  In  the  flowers  of  several
species,  the  perianth  consists  of
only  one  whorl  of  modiﬁed  leaves
called tepals. Tulips, for example, possess tepals that change from green to
other colors during their development.

Sepals, which form a protective cover over
an unopened rosebud, fold back when the
petals are ready to unfurl.

Each of the male reproductive structures, the stamens, consists of a stalk,
or ﬁlament, which bears an anther at its tip. Within the anther pollen devel-
ops.  The  ﬁne,  dustlike  grains  of  pollen  contain  two  cells,  one  of  which
eventually divides to form sperm cells. Each species of ﬂowering plant may

The colorful parts
of tulip ﬂowers are
called tepals
because no clear
distinction between
sepals and petals
can be made.

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:20 PM  Page 180

180

CHAPTER 9

A lily’s reproductive parts (pollen-laden
anthers and a pale green pistil) are clearly
displayed against the pure white petals.

A guava ﬂower’s brightly colored stamens
and rigid pistil are positioned to touch a
visiting pollinator.

anther      +      ﬁlament       =       stamen

Parts of a ﬂower.

petal

sepal

receptacle

pedicel

stigma         +         style       +      ovary       =       pistil

be identiﬁed by the distinctive shape of its pollen and the elaborate sculp-
turing of its outer wall, seen only with powerful microscopes. The pollen
wall is so resistant to decay that fossil pollen, retrieved after being buried
for thousands of years, have provided an accurate record of ancient ﬂoras
throughout the world.

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:20 PM  Page 181

From Flowers to Fruits

181

Pollen grains adhere to a lily’s sticky 
stigma.

A sectioned tulip ovary with immature
seeds, or ovules.

The ovary is the
basal portion of a
pistil and future
fruit.

The female part of a ﬂower, the pistil, is divided into three sections. At
the top is a stigma or sticky receptive surface to which pollen adheres; an
elongated style elevates the stigma into a favorable position for pollen col-
lection; and, at the pistil’s base, is an ovary. The ovary ultimately becomes a
fruit  and  contains  one  or  more  undeveloped  seeds,  or  ovules,  in  each  of
which  an  egg  waits  to  be  fertilized  by  a  sperm  (see  The  Reproductive
Process, below).

There are limitless variations in the shape and color of the ﬂower parts,
especially the petals. Sepals, petals, and tepals may be separate units, as in
pansy  and  poppy  ﬂowers.  Or  they  may  be  partly  united  into  tubes  (the
corollas of foxglove and penstemon, for example) or the fanciful shapes of
many orchid species. In daffodil and other Narcissus species, the corolla tube
forms a prominent, crownlike outgrowth called a corona.

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:20 PM  Page 182

182

CHAPTER 9

A clear contrast between an actinomorphic (radially symmetrical) ﬂower of sarcocaulon
(left) and zygomorphic (irregular) orchids.

The perianth parts of many species (lily, crocus, and forget-me-not, for
example) are symmetrically arranged around a central point in the ﬂower,
like  the  spokes  of  a  wheel,  an  actinomorphic arrangement  (Greek:  actinos,
“ray”). Snapdragon, sweet pea, and salvia, on the other hand, have ﬂowers
of irregular (or zygomorphic) forms. To botanists ﬂower shapes are important
characteristics  for  the  classiﬁcation  of  angiosperms  into  families,  genera,
and species, as are the numbers of parts in each ﬂower, their arrangements,
and sizes.

Most gardeners are familiar with the names of the ﬂower parts, but not
their word origins. Calyx and sepal are both derived from Greek words for
“covering.”  Corolla is  Latin  for  “little  crown,”  whereas  petal is  Greek  for
“thin plate.” Stamen is Latin for “thread,” like the warp in an upright loom.
Anther is  Greek  for  “ﬂower”;  thus,  perianth literally  means  “around  the
ﬂower.” Pistil is Latin for “pestle,” referring to similarities in the shape of
the two objects. Stigma is Greek for “spot”, and style is Latin for “stylus,” a
narrow,  pointed  instrument  such  as  an  etching  needle.  Ovary,  Latin  for
“egg,” and ovule, Latin for “little egg,” are used broadly, referring to their
general shapes.

POLLINATION BY ANIMALS

Having been attracted to a ﬂower by its color, shape or aroma, an insect or
other small animal may become an agent for pollination (pollen transfer). In
some species, particular visitors are the only means by which pollination
can be accomplished. Poised on ﬂexible ﬁlaments, the anthers dust pollen
on the animal’s body; as the little courier makes its rounds to other blos-

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:20 PM  Page 183

From Flowers to Fruits

183

Poinsettia’s small, yellow ﬂowers would go unnoticed by animal pollinators if it were
not for the brilliant red, modiﬁed leaves, called bracts, below them. Bougainvillea’s
small white ﬂowers are equally inconspicuous, but are set against clouds of colorful
bracts.

soms,  some  of  its  pollen  load  is  brushed  on  their  stigmas.  For  such  a
method  to  be  successful,  however,  both  the  anthers  and  stigma  must  be
strategically  positioned  to  make  contact  with  the  animal  as  it  probes  the
ﬂower.

Differences between species’ ﬂoral designs, including overall shape and
the exact placement of stamens and pistils, are the products of natural selec-
tion. Many ﬂowers are precisely engineered to match the body forms of the
animals participating in pollen transfer. Because of their shape, some ﬂow-
ers are exclusively pollinated by a single species of bee, wasp, or ﬂy—a pre-
carious dependency as extinction of the insect would leave little hope for
the plant species’ survival.

Pollen transfer by animals is a more rapid, direct, and certain process
than its random dispersal by wind or ﬂowing water. Honey bees and hum-
mingbirds, for example, move quickly between ﬂowers, thereby dispersing
pollen  before  the  ﬂowers  wilt  and  stigmas  become  unreceptive.  And,  it
would seem, even the smallest insects possess the desire to ﬂy consistently
between ﬂowers of the same species—the most important requirement for
successful pollination.

ROAD MAPS AND REWARDS

For their assistance in plant reproduction, pollinating animals are reward-
ed with food—nutriments upon which the ﬂower visitors become depend-
ent. Thereby, one of nature’s most fascinating partnerships (or symbioses) is

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:20 PM  Page 184

184

CHAPTER 9

Honeysuckle’s nectar is located at the bot-
tom of long ﬂoral tubes and only accessi-
ble to insects with long proboscises.

established. Some of the pollen may
be eaten by insects such as beetles
or  carried  by  honey  bees  to  the
hives to feed their young. But more
signiﬁcant, special glands (nectaries)
at the base of the petals, pistil, and
stamens  exude  droplets  of  nectar,  a
nutritious liquid. It is during the pollinators’ attempts to reach the nectaries
that they inadvertently pick up and transfer pollen.

The long, tubular ﬂowers of torch lily
(Kniphoﬁa spp.) are ideally suited to polli-
nation by sunbirds in South Africa, their
native habitat.

In some ﬂowers, such as the tiny blossoms of Queen Anne’s lace (Daucus
carota) and other members of the carrot family (Umbelliferae, or Apiaceae),
the  nectar  is  clearly  visible  as  a  shiny  drop  in  the  bottom  of  the  opened
ﬂowers. Such nectar is easily reached by ants and insects with short pro-
boscises (ﬂies, wasps, and beetles, for example). Other species typically con-
ceal the nectar at the bottom of deep, cup-shaped or trumpetlike ﬂowers.
Or the food may be even more difﬁcult to reach in the bottom of tubular
ﬂoral  projections,  called  spurs—the  distinctive  features  of  columbine
(Aquilegia spp.) ﬂowers. Such nectar is available only to insects having long
proboscises  (honey  bees,  bumble  bees,  butterﬂies,  and  moths)  or  to  the
extended tongues of hummingbirds.

Species having concealed nectar play games with their visitors. To feed
from nectaries obscurely located within a ﬂower, a pollinator is sometimes
forced to assume a contorted position, release a spring mechanism, or move
in such a direction that brushing against the reproductive parts is ensured.

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:20 PM  Page 185

From Flowers to Fruits

185

No time need be wasted by visiting
insects in ﬂowers displaying nectar
guides, contrasting color patterns such as
those of bignonia (above) and foxglove.

While  enjoying  a  meal,  bees  may
have to hang upside-down in some
flowers—and,  at  the  same  time,
have  their  bellies  sprinkled  with
pollen.  Insect  visitors  to  such
species  as  mountain  laurel  (Kalmia
latifolia) are peppered with pollen when anthers on tensed, springlike ﬁla-
ments, are released by the animal’s touch. The elaborate ﬂoral structures of
many orchids are so shaped that an insect, having been lured into a tiny
opening, must work its way through a series of chambers or tubes in which
pollen is scraped from its body and new loads are added. And while hum-
mingbirds gracefully maneuver before pendant ﬂowers, their feathers are
doused with sticky pollen from suspended, overhead anthers.

After an insect has settled on a landing platform formed by the lower
petals of the ﬂowers of many species, little is left to chance in aiding the
pollinator to ﬁnd its tasty reward and transfer pollen. The petal’s color pat-
terns, called nectar guides, are virtual road maps directing visiting insects to
the sweet food, past waiting stamens and pistils. Converging stripes of con-
trasting colors, rows of dots, a brilliant circle of color at the ﬂower’s center,
or starlike patterns provide visual clues that the insects instinctively follow.
Some ﬂower pigments reﬂect the sun’s ultraviolet light—wavelengths visi-
ble  to  many  insects,  but  not  to  the  human  eye.  When  nectar  guides  are
painted  with  such  pigments,  the  ﬂower’s  pollinators  are  dazzled  by  mar-
velous, iridescent patterns to which we are not privileged.

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:20 PM  Page 186

186

CHAPTER 9

INFLORESCENCES

Some ﬂowers, such as tulip, form singly on upright stalks. Others occur in
clusters or inﬂorescences, several types of which are described here. An inﬂo-
rescence mistakenly regarded by many people as a single ﬂower is the com-
posite  head,  exempliﬁed  by  daisy  and  its  relatives  in  the  sunﬂower  family
(Asteraceae, formerly Compositae). The typical composite head consists of
a central cluster of small disc ﬂowers, surrounded by a ring of ray ﬂowers hav-
ing conspicuous, straplike petals. Frequently, the ray ﬂowers are sterile, act-
ing only as attractants to pollinators. In some Composite varieties, such as
hybrid chrysanthemums and dahlias, there is no clear distinction between
the two ﬂower types in the inﬂorescence.

The shape of an inﬂorescence frequently relates to the pollinating ani-
mal’s behavior—the approach and landing of a bee or butterﬂy, for exam-
ple, or the hovering behavior of a nocturnal moth, hover ﬂy, or humming-
bird. Umbels and composite heads form ideal landing platforms for small
insects, with plenty of ﬂowers on which to feed, whereas somewhat larger

BRANCHING PATTERNS IN SOME COMMON INFLORESCENCES

In a spike, the ﬂow-
ers are attached to
the main stem with-
out stalks.

Acanthus spp.

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:20 PM  Page 187

From Flowers to Fruits

187

In a raceme, the
ﬂowers are
attached to the
main stem by short
stalks.

Sweet broom, Genista racemosa

A panicle is a 
highly branched
inﬂorescence.

Begonia spp.

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:20 PM  Page 188

188

CHAPTER 9

In an umbel, the
ﬂower stalks arise
from one point at
the tip of a stem.

Africa lily, Agapanthus africanus

Sunﬂower, Helianthus annuus

A composite head
is an inﬂorescence
composed of many
tightly packed,
small ﬂowers.

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:20 PM  Page 189

From Flowers to Fruits

189

The individual 
disc ﬂowers are
clearly seen in a
pyrethrum’s inﬂo-
rescence.

ﬂowers,  projecting  from  tall,  soli-
tary spikes and racemes, are favored
by hummingbirds.

Inflorescences  to  which  other
species  of  birds  are  attracted  have
ﬂowers  bearing  copious  quantities
of  nectar  and  convenient  perches
that the birds can grasp while feed-
ing.  Bats  forage  for  food  at  night,
navigating with a unique sound sys-
tem rather than by sight. Thus, the
flowers  that  bats  pollinate,  and
from which they feed, are clustered
on isolated branches away from the
plant’s  leaf  mass  where  the  animal
could become snared.

POLLINATION BY 
WIND AND WATER

Although  wind-pollinated  ﬂowers
are so inconspicuous they often go
unrecognized  in  ﬁeld  and  garden,
they are no less wonderfully design-
ed  to  fulﬁll  the  reproductive  pur-
pose. Most often, large numbers of
the ﬂowers are clustered on elevated

The calla lily (Zantedeschia aethiopica) is
an inﬂorescence, a type of spike in which
separate male and female ﬂowers are
borne on a central column called a spadix.
The small male ﬂowers are orange; the
ovaries of the female ﬂowers are pale
green. The spadix is enclosed by a large,
white, modiﬁed leaf (a bract) called a
spathe.

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:20 PM  Page 190

190

CHAPTER 9

Like delicate white feathers, stigmas of a
grass are prepared to capture wind-borne
pollen.

In a wind-pollinated grass inﬂorescence,
the individual ﬂowers are small and incon-
spicuous. Brown anthers dangle from the
ﬂowers on ﬁne ﬁlaments.

branches  where  clouds  of  dry, 
powdery  pollen  can  be  wafted  to
receptive  stigmas  in  distant  inﬂo-
rescences.  In  grasses  the  anthers
dangle  on  quivering  filaments.
Protruding from the tiny blossoms,
disproportionately  large,  feather-
like stigmas sweep the air as the ﬂower stalks sway in each passing breeze.
Of  the  vast  amounts  of  pollen  wind-pollinated  species  must  produce,
only a small percentage lands in appropriate ﬂowers. In view of the notori-
ous unpredictability of wind’s velocity and direction, it is difﬁcult to under-
stand how species can depend on this environmental factor to accomplish
reproduction. But they do, and they have successfully used the method for
hundreds of thousands of years.

Understandably, it is wind that transports the pollen of the most ancient
pollen-producers—the gymnosperms, from whose clustered male cones the
grains are scattered like yellow dust. The pollination system of these plants
evolved before the advent of insects and has not changed since. Despite the
advantages  of  animal  pollination,  wind  is  the  common  mode  of  pollen
transport for many species of monocots—the most advanced group of ﬂow-
ering plants—including members of the Gramineae (or Poaceae, the grass
family), Cyperaceae (reeds and sedges), and Juncaceae to which wild rush-
es belong. Wind-pollinated dicots are represented by such trees as beech
(Fagus spp.), oak (Quercus spp.), birch (Betula spp.), and elm (Ulmus spp.), all
of which form small, unnoteworthy ﬂowers, sometimes in conelike catkins,
as do birch and hazel (Corylus spp.).

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:20 PM  Page 191

From Flowers to Fruits

191

The need to produce large amounts of pollen, much of which is wasted,
is also the fate of aquatic species of ﬂowering plants whose pollen is dis-
seminated by water. One of the most interesting examples is ribbon weed
(Vallisneria spiralis), a popular aquarium plant that forms female ﬂowers on
long stalks reaching to the water’s surface. The male ﬂowers are released
from underwater inﬂorescences and ﬂoat independently on the water like
tiny  sailboats.  Propelled  by  gentle  winds,  some  eventually  make  contact
with the female ﬂowers and transfer pollen. The eel-grasses (Zostera spp.
and Phyllospadix spp.) are marine angiosperms that grow attached to rocks,
along the shorelines of many continents. The unusual, threadlike pollen of
these plants are adapted to tangle around the stigmas of the female ﬂowers
when swept there by waves.

POLLINATION ALTERNATIVES

Sexual reproduction can only occur between plants of the same species; for-
eign pollen landing on a stigma is incapable of delivering sperm to the eggs.
It is believed that a ﬂower obtains clues to the alien pollen’s incompatibility
from the grain’s shape and chemical composition.

The far-reaching effects of sexual reproduction lie in the selective advan-
tages of hybridization, genetic mixing that occurs when gametes from differ-
ent parents of the same species unite. In many species of ﬂowering plants
elaborate  methods  have  evolved  favoring  cross-pollination and  consequent
cross-breeding (outbreeding). These include self-incompatibility, chemical
barriers  in  the  stigma  that  treat  a  plant’s  own  pollen  as  if  it  were  from
another species; spatial separation of the anthers and stigmas in a bisexual
ﬂower; or staggered timing of pollen release and the stigma’s receptiveness
in each ﬂower.

Male ﬂowers of begonia bear a cluster of
yellow stamens.

In begonia’s female ﬂowers, the pistil’s
yellow stigmas and styles are connected
to an ovary, hidden below the perianth.

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:20 PM  Page 192

192

CHAPTER 9

Cross-pollination  is  also  ensured  when  separate  male  (staminate)  and
female (pistillate) ﬂowers are formed either on the same or different plants.
When one plant bears both types of ﬂowers, it is called a monoecious condi-
tion (Greek: mono, “one”; oikos, “household”). Monoecious species include
corn (Zea mays), walnut (Juglans spp.), ﬁlbert (Corylus spp.), melons (Cucumis
spp.), and squash (Cucurbita spp.). In dioecious (“two household”) species the
two ﬂower types are borne by separate individuals. Examples include wil-
low (Salix spp.), date palm (Phoenix spp.), and pistachio (Pistachia vera).

So important is pollen transfer that some species possess self-pollinating
back-up systems for use when cross-pollination fails to occur, such as on
cool days when insects are not active. In such cases, the ﬂower’s own pollen
is not treated as a foreign strain. Although self-pollination precludes genetic
diversity through hybridization, as a last resort it is preferable to no repro-
duction at all.

Some  mechanisms  of  self-pollination  include  anthers  that  eventually
sweep  past  the  stigma  as  the  stamen’s  ﬁlaments  slowly  curl,  nasturtium
(Tropaeolum  majus)  being  an  example.  In  other  species,  the  ﬁlaments  may
elongate and carry the anthers past overhanging stigmas; or movement of
the style may bring the stigma into contact with the anthers. In foxglove
(Digitalis spp.) the stamens are attached to the bell-shaped corolla. As the
corolla is being shed at the end of the ﬂowering period, the anthers may
touch the pistil and thereby transfer pollen.

Although the mature ﬂowers of many species open in a variety of envi-
ronmental conditions, a few remain closed and undergo self-pollination in
response to cold temperatures or certain photoperiods, a condition called
cleistogamy (literally, a “closed marriage”). Such plants, to which insects are
not  attracted,  conserve  energy  by  not  having  to  produce  metabolically
expensive  nectar  during  periods  of  poor  growth.  The  ﬂowers  of  some
species of rock rose (Cistus spp.) and salvia, for example, remain closed in
cold climates, whereas several species of violet (Viola spp.) develop closed
ﬂowers during the long days of summer and open ﬂowers in spring that are
insect pollinated.

Many ﬂowers remain closed at night and on rainy or overcast days, sim-
ply to protect the pollen against moisture. Self-pollination does not neces-
sarily occur during those periods. Flowers that open after the sun has set,
however, are prepared for pollination by nocturnal animals. Such ﬂowers
have  pale  colors,  visible  in  dim  light;  and  most  emit  their  strongest  fra-
grances during the hours of darkness. On a midsummer’s evening in a gar-
den  where  honeysuckle  or  night-blooming  jasmines  grow,  one  can  share
the ecstasy of nocturnal moths as, lured by sweet scents saturating the air,
they are irresistibly drawn to the waiting blossoms.

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:20 PM  Page 193

From Flowers to Fruits

193

THE REPRODUCTIVE PROCESS

The stage is set for reproduction when, by one means or another, compat-
ible  pollen  comes  to  rest  on  a  ﬂower’s  stigma.  Of  the  two  cells  within  a
pollen grain, one is destined to grow into a long tube, a pollen tube, that pen-
etrates the pistil’s tissues in search of a microscopic opening in one of the
ovules, located in the ovary. Germination and growth of the pollen tube is
rapid and is promoted by food substances and hormones supplied by the
stigma and style. Botanists still don’t understand how a pollen tube locates
the  ovule’s  tiny  pore  or  the  mysterious  factor  that  diverts  several  tubes,
growing from many pollen on the stigma, to separate ovules.

The second of a pollen’s cells divides to become two sperm that move
through the pollen tube and enter the ovule. Before the pollen tube and
sperm’s arrival, each ovule must be equipped with an egg, ready for imme-
diate  fertilization  (see  chapter  10  for  the  method  involved).  A  zygote is
formed when one of the two sperms unites with the egg. The second sperm
combines  with  another  cell  in  the  ovule.  The  product  of  that  union  is  a
temporary  food-storage  tissue,  called  the  endosperm,  used  to  nourish  the
zygote as it grows into an embryo, the miniature plant within a seed. A portion

1. Pollen grains land on the stigma and germinate.

2. Pollen tubes, through which the sperm move, grow through the
style. A tube nucleus precedes the sperm in each pollen tube.

3. A pollen tube enters each ovule to deliver the

sperm to an awaiting egg.

Events leading to the fertilization of a ﬂower’s eggs

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:20 PM  Page 194

194

CHAPTER 9

a

b

c

Germination of a pollen grain. (a) When a pollen grain lands on a stigma, it contains
two cells. (b) The nucleus of one cell controls the growth of the pollen tube. (c) The
pollen’s second cell divides to form two sperm that move down the pollen tube.

A well-deﬁned pistil
sits at the heart of
each grapefruit
ﬂower. After fertil-
ization of the eggs,
most of the ﬂower
parts drop off, leav-
ing the green ovary
nestled in a tiny
cup formed by the
sepals.

of  the  endosperm  may  persist  in  a  seed  and  supply  food  to  the  growing
seedling during seed germination (chapter 1).

As ovules grow and mature into seeds they remain enclosed by the ovary,
which  slowly  enlarges  to  become  a  fruit—the  angeion (Greek:  “vessel  or
container”) part of the word angiosperm, the ﬂowering plants’ formal name.
(Sperma is  Greek  for  “seed.”)  The  development  of  most  fruits  and  seeds
occurs as a consequence of pollination and fertilization of the eggs. Embryo
and seed growth apparently stimulate the production of hormones, includ-
ing gibberellin (chapter 7), that promote fruit enlargement. When pollen
tubes  deliver  sperm  to  the  ovules  in  only  one  segment  of  the  pistil  the
resulting  fruit  merely  enlarges  on  that  side.  Gardeners  are  familiar  with
such occasional, odd-shaped products.

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:20 PM  Page 195

From Flowers to Fruits

195

SEEDLESS FRUITS AND UNUSUAL EMBRYOS

A few species are capable of producing full-grown fruits without the stim-
ulation of pollination and fertilization or the development of seeds—a condi-
tion called parthenocarpy (Greek: parthenos, “virgin”; karpos, “fruit”). Examples
of  parthenocarpic  fruits  include  the  navel  orange,  common  varieties  of
banana,  oriental  persimmon,  and  pineapple.  Not  all  seedless  fruits  are
parthenocarpic. Seedless grapes develop after pollination and fertilization,
but  the  embryo  soon  aborts  and  the  seeds  fail  to  enlarge.  Seedless  plant
varieties  can  only  be  propagated  by  vegetative  means,  including  cuttings
and grafts.

Normally,  the  embryo  develops  when  the  fertilized  egg,  or  zygote,
undergoes  repeated  cell  divisions.  However,  in  citrus  and  a  few  other
species certain cells in the ovule, other than the fertilized egg, may develop
into a viable embryo. Thus, fertilization is bypassed and the resulting plant
has a genetic composition identical to the single parent bearing the pistil
and  ovule.  Such  an  unusual  phenomenon  is  known  as  apomixis (loosely
translated from Greek as “a different mixing”).

FRUIT TYPES

As  the  ovary  of  some  species  develops  into  the  fruit  wall,  or  pericarp,  it
becomes  increasingly  ﬂeshy  and  soft  as  the  time  for  seed  dispersal
approaches.  The  outer  layers  of  such  fruits  as  peach,  apricot,  plum,  and
cherry become soft and delicious to eat, whereas the inner stone (or pit),
which is also a part of the pericarp, is exceedingly hard and contains the
fruit’s  single  seed.  In  other  species,  the  pericarp  may  dry  and  split  open
along clearly deﬁned seams, as do pea pods when left to mature on their
vines. Some dry fruits, such as poppy capsules, scatter their seeds through
small openings, like a salt shaker. Others, including acorns and ﬁlbert nuts,
become hard and remain closed; their seeds germinate only after the peri-
carps have partly rotted in the soil.

The edible part of most ﬂeshy fruits is pericarp tissue derived from the
ﬂower’s ovary wall. But, in some cases, the tissues of petals and sepals, or an
enlarged  receptacle,  become  the  special  food  material.  In  the  ﬂowers  of
apples and pears, for example, the basal portion of the perianth forms a tube
fused to the sides of the ovary. When the fruits develop from such ﬂowers
it is the perianth tubes (petals and sepals) that enlarge, rather than the ovary
walls. Strawberry ﬂowers, on the other hand, bear numerous pistils on a
single receptacle. When the strawberry fruit matures, the receptacle grows

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:20 PM  Page 196

196

CHAPTER 9

A pepper’s fruit wall, or pericarp, is soft
and ﬂeshy at maturity. The seeds have a
large cavity in which to develop.

Some fruits become dry and brittle at
maturity. Poppy seeds are shed through
holes at the top of the capsule.

Numerous pistils
are borne on a
strawberry’s recep-
tacle, a green dome
at the ﬂower’s cen-
ter. It is the recepta-
cle that enlarges
and ripens into a
luscious fruit.

to many times its original size, softens, and becomes a bright red color. On
its surface the tiny, ripened ovaries (the true fruits) are borne; each contains
a single seed.

To classify the various types of fruits, botanists have devised an elaborate
system based on such features as pericarp structure, method of seed disper-
sal, and mode of fruit development. In such a system the most basic crite-
ria for classiﬁcation are as follows: A simple fruit is derived from a ﬂower
bearing a single ovary; examples include tomato, orange, grape, melon, and
peach. An aggregate fruit comes from a ﬂower having many ovaries. Thus, an
aggregate fruit is a collection of small fruits borne on a single receptacle,

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:21 PM  Page 197

From Flowers to Fruits

197

perianth tube

An apple develops from the ﬂower’s perianth tube.

The individual juice sacs of the boysenber-
ry’s aggregate fruit develop from separate
ovaries, formed within a single ﬂower.

Pineapple is a multiple fruit, derived from
the fusion of several ovaries, each from a
separate ﬂower in the inﬂorescence.

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:21 PM  Page 198

198

CHAPTER 9

such as blackberry, raspberry, and strawberry. The individual juice sacs in
blackberries  and  raspberries  are  separate  pericarps.  Multiple  fruits are  best
exempliﬁed by pineapple. The segments seen on the pineapple’s surface are
actually separate pericarps, each derived from a ﬂower with one ovary. Many
such ﬂowers crowd around the ﬂowering stem. At maturity the pericarps
become fused into a single, edible mass.

SEED DISPERSAL

The  transport  of  seeds  away  from  the  parent  plant,  hopefully  to  places
where the seedlings can grow without competition for light, water, and soil
nutrients, is the ﬁnal act in the drama of reproduction. The fruit’s function
is to protect the seeds until they are ready for dispersal. The seeds may be
shaken or vigorously ejected from the mature fruit when it dries and cracks

Each dandelion fruit contains a small
seed and bears a tiny parachute for wind
dispersal to far-away places.

Maple fruits have attached wings that
facilitate wind dispersal.

Seed dispersal by
water. The
coconut’s buoyant
fruit may travel
great distances
before being
washed ashore and
its seed germi-
nates.

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:21 PM  Page 199

From Flowers to Fruits

199

Animal dispersal of seeds. Attractive, red
berries, such as these toyon berries, fre-
quently contain small, hard seeds that
pass unharmed through birds’ digestive
tracts as a method of dispersal.

Cocklebur (Xanthium) fruits are covered
with barbs that snag the fur of passing
animals.

open. Or they may be carried as a package after the fruit has separated from
the parent plant and rolls down a slope or is carried by wind, water, or ani-
mals to some other location. The seeds are eventually released when the
container rots or opens when dry.

The fruits of maple (Acer spp.) and ash (Fraxinus spp.) bear wings to help
them ﬂy with a spinning motion. Some small fruits, such as those of dan-
delion (Taraxacum ofﬁcinale), receive widespread dispersal while suspended in
midair on feathery parachutes. And many orchids produce large numbers of
ﬁne,  dustlike  seeds  often  blown  great  distances  by  wind.  Seeds  and  fruit
scattered  by  water  possess  air-ﬁlled  cavities  and  waterproof  covers.  The
coconut’s  ﬁbrous  husk,  for  example,  provides  sufﬁcient  buoyancy  to  the
heavy fruit and its single, large seed to enable them to ﬂoat for many miles
on ocean currents.

The presence of hooks and barbs is a reliable indication that a seed or
fruit is waiting to hitch a ride on a passing animal. Either by snagging the
fur or lodging in the animal’s feet, the seed or fruit may travel some distance
before it is shed or scratched off. Some seeds, such as those of the parasite
mistletoe, are coated with a sticky substance that adheres to the feet and
feathers of birds until the seeds are transferred to a tree’s bark when the
animal preens itself. In a similar fashion waterfowl may carry the seeds of
marsh  plants  in  mud  stuck  to  their  bodies.  And  the  passage  of  seeds,
unharmed, through animals’ intestinal tracts may be an important factor in
both seed germination and species’ dispersal, as was discussed in chapter 1.
In such a case, the food value the animal derives from digesting the fruit
becomes an incentive to swallow and distribute more seeds.

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:21 PM  Page 200

200

CHAPTER 9

THE COST OF REPRODUCTION

A signiﬁcant portion of a plant’s food reserves are used for the purpose of
reproduction.  When  growing  in  ﬁeld  habitats,  an  average  annual  species
spends 20–30 percent of its resources on ﬂowering and fruiting; perennials
use about half that amount. But the threat of death from nutrient or water
shortages prompts many plants to increase food allocations (to 50 percent
or more) to processes ensuring the perpetuation of the species.

The bigger the reproductive structures, relative to the plant’s size, the
greater the amount of food that must be accumulated during the preceding
months or years of vegetative growth. Flowers, nectar, pollen, fruits, and
seeds are each produced at an enormous energetic cost. Even among gym-
nosperms  resources  are  taxed  by  the  development  of  cones,  prodigious
quantities  of  pollen,  and  typically  large  numbers  of  seeds.  But  with  the
stamina of a pine, cedar, or redwood tree, production of a yearly seed crop
does not cause irreparable harm.

Such is not the case with annual species, whose death after seed forma-
tion is due, in part, to the stress the reproductive processes place on their
metabolic systems. Likewise, some large, perennial angiosperms end their
lives after a single batch of seeds has been scattered—a good example being
the century-plant (Agave spp.) that, after six to ﬁfteen years of growth, pro-
duces one towering inﬂorescence and then dies. Such a sacriﬁce is indica-
tive of the price living organisms are willing to pay for survival.

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:21 PM  Page 201

CHAPTER 10

Strategies of Inheritance

GENETICS: THE SCIENCE OF HEREDITY

Family reunions offer excellent opportunities to see nature’s heredity sys-
tems  at  work:  Gatherings  of  grandparents,  parents  and  their  children,
cousins, aunts, and uncles who are tied to a common ancestry by their genes,
molecular  units  of  inheritance,  carried  by  chromosomes  in  the  nuclei  of
cells. Distinctive hair and eye colors, facial features, and other traits that
run in families bear witness to the persistence of genes transmitted from
generation to generation through the process of reproduction. So also do
physiological propensities, some of which manifest themselves in the form
of recurrent inherited diseases.

In plants, lineages can be traced by way of similarities in ﬂower form,
seed color, stature, hardiness in the face of cold or drought, unique bio-
chemical  products,  and  so  forth.  Each  plant  or  animal  characteristic  is
determined  by  a  particular  gene  or  set  of  genes.  When  mixed  by  sexual
processes, the new gene combinations result in offspring having recogniz-
able family traits, together with unmistakable, individual qualities. This is
no  better  illustrated  than  in  the  human  species  in  which  random  assort-
ments of several common features make each family member recognizably
different from the others.

The underlying mechanism of gene mixing can be traced in plants more
readily than in people, because cross-breeding can be controlled by selecting
parents with speciﬁc traits; and several generations of plants can be produced
within a comparatively short time, especially in annual species. It is not sur-
prising, therefore, that the fundamental laws of genetics were ﬁrst recognized
by  a  keenly  observant  gardener  in  the  repeated  hereditary  patterns  of  his

201

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:21 PM  Page 202

202

CHAPTER 10

plants.  The  precise  work  of  Gregor  Mendel  (1822–1884),  an  Austrian
monk, on the hybridization of common peas in his monastery’s garden and
his innovative interpretation of the experimental results have been recog-
nized as one of the greatest intellectual accomplishments by a single indi-
vidual in the history of science. Mendelian genetics revolutionized the bio-
logical sciences and provided theoretical support for Darwin’s concept of
speciation through natural selection.

The picture of how hereditary systems function was further enhanced
when other workers discovered the detailed cellular processes involved in
reproduction.  From  such  knowledge  we  are  now  able  to  appreciate  the
reproductive strategies plants use and to follow the complex steps in the
angiosperms’ and other plants’ life cycles.

MITOSIS AND MEIOSIS

mitosis

meiosis

2n

2 x

4 x

2n

n

During division of a diploid (2n) cell by mitosis the separate strands, or chromatids, of
the paired chromosomes are shared by two daughter cells. Division by meiosis results
in four daughter cells, each receiving a haploid (n) set of chromatids from one member
of each chromosome pair. The chromatids eventually duplicate themselves in the
daughter cells to form double-stranded chromosomes.

The  process  of  mitosis was  described  in  chapter  1  as  a  cell  replication
process—the  means  whereby  new  cells  are  formed  in  meristems  during
plant growth. Each cell produced by mitosis is endowed with an exact copy
of the parent cell’s nucleus, including its chromosomes and genes.

Mitotic divisions are also responsible for the growth of unicellular spores
into multicellular plants. However, when the time comes for a new gener-

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:21 PM  Page 203

Strategies of Inheritance

203

ation  of  spores  to  be  produced,  a  different  cellular  process  called  meiosis
(Greek  for  “to  lessen”)  is  invoked.  Like  mitosis,  meiosis  is  a  divisional
process that occurs within cell nuclei. But where mitosis duplicates and so
precisely  doubles  the  number  of  chromosomes,  meiosis  results  in  the
reduction of each cell’s chromosome number by exactly one-half.

A  ﬂowering  plant’s  roots,  stems,  and  leaves  are  composed  of  cells  in
which the chromosomes are in pairs. The pairing takes place during sexual
reproduction when one set of chromosomes is supplied by a sperm and the
other by the egg. The same is true of our own body cells, each of which
contain  46  chromosomes  in  matching  sets  of  23  from  each  parent.  The
number of chromosomes within cells varies across animal and plant species.
For example, among angiosperms chromosome totals range from 4 (2 pairs)
per  body  cell  in  a  species  of  Haplopappus,  a  type  of  daisy,  to  264  in  some
grasses.

When  chromosomes  occur  in  pairs  the  cell  is  said  to  have  the  diploid
(twofold) number. A diploid cell dividing by mitosis forms daughter cells
that are also diploid; that is, they are exact replicas. But when a diploid cell
divides by meiosis the products possess only half the number of chromo-
somes, called the haploid (single) number. A haploid cell may undergo mito-
sis to form other haploid cells, but can never divide by meiosis.

A fundamental difference between plants and animals is that, in the lat-
ter, meiosis is reserved for the production of gametes (sex cells), whereas
most plants use the process to form spores. To appreciate the roles of mito-
sis, meiosis, spores, and gametes in plant reproduction, the life cycles of a
typical moss, fern, and ﬂowering plant are considered in detail below.

THE LIFE CYCLE OF A MOSS

Mosses  congregate  in  shady,  cool,  damp  places.  Frequently  they  form
dense, green cushions of many thousands of individual plants that are only
recognizable when a clump is gently pulled apart. In many ways mosses are
primitive  organisms:  They  lack  roots  and  vascular  tissues  (xylem  and
phloem);  their  leaves  and  stems  have  a  simple  anatomy,  compared  with
higher plants; and because of an inability to form ligniﬁed, supportive tis-
sues, they are low in stature. The little green moss plants are composed of
haploid cells, having grown from haploid spores by mitotic divisions.

In  a  group  of  mosses,  about  half  the  members  are  male  and  produce
sperm  in  special  containers  called  antheridia (singular,  antheridium).  The
female plants form eggs in other structures, the archegonia (singular, archego-
nium). Sperms and eggs, being gametes, are haploid cells. Raindrops hitting

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:21 PM  Page 204

204

CHAPTER 10

a

b

f

d

c

e

The life-history of a moss: (a) male gametophyte; (b) enlarged view of the top of the
male gametophyte, showing four antheridia containing sperm; (c) female gametophyte;
(d) enlarged view of the top of the female gametophyte, showing two archegonia with
eggs; (e) a sporophyte attached to the female gametophyte; (f) a capsule discharges its
spores.

the male plants scatter the sperm to the females, where sexual union of the
gametes takes place within the archegonia. Zygotes, the products of that
union, are retained within the archegonia. Because the principal role of the
green moss plants is to form gametes, they are named gametophytes (gamete-
producing plants; -phyte is derived from the Greek phyton, “a plant”).

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:21 PM  Page 205

Strategies of Inheritance

205

With the formation of a zygote, a diploid cell, the moss life cycle enters
a completely different phase. The zygote undergoes repeated mitotic divi-
sions to form a multicellular diploid plant attached to the top of the female
gametophyte. Because this new plant is not photosynthetic, it draws nour-
ishment from the gametophyte during its growth into a slender stalk ter-
minated by a tiny capsule. Within the capsule, spores are produced by the
process of meiosis—haploid spores that, when dispersed by air currents, are
ready  to  repeat  the  life  cycle  by  growing  into  new  gametophytes.  The
strange-looking  diploid  plants,  balanced  atop  the  green  female  gameto-
phytes, are called sporophytes because their special function is spore produc-
tion. The sporophytes are familiar sights to all who have closely observed
mosses in the ﬁeld or garden.

The life cycle of a moss entails the sequential development of two gen-
erations  of  plants—a  haploid  gametophyte,  followed  by  a  diploid  sporo-
phyte—even  though  the  two  plants  live  attached  to  one  another.  This
amazing pattern of reproduction, known as an alternation of generations, is the
most common method of reproduction among plants, including ferns and
angiosperms.

THE LIFE CYCLE OF A FERN

Fern leaves (fronds) are among the most beautiful in the plant kingdom, the
reason for these plants’ special appeal to gardeners. The presence of vascu-
lar tissues in ferns, along with well-formed leaves, roots, and stems that are
frequently rhizomatous, are indications of a signiﬁcant evolutionary advance
over the lowly mosses. So also is the predominant role played by the diploid
sporophyte (compared with the gametophyte) in a fern’s life history.

The ferns gardeners know so well are sporophytes, as evidenced by the
production  of  spores  in  tiny  capsules  clustered  on  the  underside  of  the
leaves.  Such  clusters,  called  sori (singular,  sorus;  from  the  Greek  soros,  “a
heap”),  are  the  familiar  brown  spots  or  stripes  uniquely  formed  on  fern
leaves. Spores are produced within the capsules by the process of meiosis.
As the capsules mature, dry, and split open, dustlike spores rain from the
sori. Those spores fortunate enough to fall on moist soil have the opportu-
nity  to  grow  into  gametophytes.  Fern  gametophytes  are  heart-shaped
plants, about 1⁄4 inch (0.6 cm) wide in common species. They are photosyn-
thetic  and  extremely  fragile.  During  their  brief  existence  these  haploid
plants  fulﬁll  their  destined  sexual  function  by  producing  antheridia  and
archegonia, sperm and eggs, on the same tiny organism. Thus, to fertilize

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:21 PM  Page 206

206

CHAPTER 10

a

d

g

b

c

e

f

The life-history of a fern: (a) the fern plant is a sporophyte; (b) close-up view of a sorus,
a cluster of spore capsules; (c) enlarged view of a spore capsule; (d) a gametophyte
(sometimes called a prothallus); (e) enlarged view of two antheridia with sperm,
attached to the under side of the gametophyte; (f) enlarged view of two archegonia with
eggs; (g) a young sporophyte, attached to the gametophyte.

an egg the male gametes have only a short distance to swim in a ﬁlm of
moisture on the gametophyte’s lower surface.

During the initial growth of the zygote into a new sporophyte genera-
tion, the diploid plant is attached to the gametophyte—perhaps as a throw-
back to the union between the two generations in the mosses. But in ferns
the sporophyte’s continued, vigorous growth soon overwhelms the gameto-
phyte as the diploid generation establishes itself with roots, rhizomes, and
successive sets of leaves.

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:21 PM  Page 207

Strategies of Inheritance

207

The often unrecognized gametophyte generation of ferns, and the early
development of the sporophytes, may be observed when fresh spores ger-
minate in a ﬂat of moist soil kept in a shady, cool place for several weeks.
Close scrutiny is necessary to see the inconspicuous gametophytes, whose
pale green color offers camouﬂage against the ground. The spores of some
fern  species  germinate  more  readily  than  others.  If  successfully  grown,
there is no better opportunity to see “the other” generation in the repro-
ductive cycle of a higher plant.

THE TWO GENERATIONS OF FLOWERING PLANTS

As  evolution  progressed  beyond  the  ferns,  and  culminated  in  the
angiosperms, further modiﬁcations were made to the system of alternation
of generations. The ﬂowering plants produce two gametophytes of oppo-
site sexes, which are reduced to microscopic proportions and dependent on
the sporophyte for food and protection. Although these evolutionary rem-
nants of the gamete-producing generation are barely recognizable as plants,
their place in the reproductive cycle is just as important as it is in primitive
species. Contrary to popular belief, the plants we grow for their ﬂowers,
fruit,  and  seeds  do  not  directly  engage  in  sexual  reproduction.  They  are
sporophytes and, as such, produce spores by the process of meiosis—the
singular purpose of the diploid generation.

In the anthers of a ﬂower, for example, genetically selected, diploid cells
undergo reduction division to form haploid microspores (“little spores”) bear-
ing  the  species’  male  characteristics.  The  content  of  each  microspore
divides  by  mitosis  to  form  the  two  cells  within  the  pollen  (chapter  9).
Further mitotic division of one of those cells to form two sperm and exten-
sion of the other cell to form a pollen tube are the full measure of the male
gametophyte’s growth. The latter events occur after pollination and only
when the pollen is supplied with food and growth hormones from the pis-
til’s tissues.

When the germinated pollen is so viewed as a tiny gametophyte in the
alternation of generations, it takes on added signiﬁcance. For here is a legit-
imate, haploid, reproductive organism that, in the course of evolution, has
been reduced to its bare essentials—two male gametes and a delivery tube.
The capacity to photosynthesize and the development of antheridia have
been lost. All that remains is a mere shadow of the pretty green gameto-
phytes of the primitive mosses.

Formation  of  the  female  gametophytes  occurs  within  the  ﬂowering
plant’s ovules. The process begins when a genetically selected cell divides
by meiosis into four haploid megaspores (“large spores”) bearing the species’

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:21 PM  Page 208

208

CHAPTER 10

a

b

c

d

e

f

The life-history of a ﬂowering plant: (a) a microspore; (b) pollen grain; (c) germinated
pollen, the microgametophyte generation; (d) an ovule with the cell selected to undergo
meiosis; (e) following meiosis, a functional megaspore with three aborted megaspores;
(f) an ovule containing the megagametophyte generation, including an egg cell (lower,
center).

female characteristics. Three of these megaspores die. The remaining func-
tional megaspore undergoes repeated mitoses to form a collection of eight
nuclei,  divided  between  seven  cells  that  constitute  the  structure  of  the
female gametophyte. One of the cells functions as an egg. Following fertil-
ization, the resulting zygote grows into the seed’s embryo (chapter 1) by
way of many mitotic divisions. The embryo is an unborn sporophyte, wait-
ing for the moment of seed germination when a new life cycle is begun.

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:21 PM  Page 209

Strategies of Inheritance

209

You may wonder what happens to the male gametophyte’s second sperm.
The female gametophyte cell that contains two haploid nuclei unites with
the second sperm from the pollen tube to form a product with three sets of
chromosomes—a triploid, or 3n, condition. Mitotic divisions of the triploid
cell leads to the formation of a triploid endosperm tissue (chapter 9). In some
species, variations in these events leads to endosperms having more than
three chromosome sets.

Similar to the male gametophytes, the female haploid plants are reduced
to  microscopic  proportions;  they  are  nourished  by  food  from  the  sporo-
phyte bearing them; and archegonia have been eliminated in the course of
evolution. The bond between gametophyte and sporophyte is such that, in
nature, existence of the female gamete-producing plant without the ovule’s
and  ovary’s  protective  walls  is  not  feasible.  And,  except  for  apomictic
embryo  development  (chapter  9),  the  formation  of  viable  seeds  by  most
ﬂowering plants is only possible after the life cycle has progressed through
the intervening stage of the haploid generation.

The  reproductive  cycle  of  gymnosperms  is  comparable  to  that  of  the
ﬂowering plants, the principal difference being that the seeds are developed
in  female  cones.  A  pine  tree,  for  example,  is  the  sporophyte  generation.
Pollen are produced in male cones and transported by wind to the female
cones, where ovules are developing. Germinated pollen—the male gameto-
phytes—grow inside the ovules where tiny female gametophytes are har-
bored. Thereafter, fertilization and seed development is similar to that of
angiosperms.

Alternation of generations is as real in all higher plants as it is in primi-
tive forms. Reduction of the gametophyte’s size and its protection within
the moist sporophyte tissues enable many gymnosperms and angiosperms
to live and reproduce in dry habitats.

CHROMOSOME SEGREGATION DURING MEIOSIS

The occurrence of meiosis in a life cycle is a crucial event, whether in the
formation  of  spores,  as  in  plants,  or  gametes,  as  in  animals.  During  this
process  members  of  paired  chromosomes  (homologous  pairs)  are  randomly
segregated into two haploid sets in separate cells. And along with the chro-
mosomes,  genes  controlling  the  expression  of  physical  and  physiological
traits are also allocated to separate reproductive units.

Suppose a diploid sporophyte has only two pairs of chromosomes in each
of  its  body  cells.  Let  us  label  one  pair  A  and  A’,  the  other  B  and  B’.
Following meiosis, haploid combinations of these chromosomes can only

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:21 PM  Page 210

210

CHAPTER 10

Segregation of chromosomes during meiosis. The homologous pairs at left are divided
into haploid combinations at right.

Possible chromo-
some recombina-
tions, following the
union of gametes
into a zygote.

be: AB and A’B’, or AB’ and A’B (see the accompanying diagram). In the
anther, meiosis distributes these chromosome combinations into the vari-
ous  microspores  that,  in  turn,  are  transmitted  to  the  pollen  and  sperm.
However, only chance determines the chromosome combination present in
the sperm that fertilizes an egg—a random selection, like the combination
of numbers from the toss of two dice. Likewise, in an ovule meiosis creates
the  same  pattern  of  chromosome  segregations.  But,  again,  chance  deter-
mines which of the four megaspores survives to produce the female game-
tophyte and its egg.

After our hypothetical plants’ gametes combine their chromosomes into
a zygote’s diploid nucleus, nine chromosome patterns are possible (see the
accompanying table). When such a large number of combinations results
from only four chromosomes, imagine the huge number of possible com-
binations  obtainable  with  forty  chromosomes,  a  typical  count  for
angiosperm species.

GENE SEGREGATION DURING MEIOSIS

Chromosome  mixing  during  sexual  reproduction  takes  on  added  signiﬁ-
cance  when  the  thousands  of  genes  borne  by  the  chromosomes,  and  the
traits  they  represent,  are  considered.  But  a  further  complexity  is  added
because genes have two modes of expression—they are either dominant or

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 211

Strategies of Inheritance

211

parents

gametes

F1 generation

A cross between a homozygous tall (TT ) variety of pea and a dwarf (tt) results in het-
erozygous tall (Tt) progeny in the ﬁrst ﬁlial (F1) generation.

recessive. Dominant traits take precedence over the recessive when genes for
both  characteristics  become  mixed  in  an  individual  as  a  result  of  cross-
breeding. Consider the trait of plant height. Some hybrid varieties grow
tall,  others  of  the  same  species  are  genetic  dwarfs.  The  gardener  has  a
choice of growing pole or bush beans, for example. Tallness is frequently a
dominant trait in plants, whereas dwarfness is recessive.

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 212

212

CHAPTER 10

For illustrative purposes, consider a plant having tall (T) genes on both
members of a homologous chromosome pair (symbolized by a TT combi-
nation in the accompanying diagram). Pollen (and sperm donated by this
plant to a sexual union) bear the tall trait because only the dominant genes
are present. Consider another plant that is a genetic dwarf (t), having reces-
sive genes on both of the chromosomes determining height (represented by
a tt gene combination). All eggs produced by this plant carry the gene for
dwarfness.

Following cross-pollination between these two plants, the fertilized egg
contains  the  new  gene  combination  Tt,  as  would  every  cell  in  the  plant
growing from that zygote. Would the resulting plant be tall, dwarf, or an
intermediate  height?  Rarely  do  genes  display  partial  expression.  Most
often, the presence of the dominant gene completely suppresses the expres-
sion of the recessive trait. Thus, the hybrid plant in question will grow tall
and be called a heterozygous tall—a product of the pairing of the two differ-
ent (hetero) genes,  T and  t. The tall parent plant (TT) is a  homozygous tall
(homo, “same”).

The visible expression of genes, in this case tallness, is called the pheno-
type of  the  plant  (from  the  Greek  “to  appear”),  whereas  the  actual  gene
composition is its genotype. Note that the occurrence of a recessive pheno-
type, a dwarf plant, is only possible when the double-recessive genotype (tt)
is present.

The signiﬁcance of these differences is that when two plants are cross-
bred,  both  of  which  possess  a  recessive  phenotype,  all  the  offspring  are
guaranteed  to  possess  that  same  trait.  Similarly,  all  the  progeny  of  two
plants having homozygous dominant genotypes have the dominant charac-
teristic. But when a heterozygous condition exists in either or both parents,
the next generation can be expected to contain members with mixed phe-
notypes (see the accompanying diagram). Recessive genes, lurking in the
parent’s  genetic  makeup  through  several  generations,  eventually  reveal
their  presence  with  the  chance  occurrence  of  the  double-recessive  gene
combination.

The widespread presence of heterozygous gene combinations in plants
is one of the principal reasons why hybrid progeny—the products of sexu-
al reproduction—are not always true to their parent’s form. The only way
to guarantee genotypic uniformity among members of a population is to
propagate them vegetatively by cuttings or grafts, techniques horticulturists
regularly employ.

The inheritance of height is only one plant characteristic controlled by
paired genes on homologous chromosomes. Thousands of other physical

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 213

Strategies of Inheritance

213

parents

possible male gametes

progeny

The results of a
cross between two
heterozygous tall
plants. The progeny
include three tall
types to each dwarf
(tt). Of the tall vari-
eties, two are het-
erozygous tall (Tt)
to each homozy-
gous tall (TT ).

possible female gametes

and physiological traits are so determined, including ﬂower shape, fruit size
and color, leaf form, response to photoperiod, and maturation rates. The
genes  for  such  features,  located  on  different  chromosomes,  are  thereby
sorted and mixed into ever-changing combinations with each passing gen-
eration.

Each  variety’s  complete,  unique  gene  combination—its  genetic  blue-
print—is so complex that to duplicate it through cross-breeding is virtual-
ly impossible. Thus, when cultivated plants that are solely propagated by
vegetative means are lost through human neglect they can, in most cases,
never again be recreated.

CONSEQUENCES OF IMPERFECTION

In living organisms, the processes of mitosis and meiosis have occurred an
inﬁnite number of times, with astonishing regularity, since time immemo-
rial. But, as with any biological system, cell divisions occasionally go wrong.
The  chromosomes  may  separate  into  incomplete  sets  during  meiosis,
resulting, for example, in gametes with an extra chromosome (n + 1) or with
one  missing  (n –  1).  Such  a  condition  is  known  as  aneuploidy (“not  good
ploidy”). Most often, a plant is not at a disadvantage when it inherits an
extra chromosome; in fact, it may result in the increased size of one or more
of its organs, such as the broad leaves and globular fruits of the ‘Globe’ vari-
ety of jimson weed (Datura stramonium). However, the absence of a chro-
mosome is fatal because too many genes necessary to the control of vital
functions are missing.

A more common chromosomal aberration is polyploidy (poly, “many”) in
which  cell  nuclei  possess  three  or  more  complete  sets  of  chromosomes.
Plants  having  triploid (3n)  and  tetraploid (4n)  numbers  of  chromosomes
abound in a typical garden. It has been estimated that one-third or more of
angiosperm species are polyploids, with an especially high representation

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 214

214

CHAPTER 10

among varieties of horticultural and agricultural interest. Of these, approx-
imately 40 percent are dicots; 60 percent are monocots (particularly grass-
es). Many commercial plant catalogs feature the latest polyploid cultivars;
some are grown from seed, others are propagated from vegetative organs.
Polyploidy  frequently  results  in  sterility.  Thus,  species  with  such  a
genetic makeup must reproduce by bulbs, corms, or rhizomes to survive in
nature. And it is through such methods, plus cuttings and grafts, that hor-
ticulturists frequently propagate these unusual plants. Sterility appears in
many ways, including disruptions in the development of pollen or pollen
tubes, aborted embryos, or modiﬁcations in the structure of ﬂower parts.

Polyploids are popular for cultivation due to their large size and vigor-
ous  growth,  being  endowed  by  the  extra  sets  of  genes  in  their  cells.
Compared with their diploid counterparts, tetraploids, in particular, form
larger leaves, ﬂowers, and fruit. They possess increased food values, capac-
ities for wood production, and overall stature. The tolerance of some poly-
ploid species to environmental change has given them an advantage during
natural selection and greater ﬂexibility for growth under a broad range of
garden conditions.

THE ORIGINS OF POLYPLOIDY

Normally, sex cells contain the haploid number of chromosomes. But, spo-
radically, diploid gametes are formed when reduction fails to occur during
meiosis  (see  the  accompanying  diagram).  Thus,  when  a  diploid  gamete
combines  with  a  normal  haploid  sex  cell,  the  resultant  3n zygote  is  the
beginning  of  a  triploid  sporophyte  generation.  Vegetative  propagation  is
possible  in  a  3n plant  because  mitotic  cell  divisions  simply  replicate  the
triploid chromosomes in each newly formed cell.

The third set of chromosomes may confer hybrid vigor to the now grow-
ing plants, but reduced fertility is virtually assured when what seems to be
normal reproduction occurs between triploids. During meiosis the irregu-
lar distribution of the three sets of chromosomes to the spores, followed by
their  passage  to  the  gametophytes  and  gametes,  eventually  results  in
incomplete chromosome pairing when the sex cells unite. For subsequent
meiosis to occur, paired homologous chromosomes must be present.

Fusion  of  two  2n gametes  leads  to  the  formation  of  a  tetraploid  (4n)
plant.  The  gametes  may  be  donated  by  two  plants  of  the  same  species
(intraspeciﬁc hybridization) or by plants of different, but closely related species
(interspeciﬁc hybridization). Although it was mentioned earlier in the book that
different species are generally recognized by their inability to cross-breed,

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 215

Strategies of Inheritance

215

2n

meiosis

gametes

2n

n

3n plant

s
i
s
o
t
i

m

s
i
s
o
i
e
m

3n

(sterile)

The origin of triploidy. Incomplete segregation of chromosomes during meiosis in one
parent’s cells (upper right) ultimately leads to the formation of a diploid gamete. Union
of that sex cell with a normal, haploid gamete (upper left) results in a triploid (3n)
zygote. The zygote can undergo mitotic divisions to form a triploid plant; but when the
plant attempts meiosis, irregular segregation of the chromosomes leads to sterility.

polyploids derived from two or more species (allopolyploids; allo-, “different”)
do exist. Thus, allopolyploidy is one of the principal ways in which genetic
barriers between species are broken down, resulting in new gene combina-
tions that may confer selective advantages to the offspring. Such crosses are
also  of  interest  to  humans,  because  new  phenotypic  variations,  typically
arising in allopolyploids, have signiﬁcant potentials for economic exploita-
tion.  Varieties  of  apple,  grape,  loganberry,  maize,  rice,  strawberry,  rose,
dahlia, chrysanthemum, gladiolus, and several species of orchid are among
the different cultivars developed in this manner.

Sterility in interspeciﬁc hybrids is due to the inability of unlike chromo-
somes, from parents of diverse species, to ﬁnd partners and form homologous
pairs, necessary for later meiosis. Sometimes, however, all such chromosomes
double, thus providing themselves with identical mates for normal pairing

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 216

216

CHAPTER 10

(2n)

meiosis

(n)

gametes

sterile plant

s
i
s
o
t
i

m

chromosome

doubling

fertile plant

s
i
s
o
t
i

m

Interspeciﬁc hybridization. Meiosis occurs in the cells of two closely related, diploid, fer-
tile species (top). Union of the gametes results in a zygote that grows into a sterile
plant, whose unmatched chromosomes cannot form homologous pairs when meiosis is
attempted. If chromosome doubling occurs, fertility is restored to the allopolyploid.

(see  diagram).  The  resulting  allopolyploid  plant  is  completely  fertile
because it simply functions as a diploid with a large number of homologous
chromosomes.

The ancestors of the garden dahlia (Dahlia pinnata) are believed to have
had a diploid number of 16 chromosomes (2n = 16). Hybridization proba-

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 217

Strategies of Inheritance

217

bly  brought  about  the  development  of  two  groups  of  tetraploid  species 
(2n = 32). The garden species is an interspeciﬁc octaploid hybrid (2n = 64)
of those groups formed by the chromosome doubling described above. The
garden  dahlia  is,  incidentally,  a  highly  fertile  species.  Other  hybrids  that
have  been  traced  to  crosses  between  two  or  more  species  include  the
domestic  plum  (Prunus  domestica),  leaf  mustard  (Brassica  juncea),  and  com-
mercial tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum).

CUSTOM-MADE PLANTS OF THE FUTURE

The horticulturist’s and agronomist’s traditional methods of plant breeding
are fraught with problems related to the games of chance nature plays dur-
ing sexual reproduction. For example, the plant breeder has little control
over  chromosome  segregations  in  meiosis  or  gene  sorting  at  the  time  of
gamete  union.  To  obtain  the  unique  beneﬁts  of  polyploidy,  breeders  are
dependent on the outcome of the random, sporadic misbehavior of cells at
various stages in the reproductive cycle. Colchicine, a substance extracted
from  the  autumn  crocus  (Colchicum  autumnale),  is  one  of  many  chemicals
used to artiﬁcially induce polyploidy, but the results are as unpredictable as
when polyploidy occurs by natural means.

The purpose of selective breeding is to gather certain genes into hybrid
cultivars  that  people  deem  useful  or  aesthetically  pleasing.  Until  recent
times,  genetic  traits  that  breeders  transmitted  between  plant  generations
were restricted to those already present in the gene pool of the species or
closely  related  taxa.  And  genes  were  only  carried  on  whole,  compatible
chromosomes in the company of other genes, desirable or otherwise.

With the discovery of how genetic information is transmitted within the
elaborate  molecular  structure  of  DNA  and  the  recent  development  of
ingenious techniques of gene manipulation, plant breeding has entered a
new era. It is now possible to remove individual genes from cell nuclei and
splice them into the chromosomes of other plants. Gene transfers can be
carried out between species from different families and even between lower
forms and ﬂowering plants. Such is the marvel of genetic engineering.

Most genes inserted into an organism’s chromosomes function in a nor-
mal manner, simply directing the cell to perform a new set of biochemical
activities. And when the newly designed chromosomes engage in mitosis or
meiosis, they pass the introduced genes to subsequent generations of cells.
Furthermore,  when  genetically  engineered  plants  are  propagated  by
cloning (chapter 4), the painstaking procedures of cross-breeding by way of
sexual reproduction are completely bypassed.

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 218

218

CHAPTER 10

Botany of the twenty-ﬁrst century will probably involve mass production
of custom-made plants: Plants possessing the remarkable resistance of some
native species to pathogens and harmful insects; agricultural crops designed
to withstand drought and saline soils, with genes transposed from desert
species  that  developed  such  tricks  long  ago,  the  hard  way;  plants  with
improved nutritional value, productivity, stronger ﬁbers, or straighter wood
are certain to be developed. Ordinary and easily grown species are already
being turned into living pharmaceutical factories to produce medicines at
lower  costs  than  by  conventional  methods.  The  abnormally  high  photo-
synthetic yields of a few species will become common to all that are of eco-
nomic importance to the human race. And because gene sharing knows no
taxonomic boundaries, the important process of nitrogen-ﬁxation (chapter
6)  need  no  longer  be  the  exclusive  work  of  a  few  microorganisms.  With
genetic  engineering  the  possibilities  seem  limitless.  Perhaps,  somewhere
along  this  assembly  line,  a  blue  rose  or  a  red  delphinium  will  emerge.
Whether or not that is a good idea is for the reader to decide.

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 219

EPILOGUE

In  these  pages  we  have  ventured  into  a  realm  familiar  to  gardeners,
although not always well understood. We have journeyed far into the plant
kingdom. Words and pictures have formed interwoven paths of ideas as we
traversed millions of years of evolution and, occasionally, stepped from our
gardens into Earth’s far-ﬂung corners.

We have explored the microscopic world of plant cells and tissues; climbed
inside roots, stems, leaves, and ﬂowers; and traced the connections unifying
such diverse parts into whole, living organisms. In the course of our travels
we have paused to wonder at how plants are made, follow the progress of
their growth, and attempt to comprehend some of their mysteries.

We have delved into the intricacies of reproduction, inheritance, photo-
synthesis, and natural selection and have witnessed the power of plants to
survive by use of clever defense systems and their uncanny ability to adapt
to the contingencies continually challenging each species’ existence.

Our expedition has been made possible by virtue of the pioneering work
of  countless  scientists,  gardeners,  and  other  plant  lovers  who,  over  hun-
dreds  of  years,  have  unraveled  the  questions  of  what  plants  are  and  how
they function—a picture that continues to grow and never ceases to inspire
awe and enthusiasm for these delightful creatures.

If  this  introduction  to  botany  has  opened  new  vistas  for  the  reader’s
thoughts, encouraged a closer look at the plants in his or her surroundings,
and  brought  a  greater  sense  of  appreciation  for  nature’s  splendid  handi-
work, it has served a good purpose. Now let it be a guide as you embark on
many more journeys of discovery.

219

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 220

APPENDIX

Plant Names

Most gardeners are surprised to learn that the plants they collect, tend, and
enjoy actually have no names. That is, not in the sense that they truly have
organs and organelles to catch the sun’s energy, anchors to hold them in the
soil,  or  structures  to  facilitate  reproduction.  Plant  names  are  strictly  of
human invention and, as such, are subject to change as our study of indi-
vidual characteristics becomes more and more detailed—from the outward
forms of leaves, stems, and ﬂowers to unique biochemical products and the
DNA sequences of genes.

Plants,  like  all  other  objects  owned  or  observed  by  people,  have  been
given names from time immemorial as a convenient means of identiﬁcation
and future referencing. In different parts of the world it was common to
label plants in the local vernacular, frequently resulting in identical plants
having many different names. This was of little consequence until people of
a  scientiﬁc  mind  saw  the  necessity  of  organizing  all  of  the  world’s  then-
known plants under a uniform naming system. Thus was born the discipline
of plant taxonomy.

The  father  of  plant  taxonomy  was  a  Swedish  botanist,  Carl  Linnaeus
(1707–1778),  who  devised  a  binomial  system  of  nomenclature  in  which
each plant is identiﬁed by a two-part name, for example, Phaseolus vulgaris
L., the botanical name for the common bean. The ﬁrst part is the name of
the genus to which the plant belongs and indicates its close relationship to
other beans such as Phaseolus lunatus L. (lima bean) and P. coccineus L. (scar-
let runner bean). The generic name is a singular, Latinized noun and is always
capitalized.  The  second  part  of  the  name,  the  speciﬁc  epithet,  is  often  an
adjective and is written in lowercase. Together, the generic name and spe-

220

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 221

kingdom

divisions or phyla

classes

orders

Plant Names

221

families

genera

species

The plant classiﬁcation pyramid

ciﬁc epithet constitute the name of the species and are either written in ital-
ics or underlined. Following the scientiﬁc name an initial or other short-
ened form of a person’s name is written—the person to whom the plant’s
name is attributed (L. stands for Linnaeus). It is written in roman charac-
ters and not italicized or underlined.

Linnaeus’s pioneering attempt to give each plant a single scientiﬁc name
instead  of  the  confusing  collection  of  common  names  was  based  on  his
choice of observable characteristics such as the number and length of sta-
mens. But such a limited and artiﬁcial method of classiﬁcation presented its
own set of problems when, for example, cacti and cherries were placed in
the same class. It was Charles Darwin’s revolutionary ideas on the origin of
species  by  natural  selection  that  provided  the  theoretical  framework  on
which taxonomists expanded Linnaeus’s binomial concept into a classiﬁca-
tion  system  that  now  indicates  natural,  evolutionary  relationships  among
species. To trace the evolutionary genealogy of thousands of species that
comprise Earth’s ﬂora is one of the principal goals of taxonomists.

Genera and species hold a lower position in the taxonomic hierarchy. As
we  saw  with  the  bean,  Phaseolus,  there  can  be  several  species  within  the
genus; or there can be only one, as is the case with Ginkgo biloba. Broad sim-
ilarities between genera are used to group them into families. In turn, natu-
ral afﬁnities between certain families place them into one of several orders;
orders are grouped into lesser numbers of classes and subclasses that, in turn,

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 222

222

APPENDIX

are gathered into phyla (or divisions). Thus, the system is like a pyramid,
with few divisions at the top and several hundred thousand species forming
the base.

Genus names are derived from many different sources including mythol-
ogy (Narcissus, Hyacinthus); Classical antiquity (Lilium, Crocus); or the combi-
nation of two or more Greek words, such as the daylily, Hemerocallis, from
hemera, “day,” and kallos, “beauty,” because the ﬂower’s beauty lasts only one
day. Behind many generic names lie fascinating stories of famous garden-
ers, historic ﬁgures, or botanists who searched the world for new plants to
introduce into Europe and America’s gardens.

Speciﬁc epithets also come from a variety of sources, many of which are
simply descriptive names of the species’ distinctive feature: albus, “white”;
curvatus, “curved”; tomentosa, “matted with hairs.” Some refer to places of
origin: americanus, “from the Americas”; sinensis, “Chinese.” Other speciﬁc
epithets may describe the plant’s native habitat: littoralis, “by the seashore”;
silvaticum, “of the woodland”; or commemorate a person, for example, hook-
eri after  Joseph  Hooker,  a  nineteenth-century  explorer  and  director  of
Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. Although a generic name can only be used for
a single highly distinctive species or group of species having common char-
acteristics, speciﬁc epithets can be applied to any of a number of genera: Iris
japonica, Fatsia japonica, Cryptomeria japonica.

It should be mentioned in passing that variations within a species may
prompt taxonomists to divide it into smaller groups. In descending order
of distinctiveness, these are subspecies (abbreviated ssp.), variety (var.), and
forma (f.)

There are strict rules for naming plants, speciﬁed in the International
Code of Botanical Nomenclature. For example, the names of orders end in
-ales. Families generally end in -aceae, such as Ranunculaceae (the buttercup
family). In recent years, an attempt has been made to change some of the
older family names (Compositae, Cruciferae, Gramineae, for example) to
names ending in -aceae for the sake of consistency (Asteraceae, Brassicaceae,
Poaceae, respectively). Families vary in size, the largest being the Compo-
sitae containing 1200 genera with 21,000 species, many of which we call
“daisies.”

The largest families are divided by some taxonomists into subfamilies, the
names of which end in -oideae. The orchids, with more than 18,000 species,
are divided into three subfamilies, one of which contains the vast majority
of these exotic plants and, because of that, is divided into several tribes and
even subtribes for more convenient handling. Tribe names end in -eae. Such
details are more important to plant breeders than the average gardener.

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 223

Plant Names

223

Plants  of  garden  origin  are  subject  to  another  set  of  rules,  the
International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants. Here the nam-
ing process becomes quite complicated as more and more cultivated vari-
eties of species, or cultivars, and hybrids are developed each year. True cul-
tivars  must  retain  their  distinguishing  characteristics  from  generation  to
generation. A cultivar’s name is printed in roman characters and is preced-
ed  by  the  abbreviation  cv.  (for  example,  Papaver  orientale cv.  Sultana)  or
placed in single quotation marks (Hydrangea macrophylla ‘Europa’).

Hybrids are the offspring of sexual unions between plants from different
taxa, either in the wild or by cultivation. A hybrid’s scientiﬁc name includes
the parents involved in the sexual union. Thus, a hybrid between Fatsia and
Hedera is written Fatsia × Hedera, or ×Fatshedera; a hybrid between two fox-
glove species is written Digitalis lutea × D. purpurea.

There  is  constant  debate  among  taxonomists  about  the  placement  of
plants into the various taxa, especially those of family and lesser ranks. For
example, there is much indecision about what constitutes a family. Some
botanists argue in favor of lumping large groups of genera into a family,
whereas  others  prefer  to  split  them  into  many  smaller  taxa.  Neither
approach is incorrect because judgment calls are based solely on an indi-
vidual’s interpretation of available data. And interpretations can change as
more  information  is  obtained,  such  as,  in  recent  years,  DNA  code
sequences. Because taxonomy is in a constant state of ﬂux, such matters are
best left to scientists to resolve.

For the home gardener it is recommended that you stay with names you
are most comfortable using, including common names like “snapdragon”
and “hollyhock,” never letting the names of your plants detract from the
pleasures  they  provide.  As  Shakespeare  put  it,  “What’s  in  a  name?  That
which we call a rose by any other name would smell as sweet.”

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 224

GLOSSARY

abscisic acid a growth-inhibiting hormone
abscission zone a layer of cells at the base

of a leaf petiole, ﬂower, or fruit stalk, the
weakening of which causes the organ to
separate from the plant

abscission the controlled separation of
leaves, ﬂowers, and fruit from plants

actinomorphic ﬂower a ﬂower possessing

radial symmetry; any cut through the
center divides the ﬂower into two equal
parts

adventitious root a root arising in an unex-

pected position, such as from a leaf

adventitious shoot a shoot arising in an

unusual position, such as from the side of
a root

aerial root a root emerging above soil level
after-ripening a maturation process in seeds

of particular species after dispersal,
required for germination

aggregate fruit a group of small fruits

derived from several ovaries within a sin-
gle ﬂower

alkaloid a nitrogen-containing compound,
frequently used as a chemical defense by
plants

allelopathy release of chemicals by a plant
to discourage the growth of other plants
near it

allopolyploid a hybrid arising from the

combination of chromosomes from two
different species

alternation of generations the sequence of

a haploid gametophyte and a diploid
sporophyte during the course of a life
cycle

aneuploidy a condition in which chromo-

some numbers are not in exact multiples
of the haploid set; having extra or miss-
ing chromosomes within a nucleus

angiosperm a member of a class of plants

characterized by the formation of ﬂowers
and seeds in fruits

annual a plant completing its life cycle with-

in a single growing season

annual ring a cylinder of secondary xylem
added to the wood in a single growing
season

anther the pollen-bearing part of a stamen
antheridium the male sex organ of plants

other than gymnosperms and
angiosperms

anthocyanin a water-soluble pigment, vary-

ing from red to blue

apical bud a bud at the tip of a stem
apical dominance the inhibition of axillary

bud growth by the apical bud

apical meristem a region of actively divid-
ing cells at the tip of a growing root or
stem

apomixis development of a viable seed with-

out fusion of gametes

archegonium the female sex organ of

plants, other than angiosperms

autotrophic nutrition a form of nutrition

in which complex food molecules are
produced by photosynthesis from carbon
dioxide, water, and minerals

auxin a plant hormone that principally con-

trols cell elongation

axil the angle between the upper surface of a

leaf and the stem to which it is attached

224

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 225

axillary bud a bud located in an axil at the

base of a leaf

axillary bud primordium an immature axil-

lary bud

bark all the tissues, collectively, formed out-

side the vascular cambium of a woody
stem or root

biennial a plant completing its life cycle

within two growing periods
blade the ﬂattened part of a leaf
bolting the rapid growth of a stem prior to

ﬂowering

bract a modiﬁed leaf arising below a ﬂower

or inﬂorescence

bud scale a modiﬁed leaf protecting a bud
bud scale scar see terminal bud scale scar
bulb a short, ﬂattened stem bearing ﬂeshy,

food-storage leaves

buttress root an enlarged, aboveground

root giving support to a tree trunk

callose a plant substance created and

deposited in the pores of phloem sieve
plates, especially in response to injury
callus a corky tissue developed by woody

species to cover wounds

calyx collectively, all of the sepals in a ﬂower
cambium see vascular cambium, cork cambium
capillary water water held in the tiny spaces

between soil particles or between plant
cells

carnivorous plant see insectivorous plant
carotene an orange-yellow pigment located

in the chloroplasts

cell the smallest, independently alive unit
from which plants and animals are con-
structed

cell wall the outer covering of a plant cell
cellular respiration the chemical break-

down of food substances, resulting in the
liberation of energy

cellulose a plant substance forming a part of

the structure of cell walls

chelate an organic substance to which met-

als such as iron are bound and from
which they are released

Glossary

225

chlorophyll a green plant pigment located

in chloroplasts

chloroplast a cellular body in which photo-

synthesis occurs

chlorosis an abnormal yellowing of leaves

due to a reduced chlorophyll content

chromosome a threadlike structure bearing

genes in a cell nucleus; each chromo-
some consists of two chromatids formed
by the chromosome’s longitudinal divi-
sion

cladode a ﬂattened stem performing the

function of a leaf (such as a cactus pad)

clay an inorganic soil component having
particles less than 0.002 mm diameter

cleistogamy the development of viable seed

from unopened, self-pollinated ﬂowers
clones genetically identical organisms pro-
duced vegetatively from a single parent
cold hardening the process whereby some
species prepare for seasonal periods of
low temperatures

companion cell a phloem cell containing a

nucleus, adjacent to a sieve tube

complete ﬂower a ﬂower having all of the

normal ﬂower parts

composite head an inﬂorescence composed

of many tightly packed, small, ray and
disc ﬂowers

compound leaf a leaf in which the blade is

divided into separate leaﬂets

contractile root a thickened root serving to

pull a corm, bulb, or rhizome deeper
into the soil

cork the protective, outer tissue of the bark
cork cambium a layer of cells in the bark

giving rise to the cork; a lateral meristem
corm a short, swollen, underground stem in

which food is stored

cormel a small, undeveloped corm
corolla collectively, all the petals in a ﬂower
corona a trumpetlike outgrowth of petals
cortex the region in roots and stems imme-

diately inside the epidermis

cotyledon a seed leaf; a food-storage struc-

ture in seeds

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 226

226 Glossary

critical photoperiod the maximum day

length a short-day plant and the mini-
mum day length a long-day plant require
to initiate ﬂowering

cross-pollination the transfer of pollen to a

ﬂower on another plant

cultivar a cultivated variety, produced by

horticultural techniques

cuticle a waxy layer on the outside of leaves,

herbaceous stems and fruits

cutin the waxy substance forming a cuticle

layer

cytokinin a plant hormone primarily stimu-

lating cell division

cytoplasm the living protoplasm of a cell,

excluding the nucleus

cytoplasmic membrane the membrane

enclosing the cytoplasm

day-neutral plant a plant in which ﬂower
formation is not controlled by photope-
riod

deciduous shedding all of the leaves in one

season

defoliant a synthetic chemical causing leaves

to be prematurely shed

determinate growth growth to a genetical-

ly predetermined size

diageotropic horizontal growth of a plant

part

dicot a member of a subclass of angiosperms

characterized by having two cotyledons
in their seeds

differentiation the process whereby

parenchyma cells undergo morphological
and physiological change to become spe-
cialized in function

diffuse root system see ﬁbrous root system
dioecious having male and female sex

organs on separate individuals

diploid having two sets of chromosomes
disbudder a synthetic chemical causing the

shedding of immature ﬂower buds

disc ﬂower a small, tubular ﬂower at the

center of a composite head

DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) the sub-

stance of which genes are made; the car-
rier of genetic information in cells

dominant species the most abundant

species in a plant community and the one
most impacted by the environment

dominant trait a characteristic determined

by a gene masking the expression of a
comparable, but recessive gene

dormant, dormancy a state of reduced cel-

lular activity

drip tip a pointed leaf tip helping to drain

water from the leaf surface

drip zone the area of soil around a tree
occupied by root tips and into which
water drips from the leaf canopy

egg a female sex cell
embryo an immature plant within a seed
endodermis a layer of cells in roots between

the cortex and vascular tissues

endosperm food-storage tissue in seeds
enzyme a protein molecule functioning as a
chemical catalyst in a biochemical reac-
tion

epidermal hair a ﬁlament of cells arising

from an epidermal cell

epidermis the outer layer of cells on an

herbaceous plant organ

epigeous germination seed germination in

which the cotyledons are raised above
the soil surface

epiphyte a plant growing on another plant

for physical support

ethylene a gaseous plant hormone produced
in abundance by ripening fruits and dam-
aged tissues

etiolation the condition of a plant when
grown in darkness; its stem is pale and
elongated, the leaves are undeveloped

evergreen a woody perennial plant bearing

leaves throughout the year

fermentation the partial breakdown of food
molecules to yield ethyl alcohol, carbon
dioxide, and energy; occurs in the
absence of oxygen

ﬁber a long, thick-walled cell that dies at

maturity

ﬁbrous root system a highly branched,

spreading root system

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 227

ﬁeld capacity see water-holding capacity
ﬁlament the stalk of a stamen bearing an

anther

ﬂower the reproductive branch of an

angiosperm plant

food an organic substance providing energy

and body-building materials; especially
carbohydrates, fats, and proteins

fruit a mature ovary

gamete a sex cell; sperm or egg
gametophyte a haploid, gamete-producing

plant in the alternation of generations

gene a unit of genetic inheritance
genotype the genetic constitution of an

organism

genus a taxonomic category containing

related species

geotropism growth of a plant organ in

response to gravity

germination inhibitor a chemical substance

preventing seed germination

germination the beginning of growth of a

seed, spore, or pollen grain

gibberellin a plant hormone regulating sev-
eral processes including internode elon-
gation and cell enlargement

glaucous smooth and having a waxy bloom
graft the union of a piece of one plant to

another, established plant

granum a stack of platelike, pigment-con-

taining structures in a chloroplast

gravitropism see geotropism
growth retardant a chemical substance

slowing or inhibiting plant growth

guard cell one of a pair of cells surrounding

a stoma

gum a sticky, water-soluble plant secretion

that hardens on exposure to air

guttation exudation of droplets of water,
most often from leaf margins, as the
result of water movement up a plant due
to root pressure

gymnosperm a member of a class of plants
forming seeds in an exposed condition,
frequently in cones

Glossary

227

haploid having one set of unpaired chromo-

somes

haustorium an organ produced by a parasite

that penetrates and absorbs water and
nutrients from the host’s tissues

heartwood the central, dark-colored por-
tion of secondary xylem in a tree trunk

hemiparasite a parasite that invades its host
to obtain only water and mineral nutri-
ents

herbaceous soft, green, and containing little

woody tissue

herbicide any chemical that, when applied

to a plant, inhibits growth or kills

heterotrophic nutrition a form of nutrition

in which the organism depends on
organic substances as a food source, as is
the case with humans

heterozygous having both dominant and

recessive genes for a particular character-
istic on homologous chromosomes
homologous chromosomes matching

chromosome pairs

homozygous having identical genes on

homologous chromosomes

hormone an organic substance produced in

small amounts and transported to sites
where it controls growth and develop-
ment processes

host a plant or animal harboring a parasite
humus organic matter in the soil derived

from the decomposition of plant and ani-
mal remains

hybrid the offspring of two plants of the

same or closely related species differing
in one or more genes

hybrid vigor the increased vigor, size, and
fertility of a hybrid compared with its
parents

hypocotyl the part of a seedling between

the roots and the place of attachment of
the cotyledons

hypogeous germination seed germination

in which the cotyledons remain below
the soil surface

imbibition the process of water absorption
by a dry substance or structure, causing
it to swell

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 228

228 Glossary

incomplete ﬂower a ﬂower lacking one or

more of the normal ﬂower parts

indeterminate growth growth to an indeﬁ-

nite size

loam a mixture of sand, silt, and clay
long-day plant a plant ﬂowering in

response to day lengths exceeding its
critical photoperiod

inﬂorescence a shoot bearing clusters of

ﬂowers

insectivorous plant a plant that captures
and digests insects as a source of nitro-
gen

intercalary meristem a meristem located
between nondividing tissues such as at
the base of a leaf

internode the segment of a stem between

two nodes

lateral bud see axillary bud
lateral meristem a region where cells

divide, located along the length of a stem
or root (for example, vascular and cork
cambia)

latex a thick, white, ﬂuid secretion of many

plant species

laticifer a cell producing latex
layering a method of plant propagation in
which adventitious roots are developed
on an intact plant, before the rooted sec-
tion is removed

leaf an outgrowth of a stem; the principal

organ of photosynthesis

leaﬂet a portion of the blade of a compound

leaf

leaf primordium an immature leaf, located

at a stem tip

leaf rosette a group of leaves radiating from

a short stem

leaf scar a scar left on a stem after a leaf has

fallen

macronutrient a mineral required by plants
and animals in relatively large quantities

megaspore a spore that develops into a

female gametophyte

meiosis a cell divisional process in which
the chromosome number is reduced by
half

membrane a thin, sheetlike structure com-

posed of protein and fats surrounding
the cytoplasm, organelles, and other cell
structures

meristem a region where cells actively

divide

mesophyll the parenchyma tissue of a leaf
between the upper and lower epidermis,
including palisade and spongy cells

metabolism the sum of the biochemical

processes of a living organism

microﬁbril a ﬁne thread of cellulose in a

cell wall

micronutrient a mineral required by plants
and animals in relatively small quantities

microspore a spore that develops into a

male gametophyte

middle lamella a layer of pectin binding

two adjacent cell walls

mitochondria cellular bodies in which cel-

lular respiration occurs

mitosis a cell divisional process in which the

chromosomes are duplicated

molecule a chemically bonded group of

atoms

leaf tendril a modiﬁed leaf or leaf part used

as a grasping organ

lenticel a small, gas-exchange opening in

the cork of a woody stem

liana a long-stemmed, woody, climbing

plant growing from the ground into the
tree canopy of tropical forests

lignin a tough, durable plant substance

deposited in cell walls, especially in wood

monocot a member of a subclass of

angiosperms characterized by the pres-
ence of one cotyledon in the seeds

monoecious bearing separate male and

female ﬂowers on the same plant

multiple fruit a cluster of mature ovaries
from several ﬂowers on a single stem

mutation an induced, inheritable change in

the structure of a gene

living stone a species of succulent plants
camouﬂaged to look like a small rock

mycorrhiza an association between a fungus

and the roots of a higher plant

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 229

Glossary

229

nastic movement a movement of a plant
part (such as a leaf) not caused by an
external stimulus

natural selection the action of the environ-
ment on organisms such that those indi-
viduals better able to survive environ-
mental stress are more likely to repro-
duce and perpetuate their species

necrosis the death of a plant tissue
nectar a sugary ﬂuid secreted in some ﬂow-

ers

nectar guide a contrasting color pattern in
a ﬂower that guides a pollinator to the
nectar

nectary a gland secreting nectar
nitrogen cycle the circulation of nitrogen

between the environment and living
organisms

nitrogen-ﬁxation the conversion of atmos-
pheric nitrogen gas into organic nitrogen
compounds by a limited number of
microorganisms

node the segment of a stem to which leaves

and axillary buds are attached

N-P-K ratio the relative proportions of

nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium in a
fertilizer

nucleus the body within a cell controlling

its activities, including inheritance

organ a part of a plant, composed of differ-
ent tissues, that acts as a functional unit
organelle a cell structure performing a spe-

ciﬁc function

organic referring to substances containing

both carbon and hydrogen

organism a living plant or animal
osmosis the diffusion of water across per-

meable cell membranes that select for or
against speciﬁc substances

ovary the basal portion of a pistil that

becomes a fruit

ovule an immature seed

palisade cell a photosynthetic cell directly

beneath the upper leaf epidermis

palmate venation a vein pattern in which
the major veins radiate from one point

palmately compound leaf a leaf in which

the leaﬂets radiate from one point

panicle a highly branched inﬂorescence
parallel venation a vein pattern in which
the veins are arranged parallel to each
other

parasite a plant or animal obtaining food

from another living organism, frequently
to the latter’s detriment

parenchyma a thin-walled, undifferentiated

cell

parthenocarpy development of a fruit with-

out pollination, fertilization, or seed
development

pectin a substance in cell walls binding cells

together

pedicel the stalk of an individual ﬂower in

an inﬂorescence

perennial a plant living through several

growing seasons

perianth all the sepals and petals in a ﬂower
pericarp the fruit wall; derived from the

ovary wall

pericycle a root tissue giving rise to branch

roots

petal an often ﬂattened, conspicuously col-

ored ﬂower part

petiolate leaf a leaf in which the blade is

attached to the stem by a petiole

petiole a leaf stalk
pH a measure of relative acidity or alkalinity
phenotype the physical appearance of an

organism

phloem the food-conducting tissue of plants
photoinduce to initiate a physiological

process as a result of being subjected to a
particular photoperiod

photoperiodism the initiation of ﬂowering
in response to relative lengths of day and
night

photosynthesis the process in which light
energy is used to form foods from car-
bon dioxide and water

phototropism curvature of a plant organ in

response to light

phytoalexin a chemical produced by a plant

to inhibit the growth of pathogens

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 230

230 Glossary

phytotoxin a plant product having toxic

effects on herbivores and other invasive
organisms

pilose having long, soft hairs
pinnately compound leaf a leaf in which

the leaﬂets are arranged on both sides of
a common axis

pinnate venation a vein pattern in which

the major veins are arranged in rows on
each side of the midrib

pistil the female part of a ﬂower
pit a small opening in a cell wall
pith a region of parenchyma cells at the

center of a stem

plagiotropic growth of a branch at an angle
plant growth regulator see hormone
plasmodesmata ﬁne strands of cytoplasm
that pass through cell walls, connecting
adjacent cells

plasmolysis shrinkage of cytoplasm away
from the cell wall as a result of excess
water loss

pollen a structure that develops from a

microspore in angiosperms and gym-
nosperms to become a male gametophyte

pollen tube an outgrowth from a pollen

grain conveying the sperm to the female
gametophyte

pollination pollen transfer from an anther
to a stigma or, in gymnosperms, from a
male cone to a female cone

polyploid having three or more sets of chro-

mosomes per cell

prickle a hard, pointed epidermal outgrowth

on some species’ stems and leaves

primary growth growth arising from cellu-

lar activities in apical meristems

primary phloem food-conducting tissue

formed by growth activities originating
in apical meristems

primary tissue a tissue formed during pri-

mary growth

primary wall the ﬁrst layer of cellulose laid
down during development of a new cell
wall

primary xylem water-conducting tissue

formed by growth activities originating
in apical meristems

prop root a supportive root growing from

an aboveground stem

protoplasm the living substance of cells,

including cytoplasm and nucleus

pubescent having short hairs

raceme an inﬂorescence in which ﬂowers

are borne on short stalks on an elongated
stem

radicle an embryonic root
raphide a needle-shaped crystal of calcium
oxalate in certain species’ cells that deter
herbivores

ray ﬂower one of several small ﬂowers often
forming a ring around the disc ﬂowers in
a composite head

receptacle the enlarged end of a ﬂower stalk

to which the ﬂower parts are attached

recessive trait a genetic characteristic, the
expression of which is masked by a com-
parable but dominant gene

resin a viscous, protective secretion of many

conifers that is insoluble in water and
hardens on contact with air

resin canal a resin-containing tube
respiration see cellular respiration
reticulate venation a netlike vein pattern in

some leaves

rhizome an underground, horizontal stem
ribosome a cellular particle; the site of pro-

tein synthesis

ripeness-to-ﬂower the minimal vegetative

size a plant must achieve before it is
capable of ﬂowering

root generally the underground portion of a

plant; an organ anchoring the plant to
the soil and absorbing water and miner-
als

root cap a protective cover over a root tip
root hair a hairlike projection of a root’s

epidermal cell

root nodule a small swelling on a root

resulting from invasion by nitrogen-ﬁx-
ing bacteria

root pressure the pressure developed by

living cells in a root forcing water up the
xylem

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 231

Glossary

231

root tuber an enlarged, food-storage root

bearing adventitious shoots

runner a horizontal stem growing above-

ground that may form roots at its tip or
at nodes

sand an inorganic soil component, the parti-

cles of which range between 0.02 and 2
mm diameter

saprophyte an organism that obtains food

from dead organic matter

sapwood the outer, light-colored, water-
conducting region of secondary xylem

scarify to scratch or etch a thick seed coat to

improve water uptake

scion a plant part inserted into a root stock

during grafting

sclereid see stone cell
secondary growth growth resulting from

the activities of lateral meristems (vascu-
lar and cork cambia)

secondary phloem food-conducting tissue

formed by the vascular cambium

secondary product a biochemical product

other than substances used in major
metabolic pathways such as photosynthe-
sis and respiration

secondary wall the portion of a cell wall

laid down inside the primary wall

secondary xylem water-conducting tissue

formed by the vascular cambium

seed a reproductive structure formed from
the maturation of an ovule and contain-
ing an embryo and stored food

seed coat the protective outer layer of a

seed

seed germination see germination
seed leaf see cotyledon
seedling a young plant, shortly after seed

germination

self-pollination the transfer of pollen from

an anther to the stigma of the same
ﬂower

senescence the aging process; a breakdown

of cellular structures leading to death

sepal a ﬂower part that usually encloses and

protects the ﬂower bud

sessile leaf a leaf in which the blade is

directly attached to the stem

shade-tolerant having the ability to live in

low light intensities

shoot a stem bearing leaves
short-day plant a plant ﬂowering in

response to days shorter than its critical
photoperiod

shrub a woody plant with little or no trunk

and having branches near its base

sieve plate the perforated end-wall of a

sieve tube member

sieve tube a food-conducting cell
silt an inorganic soil component, the parti-
cles of which range between 0.002 and
0.02 mm diameter

simple fruit a fruit formed from one ovary
simple leaf a leaf in which the blade is not

divided into smaller units (leaﬂets)

sorus an area of spore production on the

underside of a fern leaf

spadix a spike of ﬂowers enclosed in a

spathe

spathe a large bract enclosing a spadix
species a group of individuals sharing many

characteristics and interbreeding freely
speciﬁc epithet a taxonomic classiﬁcation;
the second part of a species’ scientiﬁc,
binomial name

sperm a male sex cell
spike an inﬂorescence in which the ﬂowers

are attached to the main stem without
stalks

spine a modiﬁed leaf part that is hard and

sharply pointed

spongy cell one of a group of loosely

packed photosynthetic cells in a leaf

spore a reproductive cell that grows directly

into a new plant

sporophyte a diploid, spore-producing
plant in an alternation of generations

springwood xylem laid down by the vascu-
lar cambium in spring and early summer

spur a tubular projection from a ﬂower
stamen the male part of a ﬂower, consisting

of an anther and ﬁlament

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 232

232 Glossary

starch the principal food-storage substance
of higher plants; a carbohydrate consist-
ing of numerous glucose units

stem the leaf- and ﬂower-bearing part of a

plant

stem tuber an enlarged tip of a rhizome

containing stored food

stigma the part of a pistil that receives

pollen

stilt root see prop root
stinging hair a multicellular hair containing

an irritant ﬂuid

stipule an outgrowth from the base of a leaf
stalk; sometimes functioning as a protec-
tive structure

stock a rooted plant into which a scion is

inserted during grafting

stolon see runner
stoma (pl. stomata) a pore in the epidermis

of leaves and herbaceous stems

stone cell a hard, thick-walled plant cell
stratiﬁcation a cold treatment given to the
seed of some species to improve the like-
lihood of germination

style the narrow part of a pistil bearing the

stigma

suberin a fatty plant substance present in

the walls of cork cells

sucker an adventitious shoot arising from a

root

summerwood xylem laid down by the vas-

cular cambium in late summer

symbiosis the living together for mutual

beneﬁt of two or more organisms of dif-
ferent species

tannin a substance occurring in the bark or

leaves of some species, functioning to
protect against predators

tap root a prominent root with few branch-

es, sometimes swollen to store food

tendril a modiﬁed stem or leaf for climbing
tepal a perianth part in ﬂowers having no

distinct petals or sepals
terminal bud see apical bud
terminal bud scale scar a scar left on a
stem after the bud scales have fallen

thigmotropism a growth response to touch
thorn a modiﬁed stem that is hard and

sharply pointed

tissue a group of cells of the same type hav-

ing a common function

trace element see micronutrient
tracheid a water-conducting cell in gym-

nosperms and other lower vascular plants
transpiration the loss of water vapor from a
plant, mostly from the stomata of leaves

transpirational pull the force exerted by

transpiration from the leaves that draws
water up through a plant

tree a large, woody, perennial plant having a

deﬁnite trunk

tropism a growth curvature of a plant part

caused by some external stimulus such as
light or gravity

tuber see root tuber, stem tuber
tuberous root see root tuber
turgid swollen and ﬁrm due to internal

water pressure

turgor pressure the pressure developed in a

cell as it becomes ﬁlled with water

twiner a stem growing in a spiral fashion

around a supportive object

umbel an inﬂorescence in which the ﬂower
stalks arise from one point at the tip of a
stem

vacuole a ﬂuid-ﬁlled sac within a cell
variegation, variegated an inherited, irreg-

ular pattern of color in a leaf or petal

vascular bundle a strand of conducting tis-

sue containing xylem and phloem

vascular cambium a narrow cylinder of

cells that gives rise to secondary xylem
and phloem; a lateral meristem

vascular plant any plant containing water-

and food-conducting tissues

vascular ray a narrow sheet of cells running
radially across the secondary vascular tis-
sues of a stem or root

vascular tissue a group of food- or water-

conducting cells

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 233

Glossary

233

vein a strand of xylem and phloem in a leaf

blade

velamen a water-absorbing tissue on the

outside of orchids’ aerial roots

vernalization a low-temperature treatment

promoting ﬂowering

vessel a water-conducting cell in

angiosperms

viable capable of germination

xanthophyll a yellow or almost colorless

photosynthetic pigment

xylem the water-conducting tissue of plants

zygomorphic ﬂower an irregular shaped
ﬂower divisible into two similar halves
along one plane only

zygote the product of union of a sperm and

egg; a fertilized egg

water-holding capacity the amount of

water held in a soil after gravitational
run-off

whorled arranged in a ring
wood the dense tissue composed of second-

ary xylem in stems and roots

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 234

INDEX

Plates and illustrations are represented
with bold page numbers.

abscisic acid, 142
abscission, 141, 142, 162
abscission zone, 142, 143
acid rain, 165
actinomorphic ﬂower, 182
adventitious root, 111, 114, 121, 144
adventitious shoot, 113
aerial root, 118
aerobic respiration, 172
after-ripening, 31
aggregate fruit, 196, 197
alkaloid, 104, 105
allelopathy, 32, 110
allopolyploid, 214, 215
alternation of generations, 205, 209
amino acid, 30
anaerobic respiration, 172
anatomy, 54
aneuploidy, 213
angiosperm, 11, 28, 83, 176, 194, 207, 208
annual ring, 66
annual species, 92, 149
ant protection, 100
anther, 179, 182, 207
antheridium, 203, 205
anthocyanin, 167
antibiotic, 106
antifreeze, 96, 120, 158
apical bud, 38, 39, 46, 120
apical dominance, 143, 144
apical meristem, 22, 26, 36, 38, 39, 57
apomixis, 195, 209
archegonium, 203, 205
atom, 54
autotrophic nutrition, 31, 152

234

auxin, 135, 137, 143
avoidance strategy, 92
axil, 38
axillary bud, 38, 43, 44, 120, 124
axillary bud primordium, 38

bamboo, 69, 70
bark, 59, 61, 62
bat pollination, 189
biennial species, 92
blade, see leaf blade
bolting, 147, 148
bract, 183
branching,

of roots, 37, 71, 73
of stems, 38, 41, 63, 64

bromeliad, 117
bud scale, 46, 47, 92, 146
bud scale scar, see terminal bud scale scar
bulb, 120, 121, 146, 214
buttress root, 115, 116

calcium deﬁciency, 161, 162
callose, 102
callus, 101
calyx, 178, 182
cambium, see cork cambium, vascular 

cambium

camouﬂage, 99
capillary water, 163
carbohydrate, 168
carbon-dioxide ﬁxation, 170
carnivorous plant, see insectivorous plant
carotene, 166, 169
catkin, 190
cell, 13, 16, 17, 55, 79
cell wall, 18, 19, 20, 79
cellular respiration, 18, 30, 103, 168

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 235

Index

235

cellulose, 19, 81, 143, 168, 170, 171
chaparral, 33
chelate, 165
chicle, 103
chlorophyll, 18, 160, 166, 169
chloroplast, 18, 74, 165, 166
chlorosis, 160
chromosome, 18, 22, 162, 201, 203, 209, 210
cladode, 118, 119
class, 221
clay, 163, 164
cleistogamy, 192
clone, 79, 217
colchicine, 217
cold hardening, 158
companion cell, 80
complete ﬂower, 178
composite head, 186, 188
compound leaf, 48
conifer, 11
contractile root, 121, 122
cork, 45, 59, 61, 62, 73, 92, 101
cork cambium, 59, 61, 73
corm, 122, 214
cormel, 123
corolla, 179, 182
corona, 181
cortex, 56, 57, 71
cotyledon, 25, 27, 28, 29, 30
critical photoperiod, 149, 150
cross-pollination, 191
cryptic coloration, 100
cultivar, 223
cuticle, 56, 74, 76, 96
cutin, 56, 74, 101
cytokinin, 141
cytology, 15
cytoplasm, 17
cytoplasmic membrane, 17

Darwin, Charles, 84, 85, 202, 221
day-neutral plant, 149
deciduous, 32
defoliant, 145
desert, 33, 36, 93, 94, 96, 118
determinate growth, 14
diageotropic, 137, 138
dicot, 28, 214
differentiation, 54, 79
diffuse root system, see ﬁbrous root system
dioecious, 192
diploid, 202, 203, 205, 207

disbudder, 145
disc ﬂower, 186, 189
division (or phylum), 222
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid), 16, 18, 22,

162, 220

dominant species, 110
dominant trait, 210
dormant, dormancy, 24, 41, 46, 92, 146
drip tip, 117
drip zone, 36

egg, 176, 181, 193, 203, 205, 208
element, 54
embryo, 25, 29, 177, 193, 208
endodermis, 71, 101, 152
endosperm, 28, 29, 30, 193, 209
enzyme, 103, 162
epidermal hair, 56, 76, 77, 96, 117
epidermis, 56, 57, 71
epigeous germination, 28
epiphyte, 115
ethylene, 142, 145
etiolation, 134, 135
evergreen, 46, 96, 143

family, 221
fat, 30, 168
fermentation, 172
fern, 83, 205, 206
ﬁber, 70, 81, 82
ﬁbrous root system, 34, 35, 118
ﬁeld capacity, see water-holding capacity
ﬁlament, 179
ﬁre, 33
ﬂaccid, 154
ﬂoral tube, 184
ﬂorigen, 150
ﬂower, 175, 178, 180
food, 35, 168
food conduction, 54, 56, 61, 79
food storage, 35, 120
forma, 222
fossil fuel, 172
freezing, prevention of in cells, 96, 120, 158
fructose, 170
fruit, 11, 178, 194, 195
fruit ripening, 104, 142

gamete, 176, 203
gametophyte, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208
gas exchange, 63, 77, 157, 164, 169, 171, 172
gene, 14, 18, 22, 201

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 236

236

Index

genetic engineering, 217
genetics, 85, 201
genotype, 212
genus, 48, 220, 222
geotropism, 137, 138, 139
germination, 25, 26, 29, 31, 32, 111, 140, 145
germination inhibitor, 31, 32, 110
gibberellin, 137, 145, 146, 148, 194
glaucous, 56
glucose, 170
graft, 64, 101, 214
granum, 166
gravitropism, see geotropism
ground cover, 45
growth, 22, 30
growth retardant, 145
guard cell, 77, 78
gum, 102
guttation, 156
gymnosperm, 11, 83, 190, 209

haploid, 202, 203, 205, 207, 209
hardwood, 11, 19
haustorium, 124, 126
heartwood, 64, 65, 104
hemiparasite, 125
herbaceous, 29, 45, 56
herbicide, 145
heterotrophic nutrition, 30, 152
heterozygous, 212, 213
homologous chromosomes, 209
homozygous, 212
Hooke, Robert, 16
hormone, 134
host, 124
humus, 163
hybrid, 79, 86, 223
hybrid vigor, 86
hybridization, 191
hydathode, 156
hypocotyl, 28
hypogeous germination, 28

imbibition, 30
incomplete ﬂower, 179
indeterminate growth, 14
inﬂorescence, 186
insectivorous plant, 128, 129
intercalary meristem, 51, 52
internode, 40
interspeciﬁc hybrid, 214, 216
intraspeciﬁc hybrid, 214
iron deﬁciency, 160, 161

June drop, 143

knot, 63

lateral bud, see axillary bud
lateral meristem, 22, 59
latex, 102, 103
layering, 144
leaf, 47, 49, 50, 74, 75, 76
leaf arrangements and shapes, 40, 42, 43, 50,

51

leaf blade, 48, 74
leaf primordium, 38
leaf rosette, 117
leaf scar, 45, 46, 102
leaf tendril, 114
leaﬂet, 48, 49
lenticel, 45, 46
liana, 115
life cycle, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208
light absorption, 41, 48, 74, 118, 166, 167
light reaction, 169
lignin, 19, 108, 168
limiting factor, 91
Linnaeus, Carl, 220
living stone, 99, 100
loam, 163
long-day plant, 149, 150

macronutrient, 159
magnesium deﬁciency, 160
megaspore, 207
meiosis, 202, 203, 205, 207, 209, 210
membrane, 18, 152, 162
Mendel, Gregor, 202
meristem, 22, 23
mesophyll, 74, 156
metabolism, 13, 173
microﬁbril, 19, 20
micronutrient, 159, 160
microspore, 207
middle lamella, 18, 143
mineral nutrient, 159
mitochondria, 18, 168
mitosis, 21, 22, 202
molecule, 54
monocot, 28, 29, 48, 67, 190, 214
monoecious, 192
morphology, 15
moss, 203, 204
multiple fruit, 197, 198
mutation, 86

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 237

Index

237

mycelium, 101
mycorrhiza, 126, 127

nastic movement, 140, 141
natural selection, 84, 87, 221
necrosis, 162
nectar, 184
nectar guide, 185
nectary, 184
nitrogen cycle, 128
nitrogen deﬁciency, 161, 162
nitrogen-ﬁxation, 128
node, 40
N–P–K ratio, 163
nucleus, 17, 22
nutrient uptake, 18, 30, 36, 71, 117

order, 221
organ, 55
organelle, 18, 55
organic, 159
organism, 55
origins of plants, 89
osmosis, 30, 152, 153
ovary, 181, 182
ovule, 181, 182, 207
oxygen, 30, 169

palisade cell, 74, 75
palmate venation, 48
palmately compound leaf, 48, 50
palms, 41, 67, 68, 69
panicle, 187
parallel venation, 48
parasite, 124
parenchyma, 79
parthenocarpy, 195
pectin, 18, 143, 162
pedicel, 178
penicillin, 106
perennial species, 92, 149
perianth, 179, 182
perianth tube, 195, 197
pericarp, 195, 196
pericycle, 71
petal, 179, 182
petiole, 48
petiolate leaf, 48
PGAL (phosphoglyceraldehyde), 170
pH, 164
phenotype, 212
phloem, 54, 56, 80, 102

phospholipid, 162
phosphorus deﬁciency, 161, 162
photoinduce, 149
photoperiod(ism), 88, 145, 148, 150
photosynthesis, 10, 18, 31, 74, 103, 168, 169,

170, 172

phototropism, 135, 136
phylum, see division
physiology, 131
phytoalexin, 108
phytotoxin, 105
pilose, 99
pinnate venation, 48
pinnately compound leaf, 48, 50
pistil, 181, 182, 194
pistillate ﬂower, 192
pit, 80
pith, 56, 57
plagiotropic, 137, 138
plant growth regulator, see hormone
plasmodesmata, 18
plasmolysis, 154, 155
poisonous plants, 107
pollen, 179, 194, 207
pollen tube, 193, 207
pollination, 182, 189, 191
polyploid, 213, 214
postblossom drop, 143
preharvest drop, 143
prickle, 98, 99
primary growth, 22, 23, 38, 57
primary phloem, 57, 58, 71
primary tissue, 58
primary wall, 19
primary xylem, 57, 58, 71
prop root, 115, 116
protein, 30, 162, 168
protoplasm, 17
pubescent, 56, 99

raceme, 187
radicle, 26
raphide, 108
ray ﬂower, 186
receptacle, 178, 195, 196
recessive trait, 211
red light, 32, 168
reproduction, 175, 200
resin, 102
resin canal, 102
respiration, see cellular respiration
reticulate venation, 48, 52

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 238

238

Index

rhizome, 18, 111, 112, 123, 124, 137, 214
ribosome, 18
ripeness-to-ﬂower, 149, 163
root, 14, 30, 34, 71, 72
root cap, 37
root hair, 37, 71, 155
root nodule, 128
root pressure, 156
root tuber, 123, 124
runner, 45, 111, 112, 137

sand, 163
saprophyte, 124
sapwood, 64, 65
scarify, 24, 25, 31, 33
scientiﬁc method, 132
scion, 64
sclereid, see stone cell
secondary growth, 22, 23, 73
secondary phloem, 58, 60, 73
secondary product, 103
secondary wall, 19
secondary xylem, 58, 60, 73
seed, 24, 29, 30, 100, 176
seed coat, 24
seed dispersal, 25, 96, 198
seed germination, see germination
seed leaf, see cotyledon
seedless fruit, 195
seedling, 22, 26, 27, 31
self-pollination, 192
senescence, 92, 141
sepal, 178, 179, 182
sessile leaf, 48
shade-tolerant species, 110
shoot, 14, 30, 38, 41
short-day plant, 149, 150
shrub, 44
sieve plate, 80, 102
sieve tube, 80
silt, 163
simple fruit, 196
simple leaf, 48
softwood, 11
soil, 163, 164
sorus, 205
spadix, 189
spathe, 189
species, 10, 85, 221
speciﬁc epithet, 220, 222
sperm, 176, 179, 193, 203, 205, 207
spike, 186

spine, 97, 98
spongy cell, 74, 75
spore, 10, 176, 203, 205
sporophyte, 205, 206, 207
springwood, 66
spur, 184
stamen, 179, 180, 182
staminate ﬂower, 192
starch, 30, 170, 171
stem, 41
stem tuber, 124
stigma, 181, 182, 193
stilt root, see prop root
stinging hair, 99
stipule, 49, 98
stock, 64
stolon, see runner
stoma, stomata, 77, 78, 96, 157
stone cell, 81
stratify, 32
style, 181, 182
subclass, 221
suberin, 63, 92, 101
subfamily, 222
subspecies, 222
subtribe, 222
succulent, 118
sucker, 112, 113
sucrose, 170
sugar, 30
summerwood, 66
sun-loving species, 32, 110
symbiosis, 100, 126, 127, 183

tannin, 101, 104
tap root, 35, 36
taxonomy, 220
temperature control of growth, 145
tendril, 113, 114, 140
tepal, 179
terminal bud, see apical bud
terminal bud scale scar, 46, 47
tetraploid, 213, 214
thigmotropism, 140
thorn, 97, 98
tissue, 54, 55
tissue culture, 79
trace element, see micronutrient
tracheid, 81
transpiration, 156, 157
transpirational pull, 156
tree, 44

175-240_Botany  11/8/04  12:22 PM  Page 239

Index

239

tribe, 222
triploid, 209, 213, 214, 215
tropism, 135
tuber, see root tuber, stem tuber
tuberous root, see root tuber
tundra, arctic and alpine, 94, 95
turgidity, 154
turgor pressure, 154
twiner, 113, 140, 141

ultraviolet light, 185
umbel, 186, 188

vacuole, 18, 154
variegation, variegated, 167
variety, 222
vascular bundle, 56, 57, 58, 59, 67, 68, 81
vascular cambium, 57, 59, 60, 61, 71
vascular plant, 83
vascular ray, 61, 65, 66
vascular tissue, 56, 71, 72
vein, 48, 74
velamen, 118

venation, 48, 50
vernalization, 147
vessel, 80
viability, 24, 29

water conduction, 54, 61, 80, 81, 157
water-holding capacity, 163
water loss, 74, 77, 156, 157
water storage, 118, 119, 120
water uptake, 18, 30, 37, 71, 117, 152, 153,

155, 156
whorled, 40
wind pollination, 189, 190
winter twig, 45
wood, 45, 61, 62, 64
woody twig, 45
wound healing, 101

xanthophyll, 166, 169
xylem, 54, 56

zygomorphic ﬂower, 182
zygote, 176, 193, 204, 206, 208

